- INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED
AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013
=======================================================================

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES

MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho, Chairman
JERRY LEWIS, California                   JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
KEN CALVERT, California                   BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio                MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                        JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
David LesStrang, Darren Benjamin, Jason Gray,
Erica Rhoad, and Colin Vickery,
Staff Assistants

________

PART 8
Page
Public Witnesses, March 21, 2012.................................    1
Public Witnesses, March 22, 2012.................................  169
American Indian and Native Alaskan Testimony, March 27, 2012.....  329
American Indian and Native Alaskan Testimony, March 28, 2012.....  567
Written Testimony from Individuals and Organizations.............  749

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

PART 8--INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
2013

INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED
AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

=======================================================================

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION

________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES

MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho, Chairman
JERRY LEWIS, California                   JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
KEN CALVERT, California                   BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio                MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                        JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
David LesStrang, Darren Benjamin, Jason Gray,
Erica Rhoad, and Colin Vickery,
Staff Assistants

________

PART 8
Page
Public Witnesses, March 21, 2012.................................    1
Public Witnesses, March 22, 2012.................................  169
American Indian and Native Alaskan Testimony, March 27, 2012.....  329
American Indian and Native Alaskan Testimony, March 28, 2012.....  567
Written Testimony from Individuals and Organizations.............  749

S

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-609                     WASHINGTON : 2012

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\        NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\          MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia              PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia               NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey  JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                     ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama          JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri             JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                   ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho            DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas          MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida              LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana               SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas                JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana          CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California              STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                   SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio           BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                   ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                  MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida           BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------

1}}
Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2013

----------

TESTIMONY OF INTERESTED INDIVIDUALS AND ORGANIZATIONS

----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

PUBLIC WITNESSES

Mr. Simpson. We will call this meeting to order. The
ranking member will be here shortly, and then we are going to
have votes at 2:00 that are going to last for about 40 minutes.
So our schedule will be thrown off, but we knew that.
Good afternoon, and welcome to the first of two public
witness hearings this afternoon and again tomorrow morning. The
Subcommittee will be hearing from a cross section of
individuals representing a wide variety of issues addressed by
this subcommittee.
The Chair will call each panel of witnesses to the table,
one panel at a time. Each witness will be provided with 5
minutes to present their testimony. We will be using a timer to
track the progress of each witness. When the button turns
yellow, the witnesses will have 1 minute remaining to conclude
his or her remarks. The members will be provided an opportunity
to ask questions of our witnesses, but in the interest of time,
the chair requests that we keep things moving in order to
conclude this afternoon's testimony at a reasonable hour.
And I am not going to yield to my ranking member from
Virginia, because he is not here yet, unless you would like to
make his opening statement. Do you have a quote for us? Jim
always gives us a quote that we wait for.
I thought we were going to miss the quote. So now I would
be happy to yield to the gentleman from Virginia for an opening
statement, so that we can get the quote of the day.
Mr. Moran. We will facilitate things. The only thing you
ever listen to is the quote. You have no idea what the context
is. All right. This is a line from John Muir, who I know you
are all familiar with.
Mr. Simpson. The Ghost and Mrs. Muir. Was he an actor in
that film?
Mr. Moran. No. John actually, as you know, was one of the
real founding fathers of the environmental movement
internationally, but he said, ``Climb the mountains and get
their good tidings. Nature's peace will flow unto you as
sunshine flow unto trees. The winds will blow their own
freshness into you, and the storms, their energy, while cares
will drop off like autumn leaves.''
And so since that just kind of a moment of zen, Rick Healy
has provided us another quote as well. Do you want to hear the
second quote?
Mr. Simpson. Sure. Let's do the other one.
Mr. Moran. Since I am going to forego my opening
statement----
Mr. Simpson. Okay.
Mr. Moran [continuing]. In favor of these quotes that are
much more articulate than I will ever be. ``The spring came but
once a century instead of once a year, a burst forth with the
sound of an earthquake and not in silence. What wonder and
expectation there would be in all the hearts to behold the
miraculous change.'' That is appropriate to the fact that
springtime has bloomed here in Washington and makes us very
conscious of how blessed we are with all the Japanese cherry
trees and the landscaping around the Capitol. So it is a good
time to be hearing from our public witnesses, and with that,
Mr. Chairman, let's go ahead and get on with the agenda.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. I will call our first panel up to
the table. Greg Conrad, the Executive Director of the
Interstate Mining Compact Commission; Gregory--yes. Sit from
right to left, I guess. Gregory DiLoreto. Is that close?
Mr. DiLoreto. That is perfect.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. The President Elect of the American
Society of Civil Engineers; Dr. Robert Gropp, the Chairman of
the USGS Coalition; Kasey White, the Director of the Geoscience
Policy, the Geological Society of America, William Becker, the
Executive Director of the National Association of Clean Air
Agencies, and Jeffrey Hales, a Member of the American Thoracic
Society.
Mr. Conrad, go ahead.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

INTERSTATE MINING COMPACT COMMISSION

WITNESS

GREG CONRAD
Mr. Conrad. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman. My name is
Gregory Conrad. I serve as Executive Director of the Interstate
Mining Compact Commission, an organization representing 24
States that regulate coal and hard rock mining operations and
restore abandoned mine lands pursuant to the Surface Mining
Control and Reclamation Act. I am here today to present the
views of the Compact's member States concerning the fiscal year
2013 budget request for the Office of Surface Mining. I am also
appearing on behalf of the National Association of Abandoned
Mine Land Programs, which represents 30 States and Indian
tribes that operate in our reclamation programs.
In its proposed budget OSM is requesting $57.3 million to
fund Title V grants to states and Indian tribes for the
implementation of their regulatory programs, a reduction of $11
million or 15 percent below the fiscal year 2012 enacted level.
OSM is also requesting $307 million for state and tribal AML
grants, a reduction of $180 million.
Mr. Chairman, these are admittedly tough times for state
and federal budgets. As a result, some hard choices need to be
made about how we spend limited dollars in an efficient and
effective way, and environmental protection associated with
coalmining operations is no exception. One of the critical
decisions with respect to programs under the Surface Mining Act
is who will take the lead in implementing the Act's
requirements. Once we agree upon that, it is incumbent upon
both state and Federal Governments to prioritize funding
decisions to support the lead agencies.
Congress crafted a state lead approach under SMCRA whereby
state governments were vested with exclusive regulatory
authority to implement programs for both active mining
operations and AML reclamation. The Act also provides for
grants to states that meet 50 percent of their program
operating costs under Title V and 100 percent for AML projects
under Title IV.
Once again in 2013, we are faced with a decision about the
extent to which the Federal Government will support these
funding commitments under SMCRA and the State Lead Concept
Program implementation. OSM's budget proposes to move us away
from those commitments and concepts. States are struggling to
match federal dollars for these programs and signals from
Federal Government that it is wavering in its support
concerning both dollars and confidence in the state's ability
to run effective regulatory and AML programs will do little to
build confidence.
This is not the time to reverse the course that Congress
has set for its support of State programs over the last several
years. In this regard it should be kept in mind that a 15
percent cut in federal funding translates to an additional 15
percent cut for overall program funding for many states.
We, therefore, urge the Subcommittee to reject OSM's
proposed cut of $11 million for State Title V Grants and
restore the grant level to $70 million as supported by state
funding requests.
It is important to note that OSM does not disagree with the
states' demonstrated need for the requested amount of funding
for these grants. Instead, OSM's solution to the cuts comes in
the way of an unrealistic assumption that the states can simply
increase user fees. IMCC's polling of its member states
confirmed that it will be difficult, if not impossible, for
most states to accomplish this feat at all, let alone in less
than 1 year.
Turning now to the AML Program, based on SMCRA fee
collections the fiscal year 2013, mandatory appropriation for
state and tribal AML grants should be a $488 million. Instead,
OSM has only budgeted $307 million, a reduction of 180 million.
This would be accomplished by eliminating payments to those
states and tribes that has successfully certified completion of
their highest priority reclamation sites. From the beginning of
SMCRA in 1977, to the latest amendments in 2006, Congress
promised that at least half of the money generated from fees
collected within the boundaries of the state or tribe would be
returned for use as described in the Act. Breaking the promise
of state and tribal share funding will upset 10 years of
negotiation that resulted in the balance and compromise
achieved in the 2006, amendments to SMCRA.
We, therefore, respectfully ask the Committee to continue
funding for certified States and tribes at the statutorily-
authorized levels and to turn back any efforts to amend SMCRA
in this regard.
Finally, we oppose OSM's proposal to drastically reform the
distribution process for AML funds to non-certified States
through a competitive grant program. This proposal will
completely undermine the balance of interest and objectives
achieved by the 2006 amendments. Among other things, the
proposal would seat authority for both emergency and non-
emergency funding decisions to an advisory council. Aside from
the time delays associated with this approach, it leaves many
unanswered questions regarding the continued viability of state
and tribal AML programs where they do not win in the bidding
process. It also upsets the predictability of AML funding for
long-term project planning.
We urge the Subcommittee to reject this unjustified
proposal, delete it from the budget, and restore the full
mandatory funding amount of $488 million. We would request that
resolutions to this effect adopted by both the AML Association
and IMCC, along with a comprehensive list of questions
regarding the legislative proposal be included in the record of
this hearing.
Thank you very much.
[The statement of Greg Conrad follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Mr. DiLoreto.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF CIVIL ENGINEERS

WITNESS

GREGORY E. DILORETO, P.E.
Mr. DiLoreto. Thank you. Well, Mr. Chairman and members of
the Subcommittee, again, my name is Gregory E. DiLoreto, and I
am the President Elect of the 141,000 members of the American
Society of Civil Engineers. I am also the Chief Executive
Officer for the publicly-owned Tualatin Valley Water District,
which serves over 200,000 customers in the Portland, Oregon,
metropolitan area, and I am a licensed professional engineer in
Oregon in both civil and environmental engineering.
So I am pleased to be before you today to talk about EPA's
proposed budget for 2013. Unfortunately, the President's
proposed budget continues an underfunding trend for our
critical infrastructure in water and wastewater. The proposal
is to reduce spending for fiscal year 2013 from 2012, from 2.3
billion to 2 billion, which is a cut back of nearly 15 percent
in federal funding for our aging water and wastewater systems.
Now, most of you may have seen the ASCE's 2009 report card
on America's infrastructure in which we gave the grade to water
and wastewater a D minus. Since then we have undertaken a
series of four economic studies to talk about what happens to
this investment or lack of investment in our water and
wastewater systems.
In 2011, our report, ``Failure to Act,'' under investment
in water and wastewater, we talked about what does that D minus
mean for our water and wastewater systems, and the answer is
sobering. Our water infrastructure in the U.S. is clearly
aging, our wastewater systems are aging. Our fundings indicate
that investment needs will continue to escalate.
In fact, if we continue to invest at the rate we have been
for the last several years, we will face an $84 billion
shortfall by 2020, and even if we increase the way we do our
projects through sustainability, more effective means, the gap
continues to grow as we need to maintain our drinking water
systems, wastewater systems, and comply with ever-increasing
regulations for our drinking water quality and wastewater.
So this 84 billion gap, just some other numbers to help,
leads to 147 billion in increased costs for businesses, a
further 59 billion for households, but in the worst case we
estimate that the U.S. could lose nearly 700,000 jobs by 2020.
The U.S. economy is expected to decrease by $416 billion from
the GDP.
But I like to put it in terms that we can all understand.
The cost of under-investing could cost each American family
$900 per year in increased water rates and in lost wages.
The most recent Clean Water Needs Survey from EPA put the
total wastewater needs at some $300 billion as of January 1,
2008, which included nearly 200 billion in wastewater
treatment, another 64 combined sewer, and 42 storm water
management, and even our small communities at $23 billion. And
those numbers are not likely to have improved in the 4 years
since we did that study. EPA reports, though, that 335 billion
and 82 billion of needs are potentially eligible for the State
Revolving Fund Program and the Nonpoint Source Fund.
Although America spends billions on infrastructure each
year, drinking water systems face an annual shortfall of $11
billion in needed funds. I was at a recent meeting here this
past week with the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies
in Washington, DC, and as I talked with my fellow chief
executives that run the largest water utilities in the United
States, we all had the same common concern, and that is as we
get regulations, we also have to spend the money on those, and
that does divert some money from the operations of maintenance
and repair and expansion of our water systems and our
wastewater systems.
So but nevertheless, the agency's drinking water budget for
2013 represents a 4 percent decrease of 965 million. Now, we
know as well as everyone else that you are dealing with a
number of deficits, the growing federal debt, but the remedies
for these problems should not come at the expense of our
critical public health systems, drinking water and wastewater
systems.
And I would also like to note that the program that we use
the most, the State Revolving Fund, is a loan program. Money is
loaned out to those of us in the water and wastewater business
and is repaid back for re-loaning out to other folks and other
agencies that can be used.
Therefore, ASCE recommends an appropriation of 2 billion of
the Clean Water State Revolving Fund, and an appropriation of
1.5 billion for the Safe Drinking Water Fund for 2013.
Thank you.
[The statement of Gregory DiLoreto follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. You bring up a very important
issue. Several of us have been trying to figure out how we are
going to fund these systems. I have heard that the backlog
maintenance of wastewater and water systems in this country is
about $700 billion. At $1.5 billion a year, it is going to take
us 300 years to address just the backlog. We have got to find a
different way to fund these systems, frankly, and I do not have
the answer to it, but there are several of us that are looking
at it.
Mr. DiLoreto. Very good, and we would like to help. ASCE
has thrown out some ideas about the 700 billion, and clearly,
it is a partnership between the Federal Government and those in
local government.
Mr. Simpson. Dr. Gropp. Is that right?
Mr. Gropp. Gropp.
Mr. Simpson. Gropp.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

USGS COALITION

WITNESS

DR. ROBERT GROPP
Mr. Gropp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Moran, members of
the Committee. I have prepared my official remarks for the
record, and my glasses broke this morning, so I am going to
paraphrase a little bit if you do not mind. So I will do my
best to try to hit the high points and watch the clock. So I
can see that.
My name is Robert Gropp. I am Director of Policy for the
American Institute of Biological Sciences and also the Chairman
of the USGS Coalition. The GS Coalition is an alliance of more
than 70 organizations committed by a unified commitment to
supporting the efforts of the USGS and the continued vitality
of its scientific research and data programs for the Nation.
The USGS Coalition has requested and encourages Congress to
do all you can to provide the USGS with a fiscal year budget of
1.2 billion. That is slightly more than what the President has
requested. We know that would restore $49 million in proposed
cuts, as well as provide about 50 million that would help fully
fund fixed costs, bolster some new scientific initiatives, as
well as help account for what are identified in the budget as
facility costs essentially that by the GS's own admission will,
there is a cut in there, 4.4 million, that will result in
increased costs as they struggle to maintain and have increased
maintenance on facilities and equipment.
In short, as you all know and the USGS is the Nation's
science agency, land-based science agency. Its mission goes
beyond the public lands every day to impact and affect
positively the lives of every American, whether it is through
risk mitigation for natural or humanist hazards, earthquakes,
tsunamis, wildfire mitigation, forecasting, or providing the
science needed by our resource managers to inform wise natural
resources management, assess, monitor water or mineral or
energy resources. It is a vital resource that no other agency
provides, and its track record of providing unbiased data is
quite impressive.
Again, the USGS provides a unique blend of scientific
information, and its reorganization has helped it dramatically
improve its ability to respond to timely questions and issues.
And so through its new organization it is able to bring to bear
a unique blend of scientific expertise to solve and inform our
most challenging questions, whether it is in, again, biology,
ecosystem science, water, or minerals and energy.
A couple of our concerns in the President's budget request
include the number of cuts to the Water and Minerals Programs.
We support the proposed increases. We think they are all very
timely and very useful investments, and we encourage you to do
all you can to support those and provide that funding.
There is a great concern that some of the cuts could hinder
long-term data continuity. The USGS through stream gages or
water monitoring ground water assessments has a unique capacity
to provide data that informs everything form civil engineering
and local municipal water programs on up, and there is a real
concern that the agency needs, and I think they are working to
do it, but really needs the resources to ensure the continuity
of that data collection.
Again, we want to, on behalf of the USGS Coalition, thank
the members of this committee particularly for your
longstanding and bipartisan efforts to restore and make
important investments in the USGS. Your efforts, particularly
last year to help manage how Landsat VII may or may not be
funded. We deeply appreciate that. There is a great concern
that if that were to come over, that devastates a lot of core
science programs.
So we, again, want to thank you all for your efforts, and
we stand ready to help you to the extent we can to identify
priorities or what have you, and, again, our hope is that
recognizing the constraints you are in, that at least the
President's request, but if you can restore a little, that
would be outstanding and greatly appreciated.
[The statement of Robert Gropp follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. I appreciate that. Yes. We tried to
make sure that NASA did not send over the Landsat Satellite
without the money, which, unfortunately, the budget was
proposing to do.
Kasey White.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF AMERICA

WITNESS

KASEY WHITE
Ms. White. Good afternoon.
Mr. Simpson. Good afternoon.
Ms. White. Thank you for the opportunity to be here today
and testify in the 2013 budget request for the USGS. My name is
Kasey White, and I am the Director for Geoscience Policy at the
Geological Society of America. Founded in 1888, GSA is the
oldest professional Geoscience Society in North America. We
have over 25,000 members representing academia, government, and
industry in all 50 states and 90 countries.
On behalf of GSA I would like to request that Congress
fully fund the 2013 request to the USGS and restore the cuts in
the request to key programs. The USGS plays a vital role in
understanding and documenting mineral and energy resources,
researching and monitoring potential natural hazards,
monitoring the effects of climate change, and determining and
assessing water quality and availability. These truly are some
of the greatest issues facing society. Despite the critical
role played by the USGS, funding for the survey has been
stagnant in real dollars for about a decade now.
Although we believe that the USGS could effectively and
efficiently use a lot more money, it could really help increase
the pace and scope of research on a number of policy-relevant
areas, we recognize the physical restrains and feel that the
request plus restoring some of these cuts would allow them to
continue to conduct quality science in a number of these
issues.
As Rob said, the USGS is one of the Nation's premiere
science agencies. About 70 percent of its budget is for
research and development, and this research and development
underpins all of the activities of the Department of the
Interior but also communities across the Nation. They use it
for land use planning, emergency response, natural resource
management, engineering, and education.
So I would like to highlight just a few areas in which USGS
research contributes to some of these important issues. Natural
hazards remains a major cause of fatalities and economic losses
worldwide. We saw this just last night or today with the
earthquake in Mexico, and the combined historical and recent
geological records show that many areas in the U.S. are
susceptible to volcanoes and to earthquakes, and we will
continue to have those here, and a better scientific
understanding of hazards will reduce future losses and better
forecasts of their occurrence and magnitude and allow for
better planning and mitigation in these areas.
We would urge Congress to increase funding to the USGS to
modernize and upgrade its natural hazards monitoring and
warning systems and support the proposed increases for early
warning systems in the budget request.
Another area USGS contributes to is energy and mineral
resources. They are critical to national security and economic
growth. The USGS is the sole federal information source on
minerals production and potential end consumption. That is why
we are really concerned about the proposed $5 million cut in
mineral resources and the Nation's ability to develop safely
these new resources.
In addition, many emerging energy technologies such as wind
turbines and solar cells depend on rare earth elements and
critical materials that do not have really diversified sources.
China produces virtually all of them, and increases in research
at USGS can help our Nation ease our dependence on these
foreign sources.
The devastating droughts last year pretty much across the
Nation remind us of our dependence on water, and greater
scientific understanding is necessary to better understand
surface water and ground water to have safe water resources in
the future, and USGS's proposal to establish national ground
water monitoring will really help give us some of that baseline
information to allow us to plan.
As Rob mentioned, we are concerned about cuts in some of
the water programs, the water research, Water Resources
Research Act Program, water quality assessments, and
Cooperative Water Program Interpretative Studies really provide
some key information to local communities to help them plan
their water.
And, again, we are grateful to this committee for their
support. The leadership on USGS agree that we are very grateful
for your comments on Landsat. Yes, to plan and to allow the
USGS to continue to do a lot of this research that I have
mentioned and have the budget to do those things and not have
Landsat take over, even though Landsat is very important and
has contributed a lot for natural resource exploration.
Thank you very much.
[The statement of Kasey White follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Mr. Moran. We appreciate both of you speaking up on behalf
of the USGS. Thank you. It means a lot that you could come
here. Obviously, we are aware of the water infrastructures.
It's important that ASCE weigh in on them and give us the data
that we need.
Excuse me, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. William Becker.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CLEAN AIR AGENCIES

WITNESS

S. WILLIAM BECKER
Mr. Becker. Thank you, Chairman Simpson, Ranking Member
Moran, Congressman LaTourette. My name is Bill Becker. I am the
Executive Director of the National Association of Clean Air
Agencies. We are known as NACAA. We are an association of air
pollution control agencies in 45 States and over 165
metropolitan areas across the country. The Federal Clean Air
Act gives our members the primary responsibility for
implementing our Nation's clean air programs.
Our message today, we support the President's request for a
$65.8 million increase in federal grants for State and local
air pollution control agencies under Sections 103 and 105 of
the Clean Air Act.
So you are probably wondering why with all the competing
funding requests you are receiving these difficult economic
times air pollution control agencies should receive any bump in
federal funding, much less an increase of $65.8 million, and
there are at least three very important reasons.
First and most importantly, while we have made significant
progress in cleaning up our Nation's air, much more needs to be
done. The sad fact is that there are literally tens of
thousands of people dying in this country every year from air
pollution, and over 100 million people live in areas still
violating one or more of the health-based air quality
standards. This has led to a series of air pollution problems
ranging from respiratory and cardiovascular disease, damage to
lung tissue, impaired breathing, heart attacks, IQ loss,
cancer, and even death.
And it is probably fair to say that more people die or get
sick from air pollution in this country than from almost any
other problem that this subcommittee is facing today.
The second reason we are asking for an increase in federal
grants is because the Federal Government has fallen, we
believe, woefully behind in meeting its financial commitment
under the Clean Air Act to fund state and local air pollution
control programs. Sections 103 and 105 of the Clean Air Act
authorize the Federal Government to provide grants up to 60
percent of the cost of State and local air quality programs,
while state and local agencies must provide a 40 percent match.
In reality, the Federal Government has not provided 60
percent. They provided less than 25 percent of our budgets
while state and local governments supplied the remainder, over
three-quarters. A study we conducted a couple of years ago
documented a $550 million shortfall between the amount the
Federal Government should provide in federal grants for our
programs and the amount it currently provides.
Clearly the President's budget request for a $65.8 million
increase, while modest in scope, will be extremely helpful in
trying to fill this gap. These funds are the lifeblood of our
programs. We use them to carry out most of our core
responsibilities under the Clean Air Act, including the
development of strategies to attain and maintain health-based
air quality standards, the compilation of emission inventories,
the installation of air pollution monitors, the development of
programs to ensure that facilities are complying with our
Nation's clean air rules, and the establishment of innovative
and flexible strategies for industries to find a more cost-
effective way of meeting their obligations and many others.
However, in light of these funding gaps, most state and
local agencies are finding it difficult to keep their essential
programs operating. These agencies have had to scale down
programs that protect public health and have had to reduce
their staffs. As a result states and localities are now more
dependent than ever on receiving their fair share in federal
grants.
And the final reason we are seeking additional federal
grants is that our responsibilities under the Clean Air Act are
increasing substantially this coming year, well beyond our core
program tasks. This year alone we have to adopt new programs
based upon a revised health-based standard for lead, for
nitrogen dioxide, and for sulfur dioxide, as well as to
continue implementing new responsibilities for particulate
matter and ozone. Each of these activities requires a whole set
of additional responsibilities. As I mentioned, inventories,
strategies, monitoring, and so forth.
So in conclusion, the members of NACAA urge you to support
the President's budget request of a much-needed $65.8 million
increase over last year's level. These funds will go a long way
toward protecting the public health from serious adverse
affects, and we hope that you will respond favorably.
Thank you very much.
[The statement of S. William Becker follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette [presiding]. Thank you very much.
Dr. Hales.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY

WITNESS

DR. JEFFREY B. HALES
Dr. Hales. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Moran. I appreciate
the opportunity to speak today. I am testifying on behalf of
the American Thoracic Society, which is a large society of
clinicians and researchers dedicated to respiratory health of
which I am a member. I am a pulmonary physician. I practice
long-term and critical care medicine at Virginia Hospital
Center in Arlington, Virginia, and I have got three important
messages I want to make today.
First is air pollution is a serious health problem; second,
EPA funding for clean air programs should be increased, and
third, we should let the EPA do its job.
As a pulmonary physician I spend my days treating patients
with serious lung conditions such as asthma, COPD, emphysema.
Through a combination of medicines, procedures, and lifestyle
modifications I work together with these patients to help
control their chronic disease, but there is one thing that
neither I nor my patients can control, and that is the air that
they breathe.
Air pollution plays a major role in causing and
exacerbating underlying respiratory illness, and from my years
of clinical experience I know that Arlington and the
Washington, DC, area has more than its fair share of code
orange and code red air pollution days. When those happen, my
office is inundated with phone calls from patients suffering
from respiratory illness; the hospital is filled with patients
suffering severe respiratory disease and respiratory failure.
In most of these cases the patients did nothing wrong other
than happen to be unlucky enough to breathe polluted air.
I am personally not a researcher, but I am a clinician, and
my clinical observations on the impact of air pollution are
confirmed by a large number of reviewed, peer reviewed clinical
studies both here in the United States and abroad. The science
that documents the adverse effects of air pollution on human
health is comprehensive, consistent, and compelling, and
despite the significant advances the U.S. has made in
controlling air pollution over the past years, people still get
sick and die because of air pollution.
The American Lung Association notes that over 50 percent of
Americans, 154 million people, live in communities that have
experienced at least one bad air quality day in the recent
past. Air pollution is widespread, it makes people sick, and
can kill. It remains a serious health problem in the United
States.
Fortunately, the EPA can and does make a difference in air
quality, and I urge continued funding and support for the EPA
Air Quality Programs. I agree with the previous speakers'
support for the Administration's proposed $65 million increase
in grants to state and local air agencies. The increased
support for community level of air pollution programs is well
justified, but what is not justified is the Administration's
proposed cut to the Diesel and Retrofit Program. This Retrofit
Program provides support to local communities to replace old
diesel engines in school buses, transit buses, and commuter
trains with newer and more efficient engines. This Retrofit
Program yields immediate and long-term improvements in air
quality. The funding should be restored.
The EPA also has a small but scientifically-rigorous
program on the health effects of air pollution. By supporting
researchers who have published research on the health effects,
the results of EPA Clean Air Research Program provides
policymakers scientific understanding needed to make policy
judgments with confidence. I believe the EPA has good science
and has led to good decisions.
However, research programs have been flat funded for
several years. I urge Congress to provide a substantial
increase in the fiscal year 2013 budget to begin to address
these important research issues.
The EPA is also charged with developing and maintaining an
air pollution monitoring network. Unfortunately, we know that
the current monitoring network is weak and inadequate. There
are not enough monitors to adequately gauge, accurately gauge
air pollution associated with highways and other high traffic
areas. This means that we are effectively underestimating the
pollution that we are exposed to, and hence, under-appreciating
the risk that air pollution poses to our Nation's health.
The EPA needs to incorporate more recent technology into
our monitoring programs. These upgrades will give us more
accurate information. I urge the committee to provide
additional funds to expand and update the Air Quality Programs.
The last point I would like to make is that we need to let
the EPA do its job. In the last 2 years the House has
repeatedly passed legislation that would block, weaken, or even
delay the authority to improve the Nation's air quality. When
implemented, air quality standards such as the Cross State Air
Pollution Rule, the Mercury and Air Toxicants Rule, and the
Boiler Rule would save thousands of lives, prevent heart
attacks and asthma attacks. The health savings from these rules
will far exceed the compliance costs and yet the House has
repeatedly blocked these measures.
I strongly urge the Committee and all members of the House
of Representatives to restrain from extraneous policy writers,
to let the EPA do its job in protecting America's health by
improving our air quality.
Thank you.
[The statement of Jeffrey B. Hales follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Thank you, Dr. Hales, and thank all of you
for your testimony. We appreciate your appearance here. There
has been a bloodless coup if you had not noticed. Mr. Simpson
left, and he has to go and take care of the budget resolution.
He is one of our members on the Budget Committee.
Just a couple of comments. Mr. DiLoreto, being from Oregon
I am sure you are aware of Mr. Blumenauer's work, and it all
comes down to money, and I have been happy to join him on his
quest to start a water infrastructure trust fund that somebody
has got to pay for. They will not even let me into the Coke and
Pepsi plants in my districts anymore because we suggested that,
there should be some kind of fee on that.
To our friends from the USGS, I had the director in my
office, and I asked her specifically about the President's
budget, and she seemed happy. So maybe double back and make her
unhappy. I understand she has to be a team player, but she did
not express the concerns that you have expressed today. So I
appreciate you being here.
Mr. Moran, do you have anything?
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Steve.
Let me just reiterate my appreciation for the two folks who
spoke so eloquently on behalf of the USGS and for underscoring
the need for water infrastructure. As Mike has said, we have
got to figure out a way to pay for it, and I do not see where
we are going to get the money in discretionary spending to pay
for the safe drinking water, waste water treatment systems, and
the like, that we are in desperate need of funding.
And I want to thank our two witnesses, one of whom I know,
we have spoken before on the importance of clean air. So clean
air, safe drinking water, and the critical role that USGS
plays, are all important to the work of this Subcommittee.
In terms of mining, again, we are going to have to have
some form of fee. It does not seem to be an outrageously large
fee, and I understand that your role is to oppose the fee on
behalf of the association, but somehow we have got to figure
out how to pay for abandoned mine constructions and the like.
I want to thank all of you. Good testimony. Thanks very
much for taking your time.
Mr. LaTourette. Thank you very much, and the first panel
goes with our thanks, and we will now hear from the second
panel. We will be joined in the second panel by Edward Hallock,
who is the President of the Association of State Drinking Water
Administrators from the State of Delaware; Elias Longoria Jr.,
who is a Councilmember from the City of Edinburg, Texas; Nsedu
Witherspoon, who is the Executive Director of the Children's
Environmental Health Network; Elizabeth Hoffman, the President
of the Cancer Survivors' Against Radon; and Dusty Donaldson,
the Executive Director of the Dusty Joy Foundation.
Thank you all for coming, you observed the first panel, and
we will follow the same sort of rules. The lights will flash,
and we appreciate your coming here. We appreciate your
testimony, Mr. Hallock, we will start with you.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

ASSOCIATION OF STATE DRINKING WATER ADMINISTRATORS/STATE OF DELAWARE

WITNESS

EDWARD HALLOCK
Mr. Hallock. Okay. Thank you very much for the opportunity
to speak today. My name is Ed Hallock. I am the President of
the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators, and I
am also the Administrator of the Drinking Water Program for
Delaware.
ASDWA represents the State Drinking Water Programs and
their efforts to provide safe drinking water to more than 275
million Americans. We respectfully request that for fiscal year
2013, the Subcommittee appropriate funds for three programs at
levels to help ensure appropriate public health protection for
Americans.
The Public Water Supply and Supervision Program. States are
responsible for ensuring compliance with federal regulations
for over 90 contaminants and for overseeing approximately
155,000 public water systems, but state activities go well
beyond simply ensuring compliance at the tap. They administer
very challenging multi-faceted programs.
The number of federal regulations continues to grow while
at the same time the federal funding support has been basically
flat. State Drinking Water Programs are under critical phases
of implementing a series of new risk-based drinking water
rules, and this challenge is playing out in the context of the
current economic crisis. States have often been expected to do
more with less and have always responded with commitment and
ingenuity, but State Drinking Water Programs are now in crisis.
Insufficient funding increases the likelihood of contamination
that puts public health at risk.
The fiscal year 2012 appropriated levels for the PWSS
Program was $105 million or a bit less than $2 million per
state, and the President has asked for an increase in fiscal
year 2013 of only $4 million over the fiscal year 2012 budget.
This amount is simply inadequate. We respectfully request that
Congress appropriate $200 million for the PWSS Program to more
appropriately account for the federal mandates and the enormity
of the task facing states.
The Drinking Water State Revolving Loan Fund. The primary
purpose of the DWSRF is to improve public health protection by
providing loans to improving drinking water infrastructure,
thus facilitating water system compliance with the regulations.
The payback on the investment in the program has been
exceptional, $12.4 billion in grants and $2 billion in ARRA
funds since 1997, have been leveraged by states into nearly $24
billion in infrastructure loans for projects that improve
public health protection for millions of Americans.
The DWSRF Program request in the President's budget for the
past several years has exhibited a disappointing downward
trend, $850 million requested for fiscal year 2013, versus $1.4
billion appropriated by Congress in fiscal year 2010. At the
same time EPA's most Recent Needs Survey in 2007, indicated
that drinking water system needs total $335 billion over the
next 20 years.
So ASDWA respectfully requests $1.287 billion for fiscal
year 2013 funding for the DWSRF Program. This was the amount
appropriated in fiscal year 2011, and ASDWA believes this is an
appropriate funding level on an ongoing basis.
Finally, the State Drinking Water Security
Responsibilities. Since the events of September, 2001, as well
as more recent experience in natural disasters, states have
taken extraordinary measures to meet the security and emergency
response-related needs of the drinking water community. States
have provided assistance, training, information, and financial
support to their systems.
After 7 years of supporting State Security Programs through
a small grant of approximately $5 million in EPA's
appropriation, no funds have been provided for this purpose
since fiscal year 2009, and none are requested for fiscal year
2013.
ASDWA respectfully requests $10 million in fiscal year 2013
funding for the State Security Initiatives.
So a number of incidents in the U.S. over the past several
years having led to illnesses or deaths from unsafe drinking
water serve as a stark reminder of the critical nature of the
work the Safe Drinking Water Programs do every day and the
danger of inadequately-funded programs. Vibrant and sustainable
communities are dependent on a safe and adequate supply of
drinking water. A strong drinking water program supported by
the federal and state partnership will ensure that the quality
of drinking water in this country will not deteriorate and in
fact, will continue to improve so that Americans can be assured
that a glass of water is safe to drink no matter where they
travel or live.
I know the Subcommittee will be considering many worthy
funding requests for a lot of different programs, but it would
be hard to argue that anything is more important than safe
drinking water. So an increase, even a relatively modest
increase in the PWSS Grant would help a great deal in allowing
state security on this important work, and I would respectfully
request to have submitted into the record a copy of, ``The
Public Health Protection Threatened by Inadequate Resources,''
a study that we did in 2003, by the Association of State
Drinking Water Administrators.
Okay. Thank you.
[The statement of Edward Hallock follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Thank you very much.
Mr. Longoria. Welcome. Thank you.
Where is Edinburg, Texas?
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

CITY OF EDINBURG, TEXAS

WITNESS

ELIAS LONGORIA JR.
Mr. Longoria. I am going to give you a little handout here,
if you do not mind.
Mr. LaTourette. Sure.
Mr. Longoria. It is deep south Texas, about 15 miles from
the Texas/Mexican border.
Mr. LaTourette. Okay. Great. Well, welcome.
Mr. Longoria. Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Moran. I am Elias Longoria, and I am an elected City
Councilmember from the City of Edinburg, Texas, located in the
15th Congressional District of Texas, and my testimony today is
related to the Wastewater Sewer System Programs that fall under
our jurisdiction of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Today I appear before you to share with you some very
important economic statistics from the City of Edinburg, about
some important jobs coming to the city, creating even as we
speak. We are seeking counsel regarding the dilemma the city is
facing on how to improve infrastructure upgrades needed to keep
up with the city's booming economy and services to seven
colonias just outside the city that depend on our facilities.
Edinburg, as I mentioned, is located 15 miles from the
Texas/Mexican border. It is a city of 77,000 people, a city
that has grown to this population from less than 20,000 in
1960. It is now one of the fastest growing areas in south
Texas. Soon we will have two new major manufacturing companies,
one for produce and one for denim, which will be opening in the
area, offering 1,600 new jobs to the community.
There is a new plant called Santana Textiles, which through
the help of Governor Rick Perry and the State of Texas
Enterprise Zone Program, as well as some tax incentives by the
city, is expanding and opening their plant in August. They will
offer 800 new jobs.
The other new 800 jobs will be brought by a company called
Don Hugo Produce, which was formerly located in the City of
Chicago. They find that the city offers everything that they
need to be moving produce from Mexico into the eastern part of
the United States.
Also our airport which previously was used as a military
defense airport has been converted now to general aviation
after World War II and is slowly but surely becoming a
commercial airport, which we will need to adequately service
the community of Edinburg. In fact, FedEx Ground has just
opened a new ground station, 100,000 square-foot building, and
all their ground station will be based out of the City of
Edinburg.
Edinburg also assists seven nearby rural areas known as
colonias in south Texas. As described by the Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas, colonias date back to the early 1950's. They
were using marginally agricultural land, lands that lay in
floodplains and other rural properties to develop and created
unincorporated subdivisions. They divided the land into small
lots, put little or no infrastructure, and then sold it to low-
income individuals seeking affordable housing.
Colonia residents generally have very low incomes. Per
capita annual income for the Texas counties bordering Mexico
where most of the colonias are located tend to be much lower
than state average. These communities clearly are overburdened,
but they also provide many of the workers that fuel the growth
of the Rio Grande Valley's economy. Like it or not, many of
these city's services end up being provided to these residents
of the seven nearby colonias.
The city government provides to the city's residents and
the colonias sewer and water treatment, fire fighting
assistance, police assistance, emergency management assistance,
and airport services in case of an emergency or natural
disasters. The Rio Grande Valley of Texas seeks a port of entry
or egress, such as this airport, located along the Texas/
Mexican border, and in short, during this period of growth, the
city is working hard to make certain that its citizens and the
businesses that have located in our community continue to have
the necessary services for a good quality of life as well as
being able to attract even more jobs.
I fully understand that Congress is out of the earmark
business. However, I am here today to share with you a major
dilemma the city faces regarding its sewer plant and water
plants, airport, and law enforcement funding.
The city's population continues to grow because the city is
working hard to add jobs, fight off the devastating economic
effects of the recession, and do our part to stimulate economic
growth. My job today on behalf of the citizens of Edinburg is
to ask you, the Federal Government, to do an assistance with
the City and federal dollars to help us address the cost of
building a much-needed $11 million sewer plant and an $8
million water plant.
We are here for suggestions of any way that that could
happen. Unfortunately, for the citizens of Edinburg they cannot
afford both to pay for more necessary improvements to the
city's utilities and also assist the other surrounding
unincorporated communities as well as the seven colonias. The
City has been faced with fines from the federal EPA because its
burgeoning population is pushing the water and sewer facilities
to their limits.
This current state of affairs does not do us any good, and
certainly, does nothing for the city. Either we have to work
together to find federal dollars to help the citizens of
Edinburg get through these rough spots or the city will have to
turn away businesses who are eager to invest brick and mortar
and jobs to the City of Edinburg.
The same goes for our airport. When FAA tells us that we
need more volume in order to access money from the Airport
Improvement Act to expand our runway, the city responds it
cannot get more volume with a runway that is too short for
planes. It is the proverbial question of which comes first, the
chicken or the egg. This is a good example of a government
program that is not serving the communities it was designed to
serve.
Finally, because of our proximity to the Texas/Mexican
border, we also need federal dollars to spend on border
security due to the horrible problems that Mexico is allowing
to spill over the Texas side of the border from Mexico. This is
a national problem, but part of that battle is being fought on
the local level by our city law enforcement officers.
Today, I invite this committee to hold a hearing in
Edinburg, tour the airport, the seven local colonias that
Edinburg services, and let us show you exactly why we need help
from the Federal Government. These dollars we need from the
Federal Government will be used carefully to help the city
continue to be able to support its population growth as well as
prove to you that the city is doing its part to stimulate the
economy.
Our area is one of the fastest growing areas in the United
States, and we need help from the Federal Government to make
certain we continue to grow, add jobs, and allow the people of
Edinburg and South Texas to prosper.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I am open to
any questions you may have.
[The statement of Elias Longoria Jr. follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Thank you very much. Could you just tell us
who is the member of Congress that represents Edinburg?
Mr. Longoria. I believe it is Kay Bailey Hutchinson.
Mr. LaTourette. Well, she is a Senator.
Mr. Longoria. Senator. Oh, Congress. Ruben Hinojosa. I am
sorry.
Mr. LaTourette. Okay. Good. Thank you.
Ms. Witherspoon, welcome.
----------                              --
--------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

CHILDREN'S ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH NETWORK

WITNESS

NSEDU OBOT WITHERSPOON
Ms. Witherspoon. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Moran, thank
you very much for the opportunity to have this hearing and to
testify before you today. My name is Nsedu Witherspoon, and I
am the Executive Director for the Children's Environmental
Health Network, and this year the Network is celebrating our
20th anniversary. I will briefly summarize my written testimony
which has been submitted for the record.
The Network is a national non-profit organization focused
on children's health, and like parents and grandparents, I am
sure that you all want children to have the best chance
possible to grow up healthy and productive, and we certainly
want the same thing.
Thus, I am here today to highlight the important role that
the EPA plays in our Nation's health, especially the health of
our children and provide a look at how the EPA does this.
The environments in which our children live and grow, learn
and play shape certainly their health and their future. For
example, researchers are understanding more and more about the
fetal origins of disease and the health in later years.
Research has found that children who are exposed in the womb to
higher levels of a common pesticide at age eight had lower IQs
and poorer working memory.
We know that children can be more susceptible and more
vulnerable than adults when exposed to toxic chemicals. We have
much more to learn about how to protect children from harmful
exposures in their environments. For example, synthetic
chemicals that mimic or block hormone function known as
endocrine disruptors affect a developing body's vital
activities and normal functioning.
We have much to learn about how to identify those hormone
mimics and how to protect human health from this category of
chemicals. Epidemiologists are seeing increasing rates of
asthma. They have approximately doubled between 1980, and 1995,
and they are on the rise again. Childhood cancers which have
increased 20 percent since 1975, and autism, the diagnosis has
increased more than ten times in the last 15 years.
I am not saying that environmental exposures are the sole
reason for these increases; however, it is clear that such
exposures do play some role in the modern pediatric epidemics.
That is why EPA's activities have a great impact on children's
health and development. EPA's Office of Child Health Protection
leads and coordinates the agency's efforts to protect children
from environmental hazards. The Children's Health Research
Centers of Excellence are conducting phenomenal research to
help protect children from environmental hazards.
EPA's Office of Research and Development oversees research
to improve toxicity testing and to better understand children's
exposures as its many activities that will impact children's
health.
The Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Units are a
unique resource network for the Nation's pediatricians and
parents doing valuable work with very small budgets. The
National Children's Study is looking at environmental
influences on the health and development of more than 100,000
children across the United States, following them from before
birth until age 21. EPA has specific expertise to offer the
National Children's Study if the Congress provides the agency
with the resources to contribute.
A variety of EPA programs and activities are vital to
support community and State efforts to protect children's
health in environments that are unique to children such as the
school and the childcare settings. Unsafe environmental
conditions harm children's health and undermine attendance,
achievement, and productivity.
We urge you to support EPA's activities for health school
and childcare settings such as the Indoor Air Quality Tools for
Schools Program. EPA and its partners in public health such as
the National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences and
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and local and
state agencies, they are faced with tough budgetary times and
ever-increasing needs.
We recognize the fact and the challenges that you are
facing. While you are deciding on appropriations for fiscal
year 2013, please do not compromise the mission of a vital
guardian of our health, the EPA. Your investment in programs
and initiatives that protect children's health will be repaid
by a healthier generation with brighter futures.
We also urge you to direct the EPA to assure that all of
its activities and programs, including regulations, guidelines,
assessments, and research specifically consider children.
Thank you, again, for the opportunity to testify, and thank
you for your concern about the environmental health of our
children. I am certainly happy to answer any questions you may
have.
Thanks, again.
[The statement of Nsedu Obot Witherspoon follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Well, we thank you very much for being here
and sharing your observations.
Ms. Hoffman.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

CANCER SURVIVORS AGAINST RADON

WITNESS

ELIZABETH HOFFMAN
Ms. Hoffman. I am Elizabeth Hoffman. I am President of
CanSAR, Cancer Survivors Against Radon, a non-profit
organization.
The dangers of radon are real. I have never smoked, nor
have I have been around second-hand smoke, and I have lung
cancer. I first tested our home after my half of my left lung
was removed, along with the 5 centimeter mass, malignant mass.
My home tested at over twice the action level for radon.
My journey began in '03, when I went to my G.P. because I
had a persistent dry cough and an intermittent pain below my
left shoulder blade. He ordered a chest X-ray, which showed the
mass. I underwent surgery, daily chest radiation, and my series
of chemo.
'06, the cancer came back as fluid in my chest. A chest
catheter was inserted so fluid could be drained at home, and I
underwent my second series of chemo.
'08, the cancer spread to my brain and my right lung. I had
Cyberknife brain radiation and third series of chemo.
2011, there were 12 new lesions on my brain, and I
underwent whole brain radiation. Later that year a CT showed
new growth in my left lung. I am currently undergoing my fourth
series of chemo.
After I came home from my lung surgery, I researched radon.
I wanted my challenges, my life to count for something, so a
group of us came together to put a face on the dangers of
radon. We began CanSAR. Some of my colleagues from CanSAR are
here with me today.
Barb is a lung cancer survivor like myself. Gloria and
Marlene behind me both lost their husbands to radon-induced
lung cancer. We are counting on you to right the wrong that has
been allowed to go on for far too long. It is unacceptable that
more than 21,000 American lives are lost each year due to this
preventable disease.
From my perspective cutting our Nation's Radon Program is
the exact opposite of what is needed. According to EPA's own
Inspector General's 2008 report nearly 2 decades after passage
of the 1988 Indoor Radon Abatement Act, exposure to indoor
radon continues to grow.
Today an American dies every 28 minutes from radon-induced
lung cancer. According to the Today Show report, an estimated
70,000 classrooms contain toxic radon levels. One of every 15
homes in our country contain toxic levels of radioactive radon
gas.
The hard reality is that this program's voluntary nature
has proven to be ineffective. A simple, inexpensive test is all
that is required during the real estate transaction to know if
a problem exists. According to the American Association of
Radon Scientists, the 2013, proposed budget cuts will zero-line
EPA's State Indoor Radon Grant Program and eliminate EPA
regional office support.
The overall impact will be the systematic elimination of
our country's outreach and education efforts as they pertain to
radon. Fewer of our buildings will be tested and more will not
be fixed. Consumers will no longer have a state or tribal
program to protect their interests in dealing with unregulated
contractors.
Classrooms in our country with toxic levels of radon will
never be identified and fixed so our children can learn in a
safe environment. Our soldiers and their families living in
military housing containing toxic levels of radon will continue
to be put at risk.
This is not acceptable. Last year EPA announced a new
initiative, the Federal Radon Action Plan, which does not have
funding or accountability. This does not make sense. The time
for a real commitment from our elected officials in requiring
radon risk reduction is required. This requires your support in
mandating a fully-funded national regulatory program, and the
return on your commitment is potentially great, more than $2
trillion of healthcare savings, as well as saving lives.
To date the cost of my treatment has exceeded $800,000.
Every radon-induced lung cancer survivor or family member of
those who have lost their battle has a story to share with you.
This is why on behalf of CanSAR I specifically ask for the
following.
Number one. Properly fund the EPA radon budget to the 2011,
levels for a minimum period of 5 years. A fully-funded national
radon budget of 24 to $26 million per year will yield a
positive investment on your return. Using EPA's own numbers,
the overall value of a life saved is $7.9 million. According to
EPA, 687 lives were saved through testing and mitigation in
2011. This means you invested $24 million to recoup 5.4
billion.
Number two. Require EPA to regulate radon under the
authority provided by your colleagues in 1988. If EPA is not
the right agency to get the job done, then please require the
right agency to take over the program. A properly-regulated
national radon program will also provide a positive return on
your commitment by saving thousands of lives every year.
Please accept my request. I have no interest in blaming
anyone for my condition. Blame does not have a place in the
lives of cancer members. Instead, a fresh focus on addressing
the radon problem in our country must begin today. You can make
that happen. You can save more than 21,000 American lives each
year.
Thank you.
[The statement of Elizabeth Hoffman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. I thank you very much for your testimony,
and since the hearing is recorded and written down, I noticed
that you have displayed a number of photographs on the table. I
wonder if you could just for the record describe who is
depicted in those photographs.
Ms. Linnertz. These are all members of CanSAR, Cancer
Survivors Against Radon. These are people that did not know
they were living with high levels of radon until they were
diagnosed with lung cancer.
You may be interested here especially in this young lady
who is from Ohio. She passed away about 3 weeks ago. This is my
husband in Illinois. We were living with high levels of radon.
Illinois has 40 percent of the homes, almost 40 percent of the
homes, as does Ohio, with over 4.0 Pico-curies per liter of
air.
Linda is from Pennsylvania, Gail is from Iowa. I have known
all of these people since '06, the ones that were alive.
Unfortunately, we lost several of them in 2010, and 2008, and
they are not alive now. Here is Debbie, who is a third grade
teacher in Washington. California is represented here with two
people, Glenn and Leona, and Leona passed in '09, and Glenn is
in very serious condition. Denny also was in Ohio. He was a
real estate person who said to his clients, previously I did
not say too much about radon, but now having been diagnosed
with lung cancer and living with high levels of radon, I insist
everyone get their homes tested before taking occupancy.
This is Marlene's husband, Bob. These people are all over
the country. Almost every state is represented here.
Mr. LaTourette. That is why I asked you. Thank you very
much.
Ms. Donaldson, thank you for being here.
----------                              --
--------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

DUSTY JOY FOUNDATION

WITNESS

DUSTY DONALDSON
Ms. Donaldson. Thank you. As a patient advocate, lung
cancer survivor, and founder of a 501(c)(3) non-profit
organization dedicated to advancing lung cancer education,
early detection, and compassion for those impacted by the
disease, I am here to testify on behalf of more than 20,000
Americans who will die from radon-induced lung cancer this
year.
Thank you for granting me the opportunity to respond to the
announcement that EPA funding for radon programs may be
reduced.
I was diagnosed with lung cancer 6 years ago. Only 15
percent of lung cancer patients survive 5 years, so I believe I
have a responsibility to speak out for those unable to speak. I
am grateful for your time and attention.
According to the EPA more than 20,000 Americans will die
from radon-induced lung cancer this year. Radon kills more
Americans each year than AIDS, drunk driving, drowning, or home
fires. Approximately 17,000 Americans will die from AIDS this
year, 10,839 will die as a result of drunk driving, 3,650 will
drown this year, and 3,500 will die in home fires. These other
risks are well known, but the American public knows so little
about the risks of radon.
Dorothy Blosser from Virginia's Shenandoah Valley is one
person who never smoked but died from lung cancer. Dorothy was
a Mennonite pastor's wife. After her diagnosis her family
discovered the radon level in the home was nearly ten times the
EPA action level.
Lung cancer is the number one cancer killer. It kills
nearly twice as many women as breast cancer, three times as
many men as prostate cancer. In fact, lung cancer kills more
people than breast, prostate, colon, and pancreatic cancers
combined.
While lung cancer is the number one cancer killer, it is
the least funded in terms of federal research dollars. One
reason lung cancer research is underfunded is because of the
stigma associated with this disease. Maybe it is subconscious
but people assume anyone with lung cancer brought it upon
themselves, like the early days of AIDS.
Consider that approximately 79,000 U.S. smokers will be
diagnosed with lung cancer this year, yet nearly twice that
number, 147,000 who are former or never smokers, will also be
told you have lung cancer. Although the EPA estimates that more
than 20,000 lung cancer deaths are due to radon, considering
that approximately 34,000 Americans who never smoked will be
diagnosed with lung cancer this year, the number of radon-
induce lung cancer deaths could be even higher.
Radon is the number one cause of lung cancer in people who
never smoked, and for those with a history of smoking, radon
exposure greatly increases their risk for developing lung
cancer. According to the American Cancer Society each year
approximately 3,400 Americans die from lung cancer caused by
second-hand smoke. Radon-induced lung cancer claims six times
as many lives. Across the country restaurants, office
buildings, and schools have become smoke free. Although the air
in these buildings may be smoke free, radon in these buildings
is killing 55 Americans each and every day.
Many never smokers are battling lung cancer. Abby, a 14-
year-old girl from Macon, Georgia, has been fighting stage four
lung cancer since she was nine, and there is Taylor Bell, a
former college athlete who interned for Senator Richard Burr.
She was diagnosed with lung cancer at the age of 21. In Texas
there is Gerald Dash, a former college football player who had
a double lung transplant. Gerald fights for every day he gets
to spend with his wife and two daughters. I would love to tell
you about Daveed, Lila, Julie, Marian, Brittney, Katherine, Bo,
Melissa, and many more, but time constrains me.
The Dusty Joy Foundation supports the EPA's work of warning
the public about radon. One easy way to reduce lung cancer
deaths is to fund radon awareness. While radon is a serious and
potentially deadly problem, the test is inexpensive and easy,
and if there is a problem, fixing it is quick and less
expensive than most home improvement projects.
Our non-profit organization distributes free radon test
kits to targeted residents in North Carolina and Virginia,
along with EPA-radon awareness materials. If funds for radon
programs are reduced, a message would be sent that radon
awareness is unimportant, that more than 20,000 Americans do
not matter. Our organization's good work would also be
hindered. Please do not perpetuate the cruel and false
assumption that people with lung cancer deserve it.
In light of these facts we actually request an increase in
funding for the EPA's Radon Awareness Program.
Thank you, again, for your time and attention to this life-
saving matter.
[The statement of Dusty Donaldson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. I thank you, and I want to thank all of you
for sharing your testimony and your stories. We appreciate it
very much.
Just a couple of quick comments before I ask Mr. Moran if
he has some observations. Mr. Hallock, one of the problems that
we continually face, I am a child of the '60s and '70s, and in
those days there was a lot of free money for wastewater
improvement, what people described as free money. Today the
rules have continued but the money has not, and, it is why when
we had the fellow from the Civil Engineers, we have got to
figure it out. You cannot in my part of the world, where the
pipes have been in the ground since the Great Depression,
expect these communities to come up with the necessary
resources to meet all the rules that are being forced on them.
People can only afford so much in a water and sewer bill, and
so we are going to have to be creative, and it is going to have
to be both parties that are going to have to be creative and
figure out the mess. So I appreciate it.
Mr. Longoria, how long is your runway that you talked
about?
Mr. Longoria. I do not have the detail of the runway right
now. Fifty-six hundred feet.
Mr. LaTourette. Well, that is pretty short, and I think
that Mr. Moran and I and others will be happy to work with your
member to talk about it. I mean, the AIP Program is not the
subject or the jurisdiction of this subcommittee, but I am more
than familiar with it, and in order to qualify you have to be
what is called a reliever airport, that would relieve, if there
is a problem in another airport, the planes could land there.
Not very many planes can land in a 5,600 foot runway, but we
will work with you folks.
Mr. Longoria. Thank you.
Mr. LaTourette. And we appreciate it very much.
Mr. Longoria. Thank you.
Mr. LaTourette. Relative to radon, just so I am clear, when
I purchased a home here in Mr. Moran's district, he is actually
my Congressman when I live here. That is why I go back to Ohio
on a regular basis. That is not true. He is a great
Congressman. But there was a requirement that we have the home
tested as part of Virginia law, and so my question would be,
and I know that that is not the answer because there has to be
the real estate transaction, but if there were a universal
legislation similar to what apparently is in Virginia, where at
the time of transfer you had to have the radon testing, what
sort of impact do you think that that would make on the
problem?
Ms. Hoffman. Huge. Right now no one is talking about it for
some of the reasons that you heard today, but also people do
not think that it is major concern. The news is not talking
about it enough and then with the cuts, that would send the
wrong message.
So if there is regulation out there that would mandate
testing of homes, schools, be it with a real estate transaction
or with mandatory testing and that it has to be mitigated with
licensed contractors as another aspect of it, that would be
huge.
Mr. LaTourette. Okay.
Ms. Hoffman. That would be absolutely huge.
Mr. LaTourette. Go ahead.
Ms. Linnertz. Presently there is no State in our Nation
that demands radon testing at the point of sale. There are some
municipalities and there may be some real estate agents that
mandate it, but no state has that as a law.
Mr. LaTourette. And I am glad you brought that up, because
do you know, Jim? Is it Fairfax County, or what is it?
Mr. Moran. It must be local because we require it upon
transfer of residential property. So if it is not State law,
then it must be a local law.
Mr. LaTourette. Yes.
Ms. Linnertz. Right.
Mr. LaTourette. You know, just my sense is that so many
things are already attached to point of sale, transactions that
in my opinion are not worthwhile, but this seems to be
something----
Ms. Linnertz. Certainly.
Mr. LaTourette [continuing]. That is worthwhile.
Ms. Hoffman. Absolutely.
Ms. Linnertz. Certainly.
Mr. LaTourette. If we, for instance, at point of sale
required you to update your electrical system so your family
does not burn to death in an electrical fire, this seems to be
a reasonable extension of that, and, again, I will talk to
Chairman Simpson, but I know that we would be happy to work on
some, you know, around here it is the carrot and the stick
approach. So if the state does something good, sometimes we
reward them, and if they do not, sometimes you smack them
around.
I think that we can talk about this, and I really
appreciate, I did not know the statistics on the difference
between tobacco-related lung cancer and radon. So I have
learned something today, and I appreciate it.
Ms. Donaldson. Thank you, and if I might just add one more
comment to what Gloria and Liz were saying about, you were
talking about real estate transactions, Gloria had enlightened
me about, Gloria, where was that? Was that in your home state
where it is mandatory that the buyer at least receive
information. Could you explain that a little bit?
Ms. Linnertz. When my husband died and the oncologist told
us that radon was a known cause of lung cancer, my husband only
lived 6 weeks after his diagnosis, I heard it on TV again, and
I researched, and I tested our house. I went to my state
legislator, and I said, there has to be a law so people do not
have homes with high levels of radon. We were living with over
four times the EPA action level.
We did get passed in Illinois a very, very firm Radon
Awareness Act, which is a notification act so everybody that
buys a home is notified of the fact that radon is present and
that it is a class A carcinogen, and they must have this sign-
off sheet saying that the seller has tested the level as such
and such. They have never tested or they tested and mitigated
and the level is such and such.
Previous to that law only 8 percent of the people were
testing their home for radon at the point of sale. That number
has gone up to toward 40 percent since '08, when it was passed.
Mr. LaTourette. I think that it is a great step forward,
but my experience is people are so anxious to get into their
homes, nobody would ever lose a home to termites if everybody
did what they were supposed to do. So I am not a big government
guy, but it seems to me that like lead paint, like so many
other things that you can find in a real estate transaction,
that is a reasonable point.
Ms. Donaldson. This is the radon test kit. It is as simple
as this.
Mr. LaTourette. Well, the one I had in my house was a
little bigger. It looked like----
Ms. Donaldson. Yes.
Mr. LaTourette [continuing]. A dehumidifier.
Ms. Donaldson. It can be fancier.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Steve.
Mr. LaTourette. Sure.
Mr. Moran. I understand from our excellent staff that one
idea would be to have school children, perhaps in science
classes, take it home with them and check their own home. The
discussion would then probably spread to include other homes.
It would not take much tweaking to suggest that that might be
an initiative that the Administration would implement with the
money that is now available.
Ms. Donaldson. Excellent idea. Excellent.
Mr. Moran. Far-reaching affects.
Mr. LaTourette. How much does that----
Ms. Donaldson. Well, you can buy it at Lowe's for about 20
bucks, and it is a self mailer. Both ways it is no postage, and
you can buy it, well, we buy it at a discount because we are a
non-profit, and we buy wholesale, but our organization spends
$4.50 on a radon test kit.
Mr. Moran. So a school system, for example, could buy them
in quantity at wholesale prices----
Ms. Donaldson. Absolutely.
Mr. Moran [continuing]. So it might be affordable. Well, it
is something we should talk about.
Mr. LaTourette. Again, my thanks to all of you, both listed
and unlisted, who shared your stories with us and you go with
our thanks.
Ms. Donaldson. Thank you.
Ms. Hoffman. Thank you.
Mr. LaTourette. Let me just ask Mr. Moran's opinion. I have
been told that at 2:15, which is about now, we are going to
have four votes. I am reluctant to just have a couple of the
witnesses from the next panel and then----
Mr. Moran. Well, I mean, it is going to be a good 15
minutes.
Mr. LaTourette. Do you want to get started?
Mr. Moran. Let's see if we could get the first couple of
witnesses in because otherwise they are going to have to hang
around for quite awhile.
Mr. LaTourette. Okay. With that we are going to call up our
next panel with the understanding that we will probably be
interrupted before you are able to complete the entire panel.
First if we could ask Nancy Perry to come forward, who is with
the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals;
Nancy Blaney, the Animal Welfare Institute; Mary Beth Beetham,
the Defenders of Wildlife; Brad Brooks from the Wilderness
Society; and Greg Knadle from the National Fish and Wildlife
Foundation.
So we have about 12 minutes before Mr. Moran and I have to
go catch a series of votes, and there are four votes, and
included in there will be a motion to recommit, so we are
probably looking at an hour plus or minus.
So with that----
Ms. Perry. No pressure.
Mr. LaTourette. Yes. Basically anybody that can summarize
their statement in a minute or less will get full funding. The
rest of you are going to have to move on.
I appreciate you being here, and Ms. Perry, let's start
with you. Thank you for coming.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS

WITNESS

NANCY PERRY
Ms. Perry. Thank you so much. It is a great opportunity for
the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
to be here today. We are the very first humane organization to
be formed in the Western Hemisphere back in 1866, and we have
more than 2.5 million supporters that we are representing here
today.
Our birthright is in the prevention, the effective
prevention of cruelty to animals, and in particular when we
started equine protection was one of the primary issues that
Henry Bergh focused on. So it is all too appropriate that we
are here today to speak to you about the Bureau of Land
Management's efforts to manage wild horses and to offer some
suggestions for change.
We certainly know that these horses were to be treated
humanly under Congress's demands when they passed the Wild and
Free-Roaming Horse and Burro Act in 1971, an act that passed
due largely to the pressure of many school children, millions
of them around the country, that really believe that these
horses should be preserved for future generations. Those school
children are adults now and in society. Many of them are our
members. They remember that as one of their most important
civic acts that they ever conducted, and so they continue to
feel very strongly about making sure that these horses are
preserved as historical icons, protected, treated humanly,
never, never the subject of abuse.
In the 40 years BLM has been managing these horses, we have
seen a real deterioration in the way the herds have been
treated and in a non-stop cycle of roundup and removal, which
has been disruptive for the herds and the horses, harsh
treatment for the horses in the process, and very tough on
taxpayers as a result of taking too many horses off the ranch.
So there has been an acknowledgement by BLM that there is a
need for change. They recognize that. We applaud the agency for
recognizing that, and we want to work with them. We have a
couple suggestions for the committee in how they can help
institute some positive change.
We have four ideas in particular, and they are articulated
in our written testimony, so I will be very brief. We think
that first we need to abide by the ``Do No Harm Principle,''
and we need to make sure that language is in the Interior
Appropriations Bill this year that has been in past bills that
ensures that wild horses are never killed by mass euthanasia
and never commercially sold.
We also hold that there will be an equilibrium instituted
between the number of removed horses and the adoption program
so that we are abiding by the principle that we ask the
American people to abide by right now in tough economic times.
We need to live within our means, and the agency has not been
doing that, and that is why they keep coming to the committee
asking for more money.
We think that on-range management should be prioritized,
and finally, we think that humane and transparent methods need
to be instituted for all the roundups so that we do not have
anymore tragedies.
Let me first mention on the mass euthanasia and commercial
sale issue. This stems from a problem back in 2004, when a
backroom deal was instituted called the Burns rider, former
Senator Burns made amendments to the Wild Free-Roaming Horse
and Burro Act on a massive omnibus appropriations bill, and in
doing so he made sure that horses would be available for
commercial sale, which is the equivalent of slaughter, and our
recent polling in January of 2012, showed that still very
strong, in fact, growing public support against horse
slaughter. Eighty percent of Americans and 72 percent of rural
Americans feel very strongly on this issue. That needs to be
protected against.
So the ASPCA requests that the committee include language
provided in our testimony that repeats what has been in past
approps bills that would ensure that no horses are sold
commercially and that the BLM never reconsiders as it did in
2008, a mass depopulation approach to solving a messy problem
that they had created.
We also think this idea of equilibrium is very important.
We know that a certain number of horses can be adopted every
year, three to 4,000. No more than that should ever be taken
off the range without a clear plan for how we are going to pay
for that cost that we are accruing. It just makes common sense.
So I think that is fairly obvious. I will not belabor it.
But we should not delay the inevitable need for the third
point, which is on-range management, and there are a couple
ways to accomplish that. Wild horses under the Act were to
always be left on the range, and on-range management was
supposed to be the priority method of management.
There are two things that the committee can encourage the
agency to do more of, and that is more fertility control. This
is very effective, tested over decades, and right now BLM is
taking the step to control or contracept 2,000 mares, and that
is an excellent step but not nearly enough. They should be
contracepting as many horses as they plan to remove and
removing the smaller number. So that needs to be reversed, and
the Committee can certainly encourage the agency to do that.
There also have been more than 19 million acres that were
originally habitat for wild horses that have been utterly
zeroed out, and so the 47,000 horses we have in holding that
taxpayers are paying for right now could be rereleased on that
land. BLM needs to use some of the money that you provide them
to study that land for proper habitat, and as soon as possible
rerelease those horses.
Finally, there have been all too many very unfortunate
incidents in recent roundups that have demonstrated the need
for standard operating procedures to be instituted by the
agency to ensure no horses endure outright cruelty during these
roundups. We have seen and documented foals being run such
extreme distances that their hooves literally soften and slow
off and the horses have to be destroyed. Horses have been
driven to physical exhaustion. Horses and burros have literally
been physically assaulted with helicopter skids, and this has
been captured and documented over and over again. We have seen
excessive and inappropriate use of electric prongs, beating
horses with whips, kicking horses, and slamming metal gates and
metal panels against horses' legs and bodies, and the twisting
and pulling of horses' tails. There are better ways to conduct
roundups, and there is never an excuse for one of these
incidents.
BLM does acknowledge this, and they want to work on
protocols. The Committee could encourage them to expedite that
procedure.
One thing we would also ask is that video cameras be
installed on the helicopters for public transparency. This
would assure the public who currently probably spends a lot of
BLM's time with their worries, they would be able to be assured
that those roundups are conducted without harming horses.
So I want to thank you for this opportunity to mention
these important points and thank the committee for its
investment in this issue and for helping us bring to being the
original vision of the Wild Free-Roaming Horse and Burro Act
and protect these horses.
Thank you so much.
[The statement of Nancy Perry follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Thank you for coming. Thank you for your
testimony.
Ms. Blaney, you are up, and to our other witnesses I think
that will be it until we vote, so I apologize for that. Thank
you for being here.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

ANIMAL WELFARE INSTITUTE

WITNESS

NANCY BLANEY
Ms. Blaney. My name is Nancy Blaney. I am here testifying
on behalf of the Animal Welfare Institute. I will be addressing
White-Nose Syndrome activities of the Fish and Wildlife
Service, U.S. Geological Service, Forest Service, and BLM, and
also touching briefly on the horse and burro issue as well.
This Subcommittee is well aware of the destruction being
wrought by White-Nose Syndrome. When I submitted my testimony
on March 12 it was in 19 States and four Canadian Provinces. It
is now in 20 States. Since then it has been confirmed in
Alabama, as well as in the Great Smokey Mountains National
Park.
In January new estimates from Fish and Wildlife put the
death toll of that at at least 5.7 million, and you are well
aware of the significant agricultural and public health impacts
of the deaths of so many bats.
The money that has been spent so far on addressing this
problem has yielded crucial results, mapping of the Geomyces
destructans, the fungus' genome, and identifying its origin,
scientifically concluding that Geomyces destructans does,
indeed, cause White-Nose Syndrome, because that question was
open for a little while, and that is important to the
development of management strategies.
Ongoing projects that are untaken by these agencies include
detailed studies of the transmission of the fungus, possible
means of mitigation, improving detection, and developing a
better understanding of bats' resistance and susceptibility to
the fungus and of the persistence of the fungus in the
environment.
We appreciate the attention this subcommittee has given to
the problem. We are requesting a modest increase in funding for
the four main agencies involved in these activities in order to
build upon the progress that we have seen so far and so that we
can continue to try to get a handle on this.
For the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, which is the lead
government agency in this and supports all of the working
groups under the White-Nose Syndrome National Plan, we ask that
the Committee maintain the President's fiscal year 2013,
recovery fund request, which includes 1.897 million within that
amount for White-Nose Syndrome, and we request that that be
supplemented by an additional $500,000 in the General Program
Activities Account for Fish and Wildlife.
These funds would support the following. Interagency
coordination. You can imagine Fish and Wildlife is coordinating
the wildlife or the White-Nose plan over all the federal
agencies, state agencies, tribal agencies, and private
organizations.
Identifying priorities for applied research. Some of the
research that has gone on so far has involved tracking how the
fungus affects the chemical processes in bat systems because
they are so delicate.
Support the state wildlife agencies and conservation action
for bat species already in decline due to White-Nose Syndrome.
We are asking the Subcommittee also to maintain the $1
million increase requested in the President's budget for the
U.S. Geological Survey, whose Wildlife Health Center is one of
the key agencies in identifying the fungus, doing necropsies on
bats to identify where it has appeared. This money would allow
enhancements to USGS's surveillance and diagnostic capabilities
and support research on such topics as immunology and
pathogenesis, vaccine development, which is very crucial, the
prevalent and survival of the fungus in cave environments, and
modeling disease processes.
In fact, it was the USGS study that provided the first
direct evidence that Geomyces destructans, in fact, causes
White-Nose Syndrome. So that was a very important research
project on their part.
Mr. LaTourette. We were just told we have 2 minutes.
Ms. Blaney. Two minutes. Okay.
Mr. LaTourette. For us to vote.
Ms. Blaney. Oh, you have only got 2 minutes left?
Mr. Moran. What do you want to do? Do you have much longer?
Ms. Blaney. The only other thing we are asking for is
additional funding for National Park Service, BLM, and U.S.
Forest Service. As a matter of fact, BLM and the U.S. Forest
Service, which are trying to comply with the subcommittee's
directive of last year, are actually working on a plan now to
try to already protect northwest bat species because they are
already worried about the influx of Geomyces destructans and
White-Nose into the northwest.
And we also endorse the ASPCA's testimony on wild horses
and burros and ask for the inclusion of the No Kill Language in
the Subcommittee's report.
[The statement of Nancy Blaney follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Moran. Very good. Thank you.
Mr. LaTourette. Thank you very much, and to our witnesses,
we will be back as quickly as we can, and Ms. Perry and Ms.
Blaney, if you want to stay, you are more than welcome to, but
if you have had enough of this, you can be on your way with our
thanks, and if you felt rushed, we will call on you first just
for any closing observations you want to make if you feel you
need to do that when we get back.
Ms. Blaney. Thank you, Congressman.
[Recess]
Mr. LaTourette. With permission from Mr. Moran's staff, we
will take copious notes until he arrives. We are going to
proceed, and I see Ms. Perry and Ms. Blaney accepted our
invitation to leave even though they were having a great time.
So Ms. Beetham--is it Beetham?
Ms. Beetham. Yes.
Mr. LaTourette. Okay. Thank you for being here and the
floor is yours.
----------                              --
--------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

DEFENDERS OF WILDLIFE

WITNESS

MARY BETH BEETHAM
Ms. Beetham. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and members of the
Subcommittee, thanks for the opportunity to testify. I am Mary
Beth Beetham, Legislative Director with Defenders of Wildlife.
Founded in 1947, Defenders has more than 1 million members and
supporters, and we are dedicated to the conservation of wild
animals and plants in their natural communities.
Wildlife and its habitat are valuable national assets. Even
in the face of dire fiscal realities, investments in the
protection of wildlife and habitat are a wise choice for our
Nation. Wildlife-related recreation is a $122 billion-per-year
industry. Defenders opposes any further cuts to programs that
conserve wildlife and habitat, and we were very pleased to see
some modest but crucial increases in the President's budget,
and we are hoping the Subcommittee will do its best to fund
them.
We support the following increases in their quest for the
Fish and Wildlife Service budget: $4 million that will help to
ensure siting of renewable energy projects in a way that
prevents harm to species such as golden eagles, seabirds, bats,
and desert tortoise; 5.4 million for a praiseworthy new
cooperative recovery initiative to support more efficient
efforts across landscapes to recover listed species on National
Wildlife Refuges and surrounding lands. We also support the
additional increases for the National Wildlife Refuge system
that will go to baseline inventory and monitoring, challenge
cost-share projects with partners and volunteers, and law
enforcement.
In addition, for endangered species we support the $1
million increase for consultations on pesticides that includes
the development of protocols to determine safe levels of
exposure, the $1.6 million increase to support progress in
listing more than 250 candidate species, many of which have
awaited protection for years, and a $12.3 million increase for
the Cooperative Endangered Species fund to provide assistance
to States to protect listed species.
The Environmental Contaminants Program has been flat since
2001. We support the $1.3 million increase to help expedite and
complete more restoration for natural resource damage cases.
Defenders, however, was disappointed to see the elimination of
the important Wolf Livestock Loss Demonstration Program. It
helps livestock owners coexisting with wolves. We urge
restoration of this funding.
In the Forest Service request, we were concerned to see
that the Administration has again proposed merging a number of
accounts, including Wildlife and Fisheries Habitat Management
into the Integrated Resource Restoration Account. Defenders
supports continuing IRR as a 3-year pilot as directed by
Congress in the final fiscal year 2012 bill, but the Agency
must first demonstrate its ability to adequately protect fish
and wildlife habitat in a consolidated program under the
smaller pilot.
In the Bureau of Land Management budget, we were extremely
pleased with the $15 million increase that will go for
comprehensive sage grouse conservation in 10 western States.
And I have heard Chairman Simpson speak on several occasions
about his concern about the sage grouse decline and a potential
ESA listing, so we are hoping the Subcommittee will be able to
fund this.
In the BLM budget, we also support the $7.1 million
increase for renewable energy that will help fund regional land
use planning studies and environmental reviews that will help
avoid areas with potential natural resource conflicts. Also in
the BLM budget, we support the resource management planning
increase, $4.7 million that is needed to help address 47 plans
under revision and another 45 that need revision. This program
has been cut by nearly 25 percent since fiscal year 2010.
For the USGS, we support the $16.6 million increase for
ecosystems that includes $1 million for research on white nose
syndrome that is devastating bat populations and climate. And
in climate and land use change, we support the $500,000
increase for Climate Science Centers and the $6.5 million
increase in science support for DOI Bureaus.
Finally, Defenders supports the increase of $104.7 million
for the Land and Water Conservation Fund. A portion of the LWCF
total is for an Interior-Forest Service Collaborative Land
Acquisition Program to protect strategic landscape-scale
projects that at the same time meet core agency acquisition
priorities. This innovative initiative will help to bring
larger conservation benefits and build resilience across
landscapes with scarce dollars.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[The statement of Mary Beth Beetham follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Thank you very much for your patience and
your testimony.
Mr. Brooks.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

THE WILDERNESS SOCIETY

WITNESS

BRAD BROOKS
Mr. Brooks. Thank you. My name is Brad Brooks and I work
for the Wilderness Society in Boise, Idaho. I am here today to
provide comments on behalf of my organization on the importance
of investing in public lands, and I appreciate the opportunity
to be here. So thank you and members of the committee.
Even though he is not here, I also want to thank
Congressman Simpson from my home state. This past year, I
harvested a mule deer buck, as well as a bull elk in proposed
Boulder-White Clouds Wilderness, which I believe I also see
featured on the wall behind you. It is a place that is near and
dear to both of us and it will hopefully someday get the
protections it deserves. On that note, I appreciate the
Congressman has done to protect Idaho's way of life.
Investments in recreation in our public lands are important
not only to me but to many of the people that live and work in
the West. Nationally, over $1 trillion and 9.4 million jobs are
contributed to the U.S. economy every year from outdoor
recreation, resource conservation, and historic preservation.
The funding programs that facilitate this economic engine are
what I want to highlight for you today.
The past 4 years I have worked in Idaho's Clear Water Basin
as a member of the Clear Water Basin Collaborative, whose goal
is to protect the economic and ecological health of the land,
water, and communities within the basin. This is a group
comprised of conservationists, timber companies, outdoor
vehicle enthusiasts, travel representatives, and a wide array
of public interests. In the past, the Clear Water Basin was
ground zero for conflict over public lands management, but I am
here to tell you those days are largely gone.
We have been working together to meet our mutual interests
and the federal funding for restoration as part of the
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program has been a
cornerstone of our collaborative work. Our 1.4 million acre
Selway-Middle Fork project is project to cut up to 150 million
more feet of timber, create 370 jobs--which is significant in
rural Idaho--treat thousands of acres of noxious weeds,
decommission unneeded roads, improve salmon spawning habitat,
and improve big game winter range.
This project will do a lot of good work and it would not be
possible if the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration
Program were not fully funded, as it was this past year and as
it is proposed in the President's budget this year at $40
million. I ask you to please continue fully funding this
program that is simultaneously helping us in Idaho to both
create jobs and restore the landscape. More importantly, it is
helping us to move beyond the conflict that has defined public
lands management for the past several decades.
The Land and Water Conservation Fund has had an equally
important role in preserving our recreation economy and way of
life in Idaho. Outdoor recreation is a vital part of Idaho's
economy with active outdoor recreation alone supporting over
37,000 jobs and bringing in $154 million in tax revenue, which
is significant to Idaho. Idaho's recreation economy is largely
based in the natural amenities provided by our public lands and
waters whether it is hunting for a bugling bull in the Boulder-
White Cloud Mountains, fly-fishing in the world-famous waters
of the Henry's Fork of the Snake River, or mountain-biking in
the world-class singletrack outside of Boise.
People come to Idaho to experience these world-class
recreation resources and LWCF has helped sustain and invest by
providing access and protecting them for our children and our
grandchildren to enjoy. We urge the Subcommittee to provide
$450 million for the program in fiscal year 2013, which is half
of the authorized amount deposited into LWCF each year.
We also continue to support funding for the National
Landscape Conservation System, such as Idaho's own Morley
Nelson Snake River Birds of Prey area, which has the highest
raptor nesting density in the United States.
Lastly, Legacy Roads and Trails is a program that has
contributed significantly to improving infrastructure, creating
jobs, and providing clean drinking water in Idaho. This program
has helped to repair or construct 40 bridges, as well as
improving trail conditions on over 1,100 miles of trail and
decommissioned several hundred miles of unneeded roads. Legacy
Roads and Trails provides real dollars that are spent in
physical, on-the-ground work. The money provides jobs for rural
Idaho homes and heavy machine operators, jobs that are
important in counties where unemployment hovers well above the
national average. We ask that you fund Legacy Roads and Trails
at $75 million.
I have given you a snapshot of how several federal programs
benefit my home State of Idaho, but you would hear the same
story from anyone living in the West. The bottom line is that
these programs serve as an investment in our public lands and
our way of life that has a rate of return that can be measured
for generations to come. These federal programs support jobs,
communities, and the environment.
Thank you for your time and appreciate you for being here
today.
[The statement of Brad Brooks follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Well, thank you. And I will make certain I
convey to Mr. Simpson your observations.
Mr. Moran. He is quite an athlete, too. Did you read his
bio?
Mr. LaTourette. No. What does he do?
Mr. Moran. Oh, he is a mountain climber. Were you not at
the Olympic level or something? Tell us a little, just real
quickly----
Mr. Brooks. I do not want to kill any rumors that are
circulating but I was not an Olympic athlete. I do serve on the
Board of the American Alpine Club and have traveled the world
climbing.
Mr. LaTourette. What the heck are you reading?
Mr. Moran. It was pretty impressive. Maybe it was just
saying that he might have been up there, but it was pretty
good.
Mr. Brooks. And I also went to school on a soccer
scholarship as well.
Mr. LaTourette. Well, there you go. That must be it.
I said your name was Knadle. Is that right or is that----
Mr. Knadle. That is correct.
Mr. LaTourette. All right. Well, then, Mr. Knadle.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

NATIONAL FISH AND WILDLIFE FOUNDATION

WITNESS

GREG KNADLE
Mr. Knadle. I am Greg Knadle, Vice President for Government
Affairs, National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. It is very nice
to be sitting on this side of the table as opposed to that side
of the table where I used to sit.
First of all, I want to say thank you to both you, Mr.
LaTourette and Mr. Moran and your staff, on 2012, not just the
Foundation's number but that bill in the end was very good
considering where it started. And it took a lot of hard work on
you guys' behalf and I appreciate that. And I think the
community appreciates that more than you know.
Mr. Moran. And especially Mike Simpson----
Mr. Knadle. Absolutely.
Mr. Moran [continuing]. You would not be the first man to
say that but----
Mr. Knadle. Absolutely.
Mr. Moran [continuing]. Mike was terrific and, you know, we
should thank him.
Mr. Knadle. Absolutely. And Brad here mentioned some
numbers from an economic study. That actually was a study that
the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation commissioned. We took
a very conservative look at the existing data on how outdoor
recreation, conservation, and historic preservation, what their
impact on the economy is. Very conservatively, the roughly $23
billion of federal investments in those programs--most of which
are in the Interior bill--produce a $1 trillion economy, 9.4
million jobs, and more than $100 billion in federal, state, and
local tax revenue of which 55 billion is federal revenue.
Twenty-three billion investment, 55 billion return. That was
the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation study. We are
actually doing phase two of that study right now to fill in the
gaps and have it be a more accurate, complete number. It is
accurate; it just does not include everything.
The Foundation hit a milestone this year. Over 27 years, we
took $576 million in federal funds and we now hit $2 billion in
on-the-ground conservation. We did it with less than 5 percent
overhead to the government and fewer than 100 staff. So we
consider that quite a milestone. We are here to request the
President's request for our appropriation. That is $7.5 million
in Fish and Wildlife Service, $3 million in Forest Service, and
$3 million in BLM. That money is the seed money that allows us
to go out and get corporate money, get private money, get
additional state money and federal money, pull those together,
get all the partners around the table, and put it on the ground
for conservation.
Last year, that appropriation of $13.5 million, we actually
generated $130 million in conservation that we put out on the
ground. That includes grantee match; that is everything. So I
think that is quite a substantial return on investment.
Now, I am glad both of you are here because we also enter
into cooperative agreements with agencies, one of which is the
EPA. One of our biggest partners is the Environmental
Protection Agency, and two of the programs we run for them--one
is in the Chesapeake Bay and it is the Nutrient Sediment
Reduction Grants and Small Watershed Grants, $8 million and $2
million respectively. At least that was last year's level. And
then we run about $10 million in Great Lakes money to reduce
invasive species, to improve water quality, et cetera. So we
are really happy to be working with the EPA on those programs
and we will continue to keep your staff up to date on the
details and how that is going.
Lastly, I just want to mention that our reauthorization
bill has been introduced in the Senate. It is a bipartisan bill
widely supported, noncontroversial. The only reason it has not
been marked up yet is because it got bumped by the
transportation bill in the Senate. We hope to be marked up in
the near future, and when it gets over here to the House side,
we hope for your support.
Again, thank you for all you have done and we look forward
to working with you.
[The statement of Greg Knadle follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Well, thank you very much to all of you for
your testimony.
And were you an Olympic athlete?
Mr. Knadle. As you can tell, I am a world-class athlete.
Mr. LaTourette. Just checking. And Mr. Brooks, you could do
a lot to defend wildlife if you just got Boise State to change
the color of their football fields so the birds did not----
Mr. Brooks. I am working on it, Congressman.
Mr. LaTourette. Thank you. I appreciate that very much.
I did have just one thing for Ms. Beetham, the pesticide
piece that you were talking about.
Ms. Beetham. Um-hum.
Mr. LaTourette. We had Administrator Jackson in here maybe
a month ago and we got a big problem--thankfully, not in
Cleveland--but in Ohio with bedbugs. We talked about where they
are going to go with their pesticide rules and so forth and so
on, but the anomaly to me is they have discretionary authority,
if they choose, to regulate things that do not fall within the
pesticide category. What we are finding is that all of these
snake oil salesmen are popping up on the radio and they are
saying if you buy this for 35 bucks, it is going to solve your
bedbug problem and it does not do anything. I think it is a
rip-off to the consumers. Down in Cincinnati, it was isopropyl
alcohol and the apartment burned down, a whole family is out
of--so anything you can do in your pesticide work with the
Administrator and have her exercise her discretionary authority
to protect consumers by the same time she is dealing with the
protocols for pesticides would be greatly appreciated.
Ms. Beetham. Okay.
Mr. LaTourette. Thanks.
Ms. Beetham. Thank you.
Mr. LaTourette. Well, thank you very much.
And Jim?
Mr. Moran. I am all set for witnesses. Nice to see you
again, Greg.
Mr. LaTourette. Well, thanks for coming. Appreciate it.
Our fourth panel this afternoon will be John Calvelli, who
is with the Wildlife Conservation Society; Christy Plumer, who
is with the Nature Conservancy; Reid----
Mr. Haughey. Haughey.
Mr. LaTourette [continuing]. Haughey. Thank you, Reid. Reid
Haughey, the Wilderness Land Trust; Terra Rentz from the
Wildlife Society; and Kevin Boling from the Land and Water
Conservation Fund Coalition.
Well, again, thank all of you for coming. The rules are the
same, the lights are the same, and, again, we appreciate your
patience while we went off and voted. But welcome, and we look
forward to hearing from you.
Mr. Calvelli, you are first.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

WILDLIFE CONSERVATION SOCIETY

WITNESS

JOHN F. CALVELLI
Mr. Calvelli. Good afternoon, Mr. LaTourette and Ranking
Member Moran. Thank you for the opportunity to testify again.
My name is John Calvelli. I am the executive vice president of
Public Affairs at the Wildlife Conservation Society. WCS was
founded in 1895 through the efforts of Teddy Roosevelt with the
mission of saving wildlife and wild places across the globe.
Today, WCS manages the largest network of urban wildlife parks
in the United States led by our flagship, the Bronx Zoo. And
our fieldwork helps address threats to over 25 percent of the
Earth's biodiversity in more than 60 countries around the
world.
WCS requests maintain fiscal year 2012 levels for the
Forest Service International Program and supports the
President's fiscal year 2013 request for Fish and Wildlife
Service's Multinational Species Conservation Fund. Today, I
would like to share stories about the U.S. investment in global
conservation through these programs, specifically, help improve
governance and conserve our planet's natural wealth.
We are experiencing a crisis. The illegal trade in wildlife
and timber is booming across Africa and Asia. Criminalized
syndicates often also trading in narcotics and weapons are
systematically capturing and killing wildlife to sell on the
black market. CRS estimates that illegal wildlife trade is
valued at approximately $20 billion a year, making it the
third-largest illegal trade globally. This industry is fueled
by demand from countries like China and the United States for
exotic pets and goods such as bushmeat, ivory, pelts, and
traditional medicines. And now with the internet, the illegal
trade in wildlife and plant products can reach more buyers than
ever before. Two U.S. agencies are combating these illicit
activities: the Fish and Wildlife Service and the Forest
Service International Program.
In Sumatra, about 50 tigers were killed each year between
1998 and 2002 to benefit illegal trade in East Asia. The number
is significant as around 400 Sumatran tigers remain in the
wild. In Chad, elephants of Zakouma National Park went from
3,800 to 542. This 86 percent reduction was due to killing at
the hands of organized poaching groups of Chadian origin. That
killing trend has been halted by the creation of African parks
and WCS' work over the past 2 years. Unfortunately, there is a
similar crisis underway currently in Cameroon.
This is not just the case with wildlife. Illegal timber
trade is directly impacting American economic interests. For
example, industry reports estimate that U.S. roundwood, sawn
wood, and panel exports could increase by approximately $460
million each year if illegal logging was eliminated.
Despite these alarming examples, all hope is not lost. With
support from the Fish and Wildlife Service and the Forest
Service International Programs, WCS' work with local
governments to build capacity and to improve governance in
order to combat the illegal wildlife trade.
I will give one example. In 2010, I visited Zambia's
Luangwa Valley where WCS helped establish community markets for
conservation, or COMACO, to combat extreme impacts of poaching
and food insecurity. The purpose of COMACO is simple. By
providing families with alternative sustainable livelihoods,
poaching will be significantly reduced and wildlife will be
preserved. COMACO now supports 47,000 farming families, many of
whom have seen their annual income more than double. The sale
of COMACO, its wild organic brand of food products developed
with the assistance of General Mills, has injected more than
$1.3 million into the rural economy, and surveys indicate that
30 percent of wildlife species have significantly increased the
number with others stable or showing a positive trend. This
effort began with a small grant from the African Elephant
Conservation Fund, one of the Multinational Species
Conservation Funds.
More than 100 years ago, President Teddy Roosevelt
understood the importance of preserving and protecting our
natural heritage for future generations. He also realized this
required the United States to lead this effort globally to
ensure success. We look forward to working with you and all of
our partners in government to ensure that our Nation continues
to be a global leader in conservation.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[The statement of John Calvelli follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Thank you very much for your testimony. We
appreciate it.
And Plummer or Plumer?
Ms. Plumer. Plumer.
Mr. LaTourette. Plumer, okay. Got it. Thank you for being
here. You are up.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

THE NATURE CONSERVANCY FISCAL

WITNESS

CHRISTY PLUMER
Ms. Plumer. Thank you. My name is Christy Plumer. I am the
director of Federal Land Programs for the Nature Conservancy.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify on the Nature
Conservancy's recommendations for the fiscal year 2013 House
Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies Appropriations
Bill.
The Nature Conservancy is an international nonprofit
conservation organization working around the world to protect
ecologically important lands and waters for nature and people.
As we enter the fiscal year 2013 budget cycle and another year
of this challenging physical environment, the Conservancy
continues to recognize the need for fiscal austerity. The
Conservancy wishes to thank the Subcommittee for the final
fiscal year 2012 Consolidated Appropriations Act funding levels
for the Department of Interior and U.S. Forest Service
conservation programs.
As the Subcommittee begins to tackle another difficult
budget cycle, the Conservancy stresses our concerns that
wildlife and land conservation programs should not shoulder a
disproportionate share of cuts in this budget. Our budget
recommendations this year do not exceed the President's budget
request except for a few instances where we recommend fiscal
year 2012 funding levels.
Additionally, as a science-based and business-oriented
organization, we believe strongly that the budget levels we
support represent a prudent investment in our country's future
based upon the tangible economic and society benefits natural
resources provide to the American people.
The Conservancy supports the President's fiscal year 2013
budget request of $450 million for the Land and Water
Conservation Fund with the aim of continuing to work toward
full funding for this program. The President's America's Great
Outdoors Initiative is the prominent focus in this annual LWCF
budget and it includes several top-priority landscapes,
including the Rocky Mountain Front/Crown of the Continent
Conservation Area in Montana, Wyoming, and Idaho, as well as
the Longleaf Pine Conservation Area in Florida, Georgia, and
South Carolina.
This year, the Conservancy is specifically supporting 18
biologically rich LWCF project areas at a total of $94 million.
The Conservancy is supporting $60 million for the Forest Legacy
Program and the important partnership this program represents
with the States to support public recreational access for
hunting and fishing, to protect wildlife habitat for working
forests, and to enhance outdoor experiences. The Conservancy
enthusiastically supports $60 million for the Cooperative
Endangered Species Conservation Fund. The Conservancy and its
partners have used the Habitat Conservation Plan and Recovery
Land Acquisition Programs to conserve key habitats for numerous
threatened, endangered, and at-risk species to help avoid
conflicts of ESA issues.
The Conservancy appreciates the Subcommittee's ongoing
commitment to both the USGS-led Climate Science Centers, as
well as the Department of Interior's Landscape Conservation
Cooperatives, and efforts to ensure integration and
coordination of these initiatives with existing efforts such as
the Joint Ventures and the National Fish Habitat Partnerships.
The Conservancy supports the Cooperative Alliance for Refuge
Enhancement Coalition's request of $495 million for the Refuge
System O&M. We also appreciate the Subcommittee's support for
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program and
demonstration of collaboratively developed forest restoration
plans at a large scale. We recommend fiscal year 2012 funding
be sustained for this program with $40 million to restore large
forest landscapes.
We also appreciate the Subcommittee's ongoing support for
the Hazardous Fuels Reduction Program to remove overgrown brush
and trees through a variety of methods leaving the forest in a
more natural condition that is resilient to wildfires. We
believe it is essential to keep at least level funding for this
program.
The Conservancy also strongly endorses sustainable funding
levels for cooperative programs such as the State and Tribal
Wildlife Assistance Program, NAWCA, Joint Ventures,
Multinational Species, and other programs such as Partners for
Fish and Wildlife and the National Fish Habitat Initiative. We
look forward to working with you, Mr. LaTourette, Mr. Moran,
and members of the subcommittee and full committee as you
address the ongoing needs for conservation investments to
sustain our Nation's heritage of natural resources. Thank you.
[The statement of Christy Plumer follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Thank you very much for your time and
testimony.
Mr. Haughey, we are ready for you.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

WILDERNESS LAND TRUST

WITNESS

REID HAUGHEY
Mr. Haughey. Thank you. Mr. LaTourette, Mr. Moran, thank
you for the opportunity to speak with you today. My name is
Reid Haughey. I have the privilege of serving as the president
of the Wilderness Land Trust. We are a small, focused non-
profit. We work cooperatively with landowners who have property
within designated and proposed wilderness areas to acquire
their lands and make them part of the wilderness that surrounds
them.
I am here in front of you today to thank you for your
longstanding support for the in-holding accounts within the
Land and Water Conservation Fund and specifically for the
support last year in 2012 for those accounts and then to ask
for that support yet again in this upcoming year.
We believe that an appropriation of between 3 and 5 million
to each of the land management agencies within the Land and
Water Conservation Fund will enable them to acquire the high
priority wilderness in-holdings that are within the system from
willing sellers when they become available. We are not asking
Congress to undertake a new program, but we are asking that the
support be there to continue to complete the wildernesses that
have already been designated.
The fiscal year 2013 President's budget request does not
include in-holding funding for the Forest Service. There is a
new recreational access program that has been proposed. We are
not here to comment on the merits of that program. It should be
considered and funded as is appropriate, but we do not believe
that it should be an either-or situation where in-holding
accounts are cut in favor of that program. The in-holding
accounts have a 50-year track record of success of completing
projects that Congress has already undertaken through
designation, treating landowners fairly and appropriately and
furthering the mission of the wildernesses that have been
preserved.
The consistent funding for the in-holding accounts is
vital. Our experience has been over our 20-year history of work
is that these properties become available about once a
generation. So a large program is not called for but a small
program that is consistently there is very important to be able
to accomplish the mission that it was trying to do.
Since last year, when we came and spoke to the Committee,
we have transferred a total of nine properties into federal
ownership, and of those properties that were paid for out of
the in-holding accounts, the average price of those properties
was just under $77,000 a piece. These are small properties but
they are vital to the lands that surround them. They are so
vital to the lands that surround them that many of the
constituents who support these properties in that same year
donated $3,500,000 worth of property in support of the program.
There is much more work to be done. There are roughly
400,000 acres of in-holdings within the designated wilderness
across the United States. We need to keep this small program in
place so that we can continue to work on that, continue to
treat the landowners who own land within wilderness areas
respectfully and meet their wishes and the promises that they
were made that the Federal Government would be willing to buy
the property when the time came for them to sell.
So in this upcoming year, the number of in-holders in a
number of different States have approached us about acquiring
their lands, and we hope to be back before you next year with
stories of what funding was able to accomplish.
I appreciate your support and time.
[The statement of Reid Haughey follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Listen, we appreciate your testimony and
your patience.
And Ms. Rentz, we are with you.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

THE WILDLIFE SOCIETY

WITNESS

TERRA RENTZ
Ms. Rentz. Excellent, thank you. Well, good afternoon. I
really appreciate the opportunity to testify here before you
today. My name is Terra Rentz. I am the assistant director of
Government Affairs for the Wildlife Society.
The Wildlife Society represents 11,000 professional
wildlife biologists and managers across the U.S. and Canada who
are dedicated to an excellence in wildlife stewardship through
science and education, and I just want to talk to you briefly
today about the Society's priorities for fiscal year 2013 and
then refer you to my written testimony for a more detailed
discussion.
While the Wildlife Society fully understands the limits of
the current fiscal situation, I am sure as you all also agree,
we feel that Congress has the responsibility to serve as
stewards of our Nation's wildlife and natural resources and to
ensure that the investments of our previous generation's for
wildlife conservation are not squandered.
Our land and natural resource management agencies have
built a strong foundation of responsible science-based wildlife
management and conservation over the past century, and they
need the resources necessary to sustain this work, particularly
with increasing threats for invasive species, urban sprawl, and
a changing climate. Within the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
the State and Tribal Wildlife Grants Program, which I know you
are all very familiar with, is one of these key programs. It is
the only federal program that supports States in preventing
wildlife from becoming endangered, and it is also one of the
primary programs supporting the implementation of the
comprehensive wildlife conservation strategies or, as you know
them, State Wildlife Action Plans. The Society recommends that
Congress appropriate $70 million for the State and Tribal
Wildlife Grants Program for 2013 and also support the
continuation of a reduction in the nonfederal match
requirements from 50 percent to 35 percent.
The National Wildlife Refuge System provides an invaluable
network of lands for wildlife conservation, and many years of
stagnant budgets have increased the operations and maintenance
backlog for the system. Refuge visitors often show up and find
visitor centers closed, hiking trails in disrepair, and habitat
restoration programs eliminated. The need for the Wildlife
Refuge System is well over $900 million, but as a member of
CARE this year, the Cooperative Alliance for Refuge
Enhancement, we recommend that Congress provide $495 million
for the operations and maintenance of the National Wildlife
Refuge System.
The Bureau of Land Management lands support over 3,000
wildlife species and more than 300 listed and proposed listed
species and more than 1,300 sensitive plant species. However,
the BLM currently only has one biologist for every 591,000
acres of land, and with rising costs for threatened and
endangered species management continue to rise, this is an
increasing concern. In addition, the Wildlife and Threatened
and Endangered Species Management Programs have been forced to
pay for the compliance activities of BLM's grazing, energy, and
non-wildlife-related programs, eroding the ability to conduct
proactive conservation activities on their lands. Given the
underfunding of BLM's wildlife programs combined with the
tremendous expansion of energy development across their lands,
we recommend an appropriation of $55 million for BLM's Wildlife
Management Program.
The Society appreciates the commitment of the BLM for
addressing the problems associated with wild horse and burro
management, and it is on this point that we would actually have
to disagree with our colleagues at SPCA and AWI earlier today.
This year, the President requested an increase of $2 million
for research and development of contraception and population
control. However, we at the Society are concerned about the
BLM's emphasis on fertility control and do not support the
addition of no-kill language in that bill. Horse are already
above appropriate management levels, which is a term set by the
BLM in most areas and have been that way for many, many years.
And we believe that additional funding should be requested to
correct the habitat damage that has occurred due to
overpopulation of these animals. The requested $77 million for
BLM should be provided if they continue removing excess horses
from the range at a reasonable rate and if they focus
additional resources on habitat restoration.
Within the U.S. Geological Survey, the Cooperative Fish and
Wildlife Research Units provide technical assistance and
consultation on natural resource issues, participate in
education of graduate students, and provide continuing
education for natural resource professionals. In fiscal year
2001, Congress fully funded these units allowing productivity
to rise to record levels. Since then, though, budgetary
shortfalls have resulted in current staffing vacancies of
nearly one-quarter the professional workforce. To fill these
vacancies and restore seriously eroded operational funds and
enhance national program coordination, $22 million should be
appropriated for the Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research
Units.
The Society appreciates the funding of $25.5 million fiscal
year 2012 for the National Climate Change and Wildlife Science
Centers. As these centers play a pivotal role in addressing the
impacts of climate change on fish and wildlife by providing
essential scientific support, and we recommend that Congress
fund the centers at the requested $26.2 million.
And finally, in fiscal year 2011, the Forest Service
combined several programs and budgets, including vegetation and
watershed management, wildlife and fisheries habitat
management, and forest products into a single integrated
resource restoration activity budget. Our national forest and
grasslands are essential to the conservation of our Nation's
wildlife and habitat and as such, much like our colleagues at
Defenders, we are concerned with this merger because it makes
accountability to stakeholders and to Congress more difficult.
However, with these reservations noted, we urge Congress to
support the request of $793 million for the Integrated Research
Restoration Program.
And with that, I want to thank you for considering the
recommendations of wildlife professionals and we at the Society
are happy to provide you with any assistance.
[The statement of Terra Rentz follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Well, thank you very much for your
testimony. And I know we would eventually get conflict
between----
Ms. Rentz. It is interesting.
Mr. LaTourette. Yeah, it was the Wild Horse and Burro
issue.
Mr. Boling, Land and Water Conservation Coalition, thank
you for being here.
----------                              --
--------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

LWCF COALITION

WITNESS

KEVIN BOLING
Mr. Boling. Thank you, Mr. LaTourette and Ranking Member
Moran. I am Kevin Boling. I am a resident of Coeur d'Alene,
Idaho, and I am pleased to appear here today on behalf of the
Land and Water Conservation Fund in support of the $450 million
Land and Water Conservation Fund budget proposed by the
Administration for fiscal year 2013. The Coalition represents a
broad array of groups across the Nation from the Trust for
Public Land to the Nature Conservancy, ones you are familiar
with to ones you may not be so familiar with like the Alaska
Dirt Divas. But in all seriousness, the Coalition is large and
diverse and it brings together people from all walks of life
committed to conserving the Nation's natural resource heritage.
I want to spend my time today talking to you about my personal
experiences with the Forest Legacy Program and the acquisition
of public access and in-holdings for the national monuments.
Just a little bit of background about me. I spent summers
with my grandfather on his Cat logging, decided that would be a
good way for me to make a living, got a degree in forestry from
the University of Idaho in 1974, spent the next three-and-a-
half decades managing major landowner properties in Idaho from
logging manufacturing, saw wood manufacturing and public
affairs, and in the last 5 years, closed approximately $90
million worth of land sales and conservation easements.
So I come here from a private sector perspective. And I
have seen how Land and Water Conservation funding works to
maintain privately owned working forests in these important
small, rural communities. And I have worked with funds that
this Committee has provided to create several conservation
easements in North Idaho advantaged to put grizzly bears and
working forest together and managed to preserve travel
corridors between important ecosystems. And I have seen how
important it is for the acquisition of properties that have
been in effect captured by the creation of the national
monument.
McArthur Lake is located about halfway between Bonners
Ferry and Sandpoint. It happens to be a critical link between
two major ecosystems--one, the Bitterroot ecosystem from
Montana with the Idaho Selkirk ecosystem on the west. This
corridor has been subjected to a phenomenal amount of
residential development over the last 20 to 25 years, except
for the private forestland that remains in the center of this
corridor. And the Forest Legacy Program Land and Water
Conservation Fund allows the working forest in that corridor to
in effect extinguish their development rights and continue to
focus on managing those forests going forward for the taxes
they provide, for the logs and jobs they provide, and managed
by a private--not a public--agency, which we think is a good
thing.
The reason why these funds are important to continue this
work is that a private owner sitting across the table from a
public agency in terms of the negotiations takes several years
and a phenomenal amount of human capital and company capital to
make it happen, and it is important that if you enter into
those negotiations, at the end of it you are dealing with a
partner that can close the deal. And in the event that that
funding disappears or is diminished, these opportunities are
going to diminish and go away as well, because even in these
tough economic times, many of these properties are still worth
more with a home on them or a subdivision development than a
forest investor can see their way to manage over the long term
for that same property.
So I personally believe it is an important expenditure of
federal funds that in effect extinguishes the development
rights and allows these lands to continue to be managed for
forestry, working farms, working ranches.
In other cases, outright fee purchase is the only option,
and I understand that you, Mr. LaTourette and Ranking Member
Moran, have had experience in the Cuyahoga National Forest and
the Rappahannock National Refuge where that kind of opportunity
was used where you have private lands captured within a
national purpose. Frequently, the private lands and the
national purpose lands are at odds with one another in terms of
their eventual goals and it only seems right that a willing
seller/private owner would have the opportunity to take that
value of that property and invest it somewhere else.
Finally, the Coalition understands the severe financial
constraints under which you are operating. They also believe
that America simply cannot afford to lose the private sector
activity this program helps inject into the economy and the
recreational opportunities it provides. And in closing, I would
like to thank you for your dedication and service and ask that
you support the $450 million appropriation.
[The statement of Kevin Boling follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Thank you very much. I will make sure that
I mention to Chairman Simpson your observations.
Just on Land and Water Conservation, I know that all of you
know and the Senate marking the transportation bill they
actually do $700 million, which is nice. If we ever do a
transportation bill in the House, I have an amendment to double
it to $600 million and it just sort of makes sense that the
royalties and fees from drilling and exploration be utilized.
It is already authorized to the tune of $900 million, and we
should get it as high as we can.
I would say, you know, a couple of you mentioned willing
seller. And one of the hurdles that I and others have faced as
we approach this is that it is not a Republican-Democrat thing;
it is an East-West thing. The chairman of the Natural Resources
Committee in particular, I mean he sees it as, the government
is just out there looking around to snatch land from unwilling
sellers. My biggest experience has been with the Trust for
Public Land on the Cuyahoga Valley National Park and I would
encourage you all to work with everybody to come up with the
best willing seller language that eliminates that argument. And
so anyway, that will help us move forward.
And lastly, I am going to bite. What are the Alaskan Dirt
Devils? Divas, excuse me. What might those be?
Mr. Boling. It is a small group of folks near Anchorage,
Alaska, who enjoy using outdoors for mountain biking, I
believe.
Mr. LaTourette. Okay. Great. I will Google them when we are
done with the hearing.
And Mr. Moran, have you got anything? Okay. Well, thank you
all very much for your testimony. I appreciate it.
Our last panel on this public witness day is going to be
comprised of Ms. Sorenson-Groves of the National Wildlife
Refuge Association, Mr. Chandler of the Marine Conservation
Institute, Mr. Christensen of the Friends of Deer Flat Wildlife
Refuge, Ms. Patterson from the Friends of the Potomac River
Refuge, and Mr. Paddock from the Friends of Refuge Headwaters.
Okay, same rules, same lights apply. And Ms. Sorenson-
Groves, welcome and we are anxious to hear from you.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE ASSOCIATION

WITNESS

DESIREE SORENSON-GROVES
Ms. Sorenson-Groves. Thank you. And just for the record, we
like the LWCF request but we are a little happier with the
transportation, you know, number, too.
But my name is Desiree Sorenson-Groves. I am with the
National Wildlife Refuge Association, and I am speaking on
behalf of our organization and over 190 refuge affiliate groups
just like the other ones here on this fantastic refuge panel.
Thank you so much for having this and having these friends
appear. I mean I can talk about national issues and I can give
you a big picture, but these folks who came here on their own
dime can talk about what is happening on the ground in ways
that I just cannot. I visit refuges but they know firsthand
what is going on on the ground.
So the Refuge Association, Friends Group, and the CARE
group--you heard from a few of our partner organizations in the
CARE group--sportsmen and conservation groups, we all agree
that the refuge system--we hope that you will fund it at $495
million for fiscal year 2013. And that represents just what is
needed to maintain management capabilities, which is what we
call it, simply what they are doing right now. And that is the
minimum needed because we take into account the salary freeze.
And to get these groups to all agree on something, as you might
imagine, can be a little daunting, but we do.
But we are all particularly concerned about what might
happen to the refuge system should sequestration happen or a
very large funding cut. So I am going to talk a little bit
about what a 9 to 10 percent cut would do to the refuge system.
We estimate a loss of about 500 positions, and of those, 300
would be visitors' services staff. This is particularly
concerning because these are the people who oversee friends and
volunteers. And without the staff to oversee the volunteers,
then you lose all that work and effort. And that is really
important because friends and volunteers do 20 percent of the
work on National Wildlife Refuges. To lose that is enormous,
but that is one of the things that is on the table. We have
talked to Fish and Wildlife Service and that is something that
would be a realistic impact from a 10 percent cut. They would
have to look at something like that.
We also estimate that many refuges would have to simply
close. That means no staff, no access, only an occasional visit
by a law enforcement officer. Those would be probably small
refuges, those with three to four staff, something like Mason
Neck, perhaps. And then it would be refuges that use a lot of
money to run them, so something like Midway out in the Pacific
which costs an enormous amount to run.
We are also concerned that the system could at least have
some impacts to law enforcement officers, but, you know, even a
loss of one officer could have a huge impact. An independent
review in 2005 recommended a force of 845 full-time law
enforcement officers, but the system has only about a quarter
of that right now. And since that report, the system has grown
by 50 million acres with the addition of the Pacific monuments
by President Bush and visitation has grown by 15 percent.
Another crucial program that could be severely impacted by
cuts is the refuge system's fire budget. Over 50 percent of the
lands in the system are actually fire-adapted ecosystems, which
means that prescribed fire as a management tool is not just
important; it is essential, so essential in fact that if funds
from the Department of Interior's Hazardous Fuel Reduction
Program are reduced as proposed in the President's budget, it
would have dire consequences. Prescribed fire is one of the
most effective habitat management tools for game species like
elk and deer in the West, but also for endangered species like
the Florida panther in the East. And prescribed fires reduce
catastrophic wildfires which threaten people's lives and
property.
And last, I would like to talk briefly about an aspect of
the refuge system's budget, which they actually have no control
over but has severe impacts to their operations. From fiscal
year 2005 to 2011, the refuge system sustained about a little
under $700 million worth of damages from natural disasters. So
tornados, fires, hurricane, flooding, a tsunami, you know, the
earthquake here on the East Coast last year--damages just last
year were $200 million but they have only received about $250
million to address those so the rest has gone to the backlog.
As you heard from Mr. Knadle earlier, refuges are economic
engines and they are a good investment. According to a recent
report by the Southwick Associates, refuges annually generate
more than $32 billion in ecosystem services and $4.2 billion in
economic activity. That means for every $1 that you appropriate
to run the refuge system, $8 is returned in economic activity,
$65 for ecosystems services. So it is a very good value.
I hope that you will think about our request and do the
best you can. I hope that you all visit a National Wildlife
Refuge soon and, well, I guess none of us were invited to go
down with James Cameron to the Marianas Trench, which is where
he is, National Wildlife Refuge right now, but maybe we will
all get to see the fruits of his labor in a new movie, perhaps
the Abyss II.
[The statement of Desiree Sorenson-Groves follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Maybe. Well, thank you very much. And that
necklace is beautiful by the way.
Ms. Sorenson-Groves. Thank you. You know, I was hoping that
Ms. Lummis might be here----
Mr. LaTourette. Yeah, sure. Sure.
Ms. Sorenson-Groves. Yes, because we have jewelry.
Mr. LaTourette. I am actually glad my wife is not here
because it would set me back a little bit. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chandler, thank you. Welcome.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

MARINE CONSERVATION INSTITUTE

WITNESS

WILLIAM CHANDLER
Mr. Chandler. Thank you, sir. Members of the committee, my
name is Bill Chandler; I am vice president for Government
Relations with Marine Conservation Institute, a nonprofit
organization based in Bellevue, Washington. We are also a
member of the CARE Alliance. I think this is sort of a CARE
party today. We do support the President's request for $495
million for the refuges operations and maintenance and we are
especially interested in the marine monuments that President
George W. Bush created in 2006 and 2009. These monuments
included 12 National Wildlife Refuges, more than 20 coral
islands and atolls and large areas of the oceans scattered
across the Pacific. Together, they protect some of the most
pristine coral reef ecosystems in the world and they are truly
treasures that merit their status in the National Wildlife
Refuge system.
If I might, Mr. Chairman, I would like to share a map with
you all to give you a little orientation about the vast area
where the Fish and Wildlife Service must operate. This map
indicates why managing the monuments is both challenging and
expensive. The only way to move people and goods in this region
is via ship or plane, and as you know, those are not cheap. But
nevertheless, the Fish and Wildlife Service has to manage these
places.
Furthermore, although the monuments make up one-third of
the refuge system in terms of area, they receive approximately
$6 million a year right now out of the refuge budget. That is
roughly 1.5 percent. Now, in the best of all possible worlds,
we would love to see the budget for the monuments enhanced. In
fact, we think it could use another $3.5 million allocated out
of the request. And I know that there is probably going to be
lots of requests from other people to try to squeeze that $495
million in various ways. But I would like to point out that if
we could bring the spending of the monuments to about $9.5
million, there is a good rationale to do this.
First of all, they get about $5.5 million now that is
allocated to managing Papahanaumokuakea, which was the first
monument established by Bush in the Northwestern Hawaiian
Islands. Most of that covers the Fish and Wildlife Service's
share of operating the Midway Airfield, which they are required
by statute to do. The remainder pays for fuel, salaries,
transportation of people and supplies, and so forth.
In talking with the Fish and Wildlife Service, the estimate
to maintain current capabilities at Midway and deal with the
increased fuel costs, contract costs, staff salaries, and so
forth that the Fish and Wildlife Service is facing, they really
need a total of $7.4 million just to manage the Midway
situation. We believe this $1.9 million gap should be closed. I
should point out that the Midway Airport, of course, is the
only safe harbor for a plane crossing the Pacific and that is
why it is required to be maintained in an open situation. They
could also use another $600,000 for a couple of staff people
out there to actually do natural resource management work.
Moving now to the three latest monuments established by the
President, these in my opinion are severely underfunded and we
think they could use an additional million dollars above their
current budget. I should point out that the Fish and Wildlife
Service has already missed its deadline for having these
monument plans finished. They were supposed to have that done
in 2011. They are not even close to getting those done, and one
of the reasons is they just do not have the staff. So that
million dollars would cover things like a manager for the
Marianas Trench National Monument--they have never had one as
yet--and also one for the remote Pacific islands. A manager has
been put at Rose Atoll, but the other two have been vacant
since the monuments were created.
They also need a public planner to help get those plans
done. They have got the usual costs of administration and
travel. They have got a serious problem with eradicating
endangered species to trespassers introduced to some of these
islands without the Fish and Wildlife Service knowing it
because there are no people on some of these places. So we have
a law enforcement issue here that we are working with the
Service, the Coast Guard, and NOAA to try to solve.
That money would also pay for a cost assessment of the two
wrecked vessels that we have mentioned to the Subcommittee
before. They are lying on two of the islands. And it would help
issue more scientific permits such as that requested by Mr.
Cameron to do his dive. Right now, they only have enough time,
money, and staff to put out about three research permits a year
for each monument. They would like to increase that
significantly because they are getting a lot of requests for
scientific research and they have to vet those very carefully.
So in summary, without additional funds, the Fish and
Wildlife Service will not be able to meet its full operational
requirements at Midway and that could cause some of the
visitation out there to stop. Biological surveys and dealing
with invasive species would be cut back significantly. The
scientific exploration mandate would not be met. And the law
enforcement efforts out there are going to remain spotty and
nonexistent at some of the islands.
So I thank you for your time, gentlemen, and I will be
happy to answer any questions you may have, and we look forward
to working with the Subcommittee. I go out to Hawaii quite a
bit to find out what is going on at these places and I might
have some information that would be useful to you.
[The statement of William Chandler follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. That would be great.
Mr. Chandler. Thank you.
Mr. Moran. I am supposed to meet somebody at my office
Mr. LaTourette. Sure.
Mr. Moran [continuing]. At 4:00. I wonder if we could hear
from John next if you do not mind.
Mr. LaTourette. Do whatever you want. I just want to ask
Mr. Christensen, is Deer Flat either in Idaho, Washington, or
Virginia? I am developing a theme here. But with your
understanding, Mr. Christensen, we will skip over you for a
second and we will get to Joan Patterson to accommodate Mr.
Moran's schedule.
So welcome.
----------                              --
--------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

FRIENDS OF THE POTOMAC RIVER REFUGES

WITNESS

JOAN PATTERSON
Ms. Patterson. Good afternoon, Mr. LaTourette and Mr.
Moran. My name is Joan Patterson and I am speaking on behalf of
the Friends of the Potomac River Refuges and its 136 members.
But perhaps more importantly, I am here speaking to you as a
mother. I would like to share with you how important the
National Wildlife Refuge System is to communities, families,
and individuals, and how involvement in our Nation's effort to
conserve our wildlife heritage can change lives and foster
citizenship.
I have been a volunteer and a Friends member on National
Wildlife Refuges since 1995. Back then, my husband and I were
living near Portland, Oregon, in a small community where a
refuge had recently been established. At the time, we were
anxiously awaiting an adoption assignment and I got involved in
the Friends of the Tualatin River National Wildlife Refuge to
keep from going crazy. My involvement in the refuge system
began in Oregon but my commitment to it began in China.
A few months after joining the Friends, we finally got
approval from the U.S. and Chinese Government to adopt. Shortly
thereafter, I stood along the Pearl River in Guangzhou with my
baby girl in my arms and I was wondering if it was fair to take
her away from this rich cultural heritage. What would life in
America offer her? Standing there I could feel the smog in the
city and I saw the river polluted and it was bubbling. And it
struck me that what we could offer her was a culture rich in
wildlife with incredible landscapes, clean air and water.
Since that moment, Maggie and her younger sister have
explored the wonders of refuges in Oregon and Northern
Virginia. They have had the chance to observe and investigate
many ecological concepts that most urban youth only read about.
They have learned how their daily decisions impact habitats and
their communities. They have come to Capitol Hill to advocate
for refuge system needs. They are becoming good citizens.
Maggie was in this building just last month speaking up for
online education.
Every child should have these same opportunities. We need
to tap into resources at refuges to educate the next generation
and foster civic responsibility. The Potomac River Refuges in
Northern Virginia lack the resources to provide a robust
education and volunteer program. In 2006, budget cuts suspended
most of the biological programs and curtailed maintenance. The
one full-time staff member who is responsible for visitor
programs now must dedicate most of his time to managing the
resources. We are that subsequent funding increases stopped the
bleeding. However, if sequestration occurs, we expect all
visitor services programs to be eliminated. And two of the
three refuges in this complex could be closed. If this happens,
the over a quarter of a million public school students in our
area might never have the chance to connect with nature and
further their development of civic skills.
While volunteers can supplement some of these losses, they
cannot do it all. Refuges need staffing and facilities to
recruit and train volunteers. Friends groups and volunteers
contribute nearly 20 percent of all the work hours on refuges.
At Potomac, volunteers are picking up trash--we are doing it
Saturday and you are welcome to join us--mowing, conducting
outreach programs, and other things. Can we do more? Yes. But
without staff to oversee and interact with volunteers, projects
go undone. Volunteer retention is also difficult. Keeping these
refuges open and functioning is important to your constituents.
Last fall, on a bitterly cold, rainy day, we hosted a
festival at Occoquan Bay National Wildlife Refuge. A young
mother and her four children came and all were unprepared for
the weather. Mom was wearing flip-flops and she and one of the
little girls were wrapped in black garbage bags. The oldest boy
came up to me and gave me a dollar saying my mother wants you
to have this. His mother loves plants and was glad to have this
place to take her children. This family was living in the
homeless shelter. But that did not stop this wonderful woman
from showing her appreciation for the natural heritage we all
share and demonstrated to her children how important it is to
support it. I hope all of us will follow her example.
While we realize that our country is facing difficult
economic times and we must all share in the challenges of the
recovery, we respectfully ask you to support a budget of $495
million for the National Wildlife Refuge System.
I thank the Subcommittee for giving us the opportunity to
provide this testimony.
[The statement of Joan Patterson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. I thank you very much. Mr. Moran, do you
want a moment with Joan before you depart us? Do you have any
questions of anybody?
Mr. Moran. No, I am all set. Thank you.
Mr. LaTourette. Okay. Thank you very much.
Mr. Moran. Thank you very much.
Mr. LaTourette. Thank you.
And Mr. Christensen, thank you for your accommodation. Now
we will hear from the Friends of Deer Flat. Welcome.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

FRIENDS OF DEER FLAT WILDLIFE REFUGE

WITNESS

ROBERT C. CHRISTENSEN
Mr. Christensen. I appreciate the opportunity to be here
today. At first, when I was selected, I am not sure I
appreciated it but I do now.
My name is Bob Christensen, and I am a retired wildlife
biologist. I worked 30 years with the U.S. Bureau of
Reclamation. I am here today on behalf of the Friends of Deer
Flat Wildlife Refuge and its 80 members, also its 500 or more
volunteers.
My first experience with a wildlife refuge was at Fish
Springs National Wildlife Refuge, which is on the south end of
the Great Salt Lake Desert, one of the most remote wildlife
refuges in the 48 States. I worked there a summer as a
biological aide and I gained an appreciation for all of the
planning and the work and the sweat that goes into creating,
maintaining, and enhancing these icons of wild America. While I
was there at Fish Springs, I met a man we call him Trapper Jim
and he lived there at the refuge. He was granted lifelong,
well, opportunity to live there and he lived in a dugout next
to one of the desert springs. And most of the time he spent
trapping muskrats and in the summertime he spent in his
underground hole there just trying to keep cool. But he claimed
that if you drank from the alkaline waters of the desert
springs there and then walked to the refuge every day, it would
keep you clean both inside and out.
Anyway, my coworkers and I one time, we were listening to
Jim in his little hut there; we like to listen to some of his
stories he told. He told a lot of yarns. But we were listening
to him. He had just skinned out a muskrat and he had put the
glands up on a little shelf above his counter and he was
drinking his coffee and talking to us and spinning his yarns,
and meanwhile, these glands rolled off his dusty shelf and
plopped into his coffee cup and we kind of looked at each other
and snickered and wondered what was going to happen. And he
eventually picked up the coffee cup and tasted it and his eyes
kind of a puzzled look in his eyes and he took another sip and
he kind of sloshed it around in his mouth and smacked his lip
and gulped it down and he said, you know, that is the best cup
of coffee I have ever had.
Now, I tell you that because each refuge has its own
history and heritage, each has its own story to tell, and each
has its own intrinsic value on the American landscape. They are
all different. They are all different characters. And this is
true of Deer Flat National Wildlife Refuge where I have been a
volunteer for many years. And it is one of the oldest refuges
in the National Wildlife Refuge System. Last month, we
celebrated its 103rd birthday.
Deer Flat serves as a refuge and a breeding ground for
migratory birds and other wildlife with emphasis on wintering
water fowl. The refuge received about 225,000 visitors last
year, and that is pretty significant for a pretty small refuge.
And it is up from--we had about 100,000 in '96 and so now we
are at 225. Interpretive and educational outreach programs
provided by the refuge having in recent years reached over
6,000 young people with different ethnic backgrounds and have
also influenced another 9 to 11,000 people in our Environmental
Education Programs. And much of this has been due to volunteers
as well as to interns that we have been able to keep on staff.
The Friends of Deer Flat realize the economic times that we
are in and that funding increases are not necessarily feasible,
but we know that at current budget levels, as Desiree
explained, we can barely keep things moving along. And there
will be actually some losses, particularly if we lose these
Challenge Cost-Share Grants. We will have to reduce our
volunteer outreach and environmental programs by 20 to 30
percent. If we go to the 10 percent reduction, then that will
kind of double that. If we lost all of our grant monies for
Challenge Cost-Share, then our outreach programs would be
reduced by 40 to 60 percent.
And another thing that we are concerned about is fire
suppression and invasive weed control programs, they will be
seriously diminished also. And we have had public input on
that. The people would like to see us do a better job on the
refuge.
The refuge currently has no law enforcement officer and, of
course, maintaining the status quo or reducing the budget would
not help us there at all. We would not be able to provide any
law enforcement.
We hope that you will support the Deer Flat Refuge and the
other 556 refuges across the country by maintaining at least
the status quo funding for the refuge system and the funding,
particularly the Challenge Cost-Share Program at $3.6 million
level.
On behalf of the Friends of the Refuge, we thank you for
the opportunity to come and testify today.
[The statement of Robert Christensen follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Well, I thank you very much for your
testimony.
And Mr. Paddock, we have come down to you. You are our last
witness today. Welcome.
----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012.

FRIENDS OF THE REFUGE HEADWATERS

WITNESS

TODD PADDOCK
Mr. Paddock. Thank you. And I guess I am the last and you
are the last.
Mr. LaTourette. That is right.
Mr. Paddock. All the others have worn out the members of
the Subcommittee. So I will try to be brief.
The Upper Mississippi National Wildlife and Fish Refuge
begins in Minnesota and it stretches 260 miles down through
Wisconsin and Iowa and Illinois. So it is a very large refuge.
And it is an important one. We get 3.7 million visitors a year
and that is more than Yellowstone, for example. The reason is
this is not a refuge that has fences. It is not distant from
where people live. It is our backyard. You often can be in the
refuge and not know it. And that does not mean, though, that it
is not a vital refuge. For me, it is easy for me to talk about
this because I am there probably a couple hundred hours a year.
I fish, I hunt, I kayak, I canoe, I picnic, I swim with my
wife, with friends. I am there a lot and I know how many other
people use it as well. I am not that unusual to be honest.
I have never been in a place in that refuge, no matter how
far I would walk or canoe, gone over the ice where there was
not another person nearby who might come around the corner.
Over and over I thought I got away from everyone and I was
wrong. And that is, again, because this is a place that is
used. It is a wildlife refuge, it is for wildlife, but it is a
paradise for people.
I am sure you know that Minnesota is known as the land of
10,000 lakes, but not where I live. We are the land of the
upper Mississippi River. That is just the truth. I guess you
could call it the land of 10,000 backwaters of the river and
islands. It is 240,000 acres of marshes and wooded islands and
bottomland forests and upland prairies and more. And we have
300 species of birds, 100 species of fish, 150 species of
mammals. We have 250 eagle nests, 5,000 nests of herons and
egrets. We also are one of the four major flyways for the
United States for migrating birds, and they need the water, the
food, the protection that is there when they are migrating. And
that is one of the things that a refuge provides. It is one of
the reasons it began.
If there was a 10 percent cut, the reason it would have a
big impact for us is because we are already operating on an
austere budget. For example, we have four law enforcement
officers for four States and 3.7 million visitors. That is
really an impossibility. We have no fisheries biologists. This
is a refuge that is based entirely on the efforts--and no
fisheries biologists when, like, Asian carp are coming and we
know they are coming, there is not a lot we can do. Certainly,
we cannot have an expert there to plan for how to address it
because there is no such position. Similarly, we have no
forester. Fifty thousand acres of bottomland forest and no
forester. These positions exist, that part of our plan, but
they are vacant. We do not have the money to hire them.
If you were to visit the city I am from, Winona, and this
is not unusual for river towns that are next to this refuge,
you would see boats on the street and the side yards and the
front yards and the backyards. They are kayaks, they are
canoes, they are pleasure boats, they are fishing boats, they
are hunting boats, they are airboats, which are what trappers
use, and it is just another example of how important this
refuge is. And people really do care. They truly care and they
will pay for it.
Minnesota, we passed a constitutional amendment to provide
through sales tax on everything that is bought and sold that
provides hundreds of millions of dollars a year to be spent on
land purchases, water quality, and more. We care about
environment to the point of saying we will spend more on it.
They passed a similar law--although now they are waiting on
their legislature to actually put it in effect.
So I just want to let you know that if there was a cut of
10 percent, there would be further reductions. I asked the
staff, what would you do? They said, well, no weekend visitor
hours, no weekend visitor services. Special services like
hunting for the disabled will be eliminated. We will also
reduce law enforcement. We will reduce school programs. These
are things that I do not think anyone wants to happen and that
is what I am asking you to help stop, to not let this happen.
Thank you.
[The statement of Todd Paddock follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Well, listen, thank you and thank all of
you. All of you touched upon sequestration. The good news is I
do not think sequestration is going to occur because it was
just too horrible. Nobody ever thought we would find ourselves
with sequestration because we are supposed to have done our
jobs, which we did not do. The budget that will be debated next
week and some alternatives I think will accommodate
sequestration without the 10 percent cuts that you are talking
about. So that is the good news.
The bad news is that people in your line of activity and
others are going to have to get involved in this budget debate
because all the pressure of last year's budget and this year's
budget is on non-defense discretionary spending. Now, how does
it get there? You have one party, my party that does not want
to talk about revenues. You have the other party that wants to
use the middle-class entitlement programs of Medicare and
Social Security to beat the snot out of my party. You cannot
get there unless you address both of these things. So the
chicken way out of it is to continue to ratchet down this small
percentage of the budget that is non-defense discretionary that
has the disastrous effects that you are describing. If you all
and people like you let us get away with it, well, then bad
things are going to continue to happen.
I have no problem saying to some of my wealthy friends,
look, you got to be part of the solution, and, you know, you
cannot pay 14 percent. You need to pay what I pay. And I have
no problem saying to a retired person that Social Security was
not designed to sustain you for as many years in retirement as
you worked. But we got to get there. If we do not get there,
again, you know, the average life expectancy of a Member of
Congress is 8 years, and so the tendency is to just wait it
out, and not have to make a tough decision, and nobody is ever
going to be mad at us. But we are really at the point where we
cannot do it. It is like the Asian carp. The clock is ticking.
So as you go out and talk to all your members and your
visitors and everybody else, America needs to get involved in
this budget discussion because it is ordering priorities but it
is also recognizing that there is a finite set of resources.
Even if you tax the richest one percent, it does not fix the
problem.
So anyway, good news is no sequestration; bad news is we
are in a lot of trouble. I want to thank you all for being
here. I appreciate your testimony. And if you have anything
come up as we begin our markup on some of the other things that
occur, stay in touch with Mr. Simpson or Mr. Moran's staff and
I am sure that we can accommodate you.
So thanks so much for being here.
Thursday, March 22, 2012.

TESTIMONY OF INTERESTED INDIVIDUALS AND ORGANIZATIONS

PUBLIC WITNESSES

Mr. Simpson. The Committee will come to order.
Good morning, and welcome to the second day of our public
witness hearing. This morning, the Subcommittee will be hearing
from a cross-section of individuals representing a wide variety
of issues addressed by this subcommittee.
The Chair will call each panel of witnesses to the table,
one panel at a time. Each witness will be provided with 5
minutes to present their testimony. We will be using a timer to
track the progress of each witness, and when the button turns
yellow, the witness will have 1 minute remaining to conclude
his or her remarks. Members will be provided an opportunity to
ask questions of our witnesses, but in the interest of time,
the Chair would request that we keep things moving in order to
conclude this morning's testimony at a reasonable hour.
Mr. Simpson. I am happy to yield to my friend, Mr. Moran,
for any remarks that he might have.
Mr. Moran. No, I am fine.
Mr. Simpson. No quote of the day?
Mr. Moran. Well, I do, but I think it is a little ponderous
for this hearing. I am going to save it for another time.
Mr. Simpson. I have a really----
Mr. Moran. You really want it?
Mr. Simpson. Yeah, yeah.
Mr. Moran. Okay. Well, this one is from Margaret Mead.
Mr. Simpson. Margaret Mead?
Mr. Moran. Yeah, and since we have--representatives of the
public here, and this is a day to hear from them, the quote is
that ``Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed
citizens can change the world. Indeed, it is the only thing
that ever has.'' So this is kind of a push for more civic
advocacy on behalf of their priorities, and----
Mr. Simpson. Are you going to put together a book of all
these quotes?
Mr. Moran. I do not know.
Mr. Simpson. Because I like them.
Mr. Moran. Do you really? Well, I appreciate that. I
probably would not have sustained this if you had not shown
some interest. It is getting to be a little bit of a burden for
the staff.
Mr. Simpson. I am going to have to go get a Bartlett's
quotation book.
Our first panel is Robert Lynch, President and CEO of
Americans for the Arts, and Stanley Tucci, the award-winning
actor, writer, producer and director, for Americans for the
Arts.
Welcome to our hearing this morning. Who is first? Okay. Go
ahead, Bob.
----------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

AMERICANS FOR THE ARTS

WITNESSES

ROBERT LYNCH
STANLEY TUCCI
Mr. Lynch. Well, first of all, thank you so much for having
us here for this testimony, and I have submitted written
testimony to you, so I am not going to go through that written
testimony but I wanted to make a few comments about the value
of your support for the National Endowment for the Arts and for
the appropriation level of $155 million that we have this year,
and that figure, $155 million, aligns closely this year with
President Obama's fiscal 2013 request, which is what we are
supporting.
For context, I will just point out that that gets us to the
1980 level for the National Endowment for the Arts. Five years
actually before I got here to Washington, it was at $155
million, and some day the hope is to get back to the 1992 level
of $176 million. But $155 million is the support level in these
troubled times that we hope can occur.
Mr. Moran. What would it be adjusted for inflation? Do you
have that number?
Mr. Lynch. It would be over $300 million adjusted for
inflation from that high of 176.
But I want to point out also that I want to thank both
Chairman Simpson and Ranking Member Moran and fellow
Subcommittee members for the work last year that you did in
fighting off two amendments at least that were brought to the
House Floor and would have greatly reduced or eliminated the
National Endowment for the Arts, and that was noticed by the
arts community and we thank you so much for that.
This week is St. Patrick's Week, the week of celebration
for Irish-Americans. It used to be St. Patrick's Day but now it
is the entire week.
Mr. Simpson. Some of us think it is St. Patrick's Year.
Mr. Lynch. And I actually had the opportunity to take some
time and Google every district of every member of the Committee
and noticed in every district there were art and music and
theater and dance and literature celebrations honoring St.
Patrick's Day, some nonprofit organizations and many of them
supported by the National Endowment for the Arts. And then I
had the opportunity to go to an event on Tuesday night where
the leader of the Republic of Ireland, the taoiseach, Enda
Kenny, was speaking, and interestingly, he got up there and
what he said is, come to Ireland this year, come to Ireland
next year, and why should you come? He said hear our music, see
our theater, enjoy our dance, visit our museums, bring your
credit cards. And so I think it is interesting that I see
nations have the opportunity to work with the French government
last year and the Netherlands government and the Chinese
government, all of them looking to have our American citizens
come there to enjoy the arts that they support in those
countries in order to create tourism abroad and also to be able
to benefit the people from those countries.
And so it is another example of what your support through
the National Endowment for the Arts does. It creates the kind
of opportunity here through the arts for people to come, and
one of the things that is interesting that the Department of
Tourism talks about is that cultural tourists, when they come
here, they spend more money than any other kind of tourist and
they stay longer, and they like to go to places that are not
necessarily New York City but might be Boise, Idaho, or other
parts of the country. They want an authentic experience. So I
am excited about some of the things that we are seeing there
that can attract people to our country.
Now, the arts today, there is some tough news for the arts
as there is for every other industry in America. We have seen
that many nonprofit organizations are struggling to maintain
their bottom lines. In fact, 45 percent of nonprofit arts
organizations ended the year with a deficit in 2009, 45
percent. Now, 2 years ago I came to the Committee and I talked
about the fact that we at Americans for the Arts thought that
nonprofit arts organizations were going to take a financial hit
and that they might lose as much as 20 percent of their budgets
across the board, and we were right about that. Nonprofit arts
organizations have taken a hit.
But I was wrong about a second thing that I brought to the
attention of the committee. I thought that from the data we saw
that some 10 percent of them were going to go out of business,
but they proved very resilient. They proved very, very strong
and far fewer than that went out of business. That is what you
read about in the papers. But in fact, they are mission driven.
They are not bottom line driven. They are looking to make
better communities and they will do whatever it takes to stay
in business and the kind of help that they get, the little tiny
bits of help that they get from something like the National
Endowment for the Arts makes all the difference in the world.
Now, that is the tough news. The good news is, they
continue to have, these nonprofit arts organizations, a
wonderful reputation for being economic drivers in America,
revitalizing communities, creating jobs. I have mentioned
figures in the past from our arts and economic prosperity study
but $166 billion economic impact for the arts in America from
the nonprofit arts community, 5.7 million jobs created and
sustained across America, and $30 billion of tax monies coming
to federal, state and local coffers. That I think is a great
contributor and a consistent and steady contributor.
In the year of the founding of the National Endowment for
the Arts, 1965, there were 7,000 of these nonprofit
organizations. Today, we know that there is 113,000 of them in
smaller places all across the country. Four state arts agencies
have become 50 state arts agencies because of the investment of
the National Endowment for the Arts and the matching money that
you create, and the 200 local arts agencies that our
organization served back in 1965 are now 5,000 local arts
agencies funding, serving and sustaining those 113,000 other
organizations, and that is only the nonprofit. There are
800,000 other organizations that are for-profit businesses--a
local music store, a dance school, Broadway Hollywood. And so
with that, we are seeing that 4.25 percent of all businesses in
America are arts businesses, small as they may be.
I would point out that in Idaho's 2nd Congressional
District, Reno, that there is 2,133 arts-related businesses
that employ 6,539 people. Congratulations. And in Virginia's
8th District, we know that there are 2,842 arts-related
businesses employing 12,700 people. That is, I think, exciting
and powerful at the local level, and nationally, we know that
there is 904,000 of these businesses.
What I see when I look at the National Endowment for the
Arts is that through programs that they have, they are
continuing to track on providing access to all Americans to the
arts and at the same time fostering economic development,
economic growth. And I looked at some of the Committee members
and I saw that in Representative Cole's district in Oklahoma a
$10,000 Challenge Grant supported Global Oklahoma, which
fostered interest in and celebration of all the different
diverse cultures that were there in that particular district.
In Representative Calvert's district in Riverside----
Mr. Moran. Would you just repeat--I did not hear that, Bob.
Would you just repeat the last point that you made just once
more?
Mr. Lynch. I actually would like to say for a great example
of arts activity in America something that happened in
Representative Cole's district in Oklahoma a $10,000 Challenge
Grant supported Global Oklahoma, a festival featuring different
cultural traditions, and the festival brings together cultures
of the world to promote appreciation and understanding of
peoples that are in that district are from throughout the world
through art and food, a terrific example. And in Representative
Calvert's district, a $15,000 Access Grant supporting creation
and presentation of a multidisciplinary work that celebrated
the local Native American culture.
On the placemaking side, the investments through things
like Our Town and other programs are supporting livable,
sustainable neighborhoods and enhanced quality of life through
the arts, and I noticed that in Representative Lummis's
district a $50,000 Our Town grant supports a pilot program in
which public art is integrated into a low-income housing
community in Casper. In Representative Simpson's district,
Chairman Simpson's district, a $100,000 Our Town grant will
support community engagement by the Trey McIntyre Company,
allowing the Trey McIntyre Dance Company to stay home as
opposed to touring and work with the people there.
So with all of this, I think that we are seeing a valuable
and a forward-thinking approach by Chairman Landesman at the
National Endowment of the Arts, and the NEA seems to constantly
be evolving with the times but still ensuring quality
programming reaching all of our communities.
I would like to take a moment simply to say a word of
thanks to someone who is not here but I know that Congressman
Norm Dicks, who has been a great member of this Committee for
so long, is retiring and the arts are losing a friend with
Congressman Dicks. He has worked with both of you very strongly
and alongside Ranking Member Mike Simpson created increases in
the National Endowment for the Arts and so I just wanted to say
a word honoring him.
So in conclusion, I respectfully request that the
Subcommittee fund the National Endowment for the Arts at the
President's request of $155 million. It is my profound hope,
whether this time or in the future, that the Subcommittee can
do even more for the citizen participation in the arts, and
continue to demonstrate the wonderful leadership, the belief in
the nonprofit arts sector and the support for the NEA that you
have done. To me, if we continue to do that, we get what you
are actually helping to create: a better citizenry, better
towns, a better Nation, and even perhaps a better world. The
cultural community is ready to assist you, and I thank you for
the honor of testifying.
[The statement of Robert Lynch follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, and thanks for bringing up Norm. We
are all losing a great friend, and unfortunately, the country
is losing a great representative in having Norm retire. I
called him a chicken the other day, a quitter.
And I have to admit, when I think of Oklahoma, I think of
football, not art.
Stanley, go ahead.
Mr. Tucci. Thank you.
I am very honored to be here today before the House of
Representatives Appropriations Subcommittee on the Interior,
Environment and Related Agencies testifying on behalf of an
increase to $155 million for the National Endowment for the
Arts for fiscal year 2013.
You asked me to speak extemporaneously, but I said I would
not because if I did, all of the funding would be cut. So I am
going to read what I wrote.
I have always felt that the arts are a necessity and not a
luxury. That is a bold statement, I know, but here is why. Both
sets of my grandparents emigrated from Italy at the turn of the
century. None were educated beyond the 8th grade. My father
went to Buffalo State Teachers College, now part of the SUNY
system. The SUNY system is also what I went through as well,
the conservatory at SUNY Purchase. He studied fine art and then
he went on to Columbia graduate school receiving his masters in
fine art. He taught high school art for 40 years, everything
from printmaking, sculpture, silkscreen, pottery, jewelry
making, calligraphy, painting and drawing. He was given a
sabbatical in 1972 to study figurative sculpture in Florence
for a year, and we all followed.
The exposure to the art, architecture and the food of Italy
was life changing for me and it very strongly influenced my
aesthetic as an actor, as a writer and a director, but this
aesthetic was already being formed unbeknownst to me by my
exposure to art on a regular basis since the day I was born.
Besides his teaching job, my father sketched, painted and
sculpted at home in the evenings after dinner, and he taught
art on Saturdays and summers locally to make extra money, for
as we know teachers' salaries are nothing to brag about. I will
be back next year to talk about that.
But along the way, I was very often by his side learning to
work in all the mediums he was exploring himself and teaching
his students. I spent many summers in the very well-equipped
art room in the posh suburb of Chappaqua, New York, near where
we lived and where he taught. The summer school class was
filled with students, some of whom had come from poorer
sections of New York City to stay with families in Westchester
and take art courses, a sort of like fresh air program. All of
them adored and respected my father because he treated them
with respect by recognizing and bringing to the fore their
individual artistic talents and abilities. These guys, these
kids, had never before been given the time, the materials, the
environment and the opportunity to create something of
themselves, for themselves that ultimately ended up pleasing so
many others around them.
Now, why do I bring that up? I bring it up because art, not
unlike athletics, is a sure way to find and make use of the
best in all of us, and I do not mean just fine art, but music,
dance and film. And so for this reason, I feel that we must not
look at the arts as an adjunct to society, but as a vital and
integral part of society. Sometimes the arts make us think,
sometimes they make us see things as we have never before,
sometimes they simply entertain and sometimes, if we are lucky,
they do both.
A society that nourishes art will always benefit not only
culturally but economically, as Bob just pointed out. If we
look at the number of jobs that are created by the arts alone
and their positive fiscal impact on any given community, city,
state or country, the numbers speak for themselves. You cannot
really argue with it in the end. It is a great--it is a
bargain, really. This is too often overlooked by so many who
consider the arts a drain on the finances of any social entity.
But an increase in funding, even during financially tough
times, will only reap benefits in the long run.
I have followed and know only too well the strained
relationship that the NEA has had with Capitol Hill over the
years, and I can understand the reticence on the part of
legislators to increase or even continue its funding, but I
urge that the focus not be on those few works that might offend
a certain group or individual, but rather on all the
extraordinary visual art, theatre, music and film that sprang
from programs, schools, museums, theatre and dance companies
funded and sustained by the NEA.
But unfortunately, art is not a thing that is easily
defined. It is amorphous, it is interpretive, it is subjective.
If it were not, it would be mathematics. Now, imagine us all
going to the theatre on a Saturday night and watching someone
solve mathematical equations for two and a half hours. No,
thank you. I will just meet you at the party afterward.
But this inability to define art is what causes us great
strife. Are we all to like the same music, painting or film?
No. It is impossible. Why, even caring husbands and wives argue
about such things. Except for my films, of course, which
everyone loves.
So art is elusive. Is it all good? No. Is it all bad? No.
Is all dance beautiful? No. Some of it is just indulgent and
annoying. Do we wish that some conceptual art would remain just
that? Yes. Can art be elitist? Yes. Need it be? No. In fact the
arts are a great leveler. They bring people of all walks of
life together by giving them common experiences through so many
mediums and in so many venues. They are an apparatus, a vehicle
for healthy social interaction of people of all ages.
Like sports programs, arts programs give all children and
teens, but particularly those at risk, a place to go and create
something positive during those rather ambiguous hours between
the end of the school day and when a parent comes home from
work. They teach the intellect. They grow the imagination. They
strengthen the spirit. They encourage competition. They instill
a work ethic. They inspire the soul. And they make us proud as
individuals, as a culture and as a nation. The examining and
reflective nature of all artistic disciplines helps us to
better understand who we are as a people, for our generation
and for other generations to come.
It is true that art cannot always be good, but it can be
and is good for us. As history shows us, the arts not only help
define who we are as a people but they are one of the deciding
factors that clarify the distinction between a society and a
great nation.
I respectfully ask the Subcommittee to increase the NEA
budget for fiscal year 2013 to $355 million--oh, I am sorry. I
said $155 million. And thank you for the opportunity to present
witness testimony.
I want to also take this time to publicly recognize and
thank the Subcommittee for supporting the NEA and so many New
York area nonprofit arts organizations and institutions that
have specifically touched my life since its inception in 1965.
They have helped shape my childhood, my career and now, as a
father, my children's appreciation of the arts.
Some of those that I have had direct contact with are the
Katonah Art Museum, which is a Blue Star Museum in the town
that I grew up in, that provides free admission to active
military-duty families from Memorial Day to Labor Day; the
Classic Stage Company where I worked, and the Classic Stage
Company has received multiple NEA grants throughout the years
including Shakespeare in American Communities grant, which
supports performances and educational activities that introduce
middle and high school students to the power of live theater.
SUNY Purchase, which is my alma mater, has been repeatedly
recognized by the NEA for its excellence in theater. There is
no other school quite like it in the country, I think. The
Ensemble Studio Theater where I worked when I was very young
and had hair, they have received several NEA grants throughout
their storied history including a Challenge America grant, a
grant program for projects that extend the reach of the arts to
underserved populations. The Jacob Burns Film Center, which is
in Pleasantville, New York, not far from where I live, is a
prime example of the access facilitated by NEA grants. This is
an extraordinary center, a film center, that has received a
grant every year since 2007, enabling it to bring big names to
a small town and to present film series such as the
International Understanding Through Film series. Sarasota Film
Festival that I have participated in quite a few years in a
row, they have received NEA recognition in 2007, in part for
its commitment to community involvement. This is becoming a
very important film festival that I also think brings, not that
Sarasota needs a lot of money but, you know, it helps. And of
course, the Tribeca Film Institute, which recently won two NEA
Access to Artistic grants for their professional development
program. The SUNY Purchase Neuberger Museum of Art, which is an
extraordinary museum gallery on the campus of SUNY Purchase.
And I think for me, one of the most important ones is, I
would like to express my appreciation for the support the NEA
has given to the Sundance Institute. The Sundance Institute
began with a grant from the NEA and they have been repeatedly
recognized for their commitment to the discovery and
development of independent artists and audiences, and I serve
on the board of trustees and as a creative advisor for the
screenwriters and directors labs. Multiple Access to Artistic
Excellence grants have provided critical support for the
institute's Film Forward program, which offers emerging
screenwriters, directors, producers and composers the
opportunity to support and resources needed to successfully
create work. This really is an extraordinary thing that has
completely changed the landscape of filmmaking as we know it.
Without Sundance and without the NEA's support for Sundance,
independent film would have all but disappeared in this
country.
So thank you so much.
[The statement of Stanley Tucci follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. And I was just reading an article
on Delta's magazine on the flight back this time and it was
talking about the film festivals around the country, around the
world actually. Cannes was number one. But if you looked at it,
Sundance had the highest attendance of just about any of them.
Mr. Tucci. Yes.
Mr. Simpson. I appreciate your testimony and thanks to both
of you for being here today. This Committee, as you noted, has
been very supportive of the arts and will continue to be, and
we will do what we can in this budget. I suspect this year we
will also have to again fight off some amendments from some
people that would like to do away with a lot of the arts.
And it is very interesting when you talk about what the
arts are, it is different for everybody. We had a gentleman
from Idaho out here not too long ago who actually made saddles,
an old cowboy, and he did the leather work. I mean, they were
world class. He is as much an artist as anybody that sits down
with a palette of paint and paints a picture. So they are
different for everybody, and oftentimes, as you said, they are
controversial and, you know, that is okay. That is what it is
supposed to be.
So I appreciate you both being here today and testifying,
and we will do what we can. Jim?
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Mike. I think we agree on the
importance of the arts. Certainly, we have a pragmatic
rationale that it is such an economic driver within
communities, both urban and rural, but beyond that, it is a
reflection of our values as a society. It is just so integrally
important in defining who we are as a Nation. It helps us
empathize with others, people who are different. More than any
other vehicle for enabling us to do that, are the arts and
humanities. So we appreciate your taking the time to testify,
but most importantly thank you for what you do all year long on
behalf of the betterment of our society.
Mr. Simpson. Representative Cole.
Mr. Cole. I was delighted to arrive in time to play my
customary role as a foil for the Chairman. You remind me,
however indirectly, of the 2005 Boise State-O.U. game. It has
been going on a lot of years. It never stops.
I do have one--and I was disappointed to see of all the
grants you mentioned, mine was the smallest in the testimony.
But seriously----
Mr. Moran. But it had the highest impact. That was the
point he was making. It was worldwide, yours. It was global.
Mr. Cole. Well, we always do the most with the least, you
know.
But seriously, Chairman Simpson and I have the duty to sit
on the Budget Committee, which frankly sets the overall targets
for spending. It does not get down to programmatic levels. And
we and others on that committee spend a lot of time defending
the appropriated part of the budget, which this is a very small
part of but a very important part. I could not agree more with
what you had to say.
But I would just ask you, as you advocate for the specific
things, all these types of programs are under pressure because
we have not been able to come to grips with our entitlement
problem. We spend a lot of time talking about it. There is
going to be a lot of different ways to do that and we are going
to fight over them, hash over them, but sometime, probably next
year, we are going to sit down, I think, as a Congress once we
know what the distribution of positions are and hopefully come
to grips with this because the biggest threat you face is not
somebody crafting a piece of art that somebody did not like,
and again, this is a miniscule part of an enormous budget, so
it is pretty hard to argue that this would make any substantial
contribution to the deficit problem. But if we do not have more
people engaged in really working through how we deal with
Medicare, Medicaid and Social Security, these things, they will
disappear. Because people go after ``the easy things'' first.
They do not want to deal with the real problems. The real
problems are big.
So I know that is not on your topic and not your
responsibility but I would just ask, as you do have the
opportunity to interact with a lot of members and influence a
lot of people, just get them to think about the big problems
and have the courage to put solutions on the table. And right
now we are not seeing enough people in elected office willing
to put solutions on the table and then split the different or
divide, and I think that you could help your cause by trying to
focus attention on that as well.
And again, thank you for what you do. It is a wonderful
organization. It has done enormously wonderful things and
impacted lives, and thank you for taking your time to be here
to testify.
Mr. Tucci. It is a pleasure.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. And Tom brings up a very important
point, that the biggest threat really is the deficit that we
are facing. Unfortunately, there are people who are trying to
focus more and more of the debt problem on a smaller and
smaller part of the budget, and frankly, you cannot address the
debt problem by focusing on small amounts of discretionary
spending.
So I appreciate you being here. Betty, did you have
anything?
Ms. McCollum. Good morning. I was with people in my
district who are very passionate about supporting the arts, and
I said I need to get down to show my public support for the
arts. So all politics is local, but I really appreciate you
being here. This is how we express ourselves in a democracy, so
the arts are important to our democracy. Thank you for being
here.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you both.
Mr. Tucci. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. I just wanted to point out one thing for
Congresswoman McCollum, and that is that we had the opportunity
to bring our conference to Minnesota and the economic impact of
that, but my members wanted you to know that there is 2,037
businesses that are arts-centered businesses in your district
with 8,867 jobs, which you know of, but I think it is good to
be in the record as well. And with Congressman Cole, the same
thing. One of the things that I think the arts can do is to
contribute back dollars to that budget process, even in a
district in Oklahoma where the chairman of my board, Ken
Ferguson, comes from and says to say hello, 1,389 businesses
and 3,658 jobs. So we are trying to do our part to help you
with the budget process.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. And for your annual conference,
Boise is a beautiful place. I will just throw that out. Thank
you for being here today.
Next we have Hunter Rawlings, III, and Deborah Frances
Tannen, Professor of Linguistics at Georgetown University, the
National Endowment for the Humanities, and Mr. Rawlings,
President of the Association of American Universities for the
National Endowment for the Humanities.
----------                              --
--------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE HUMANITIES

WITNESSES

HUNTER RAWLINGS, III
DEBORAH FRANCES TANNEN
Mr. Rawlings. Good morning. Thank you very much for
inviting me to speak. I appreciate the opportunity. I am from
the State of Virginia, and Ranking Member Moran, it is a
pleasure to see you and other members of the Subcommittee.
I want to take us back to August of 1769. In August of
1769, the 18-year-old James Madison left his home in Orange,
Virginia, and went up to the College of New Jersey. There, he
took the exams that were given to the freshmen who had finished
their first year at the college of New Jersey and he passed
those exams, so he became a sophomore. And the reason he passed
those exams was that his Latin and his Greek were very strong
and that was the test of a student in those days. He was, in
other words, a humanities student.
At the College of New Jersey, he took the curriculum that
all students took in those days, and that was primarily Latin
and Greek and natural philosophy and philosophy of the Scottish
Enlightenment, thinkers like Adam Smith and David Hume, and he
did very well. He also learned how to debate, to discuss
issues, to make an argument. He took the full curriculum for 2
years, and by working very hard he graduated after 2 years. He,
in other words, took advantage of advanced placement credit and
he worked especially hard and skipped the senior year and he
graduated.
At the end of that period of 2 years of study, like most
humanities majors, he had no idea what to do with himself. He
did not get a job. He did not know what job to get, and so he
did what most humanities majors do in these days. He went to
the president of a college and he said could I stay and spend
another year, I would like to study Hebrew and theology with
you, and the president being a good president, said you may
certainly do that, and James Madison thereby became Princeton's
first graduate student. A year later, he had finished that
course of study, and he still did not know what to do. So like
many a humanities major, having now graduated twice, so to
speak, he went home and lived with his parents.
Now, we would consider this today a failed education. He
had taken a bunch of useless courses, ancient stuff like Latin
and Greek, and he had prepared himself for absolutely nothing
in the way of a job and so he spent the next 4 years living at
home with his parents tutoring his younger siblings and writing
nostalgic letters to his friends from the old days at the
College of New Jersey.
James Madison never did find a job. Instead, a job of
course found him. The revolution occurred, and James Madison
became the founder of our republic. How did he do that? He did
that because he had had a really strong humanities education,
and so at the end of this period of time in 1776, he became one
of those people that the Americans began to look up to, and
within short order he had been elected from his own district in
Virginia to the state assembly in Virginia. He was then the
principal architect of the Constitution. Why was that? Because
his friend, Thomas Jefferson, sent him two trunk loads of books
from Paris where Jefferson was living and Madison began what
became known as the most important piece of scholarship in
American history. He studied what federations had been in
history in order to prepare himself to go to Philadelphia to
work on the federal convention.
In Philadelphia, even though he was only 35 years old, he
became the best known of all the advocates for the new
Constitution. Why? Because he was trained well in the
humanities. He was an oracle of information on European
history, on ancient Greek and Roman history, on confederacies.
He was the author of the Virginia Plan, which was eventually
adopted as the basis for the Constitution.
Once the Constitution was completed, it had to be ratified
in the states. What did Madison do? He went to New York and
joined Alexander Hamilton writing the Federalist Papers in
order to promote ratification in New York. When he finished
there, he rushed back to Virginia and led the fight for
ratification in Virginia. During all of this time, he used his
humanities education to make the case. The Constitution was
ratified and you know what happened next. Madison went to
become a member of the House of Representatives. There, he
wrote the Bill of Rights and then became Secretary of State and
then President for two terms.
Now, the point I want to make in this story is, this was a
person who finished college with a humanities major and had no
idea what to do with himself, but his humanities education had
prepared him for what would become a lifetime of service to the
United States, and he died at the age of 85 having continued to
work constantly in public service all his life. So the story of
James Madison is a good story of a humanities major who, like
me when I finished college, had no idea what to do with
himself, and I remember very well when I decided I wanted to go
into academia, all my uncles said what in the world are you
going to do with an education in Latin and Greek; you cannot
get a job. And even after I got a job teaching, they said when
are you going to get a real job. Because the humanities are
somehow seen as beneath the real world but I am here to tell
you this morning they are not. They are in fact essential to an
educated citizenry. And the reason the humanities are important
is that we want to be training and educating citizens who can
make complicated decisions in a complicated world.
We spend in this country billions of dollars on science,
and I am glad we do because we need good science, but many
countries spend billions of dollars on science. Even
autocratic, dictatorial countries spend money on science
because they see it as a way forward. In the Soviet Union,
science was prized. It was put up on a pedestal. It was
important. It was critical. And today, China is spending
billions of dollars on science in order to catch up with us.
But those countries do not do the humanities well at all.
Why not? Because the humanities require freedom. You cannot do
the humanities without freedom. Why is that? Because the
humanities are about values, and dictators do not like having
values on the table for debate and discussion. One of the
things that makes us a very great country and it is one of the
reasons that Madison created us the way he did is that we are
free to debate ideas, to take them wherever they will go, so in
teaching and in scholarship, we can talk freely about our
ideas, bad ideas, good ideas, and they all have to be put on
the table and fought over, and that is the way James Madison
foresaw the country, a place where you can have free debates
about ideas so the humanities can only exist in a strong way in
free countries, and that is why the humanities are weak in
places like China because you cannot express yourself freely.
In this country, we can.
So to me, the humanities endowment is our way of saying as
a Nation, we believe in freedom. We believe in the opportunity
to discuss ideas wherever they will take us. Bad ideas, good
ideas, they have to go into the public forum and they have to
win debates. Otherwise they lose and they are discredited. At
least we get to discuss them.
So I am proud of being a humanist and I eventually did get
a job in spite of my uncle's belief that I never would, and I
am pleased to be able to come to you this morning and talk
about the humanities because I am a really strong believer in
them.
I am not going to spend a lot of time on the budget.
Clearly, I support Chairman Leach's request for $154 million.
That seems to me to be a minimal commitment to something as
important as the humanities. I hope that you will be able to
support Chairman Leach's priorities. The Bridging Cultures
project, which he has brought forward as chairman of NEH, is an
important statement, I think, about what the country wants to
do and to say to the world, and it seems to me that is one of
the most important functions of the NEH, to say publicly to the
world, we support freedom, we support free ideas, we support
free debate. That is the only way, it seems to me, we are going
to make James Madison proud of the product that he created.
Thank you very much.
[The statement of Hunter Rawlings, III, follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cole [presiding]. Dr. Tannen.
Ms. Tannen. I do thank you for the honor and privilege of
addressing you today, and I am a resident of Virginia as well.
I guess I am best known as the author of a book called You
Just Don't Understand that was on the New York Times bestseller
list for nearly 4 years. It was number one for 8 months. It has
been translated into 31 languages, the 31st just added last
week, Romanian. I have written 22 books, half of them for
scholarly audiences, half for general audiences, and because of
that book as well as two others that were New York Times
bestsellers and others as well, I am often asked to comment on
radio and television and image reviewed by newspapers.
But what I want to talk about today is the early support
that I got from the National Endowment for the Humanities and
the role that that played in laying the foundation for the work
that later led to this wide audience, so I guess I would say
that the ways the NEH helped me helped so many other people, a
wide range of people in their daily lives.
I came to Georgetown in 1979. My salary was $17,000. It was
not enough to live on in Washington. And I would have had to
teach that first summer just to pay the rent. It was a little
tiny place over a garage in Georgetown, but even that I would
have needed to supplement it to pay the rent, but I got a
summer stipend from NEH that was $2,000, but it made the
difference between teaching that summer and actually having a
summer to do my research, and maybe most important, it was an
early sign of confidence that the work I was doing was worth
something.
In 1985, I organized a huge summer institute at Georgetown,
self-supporting. Students paid. Six hundred people came from
all over the United States as well as abroad to study the kind
of linguistics I was doing. It was a summer institute. I got a
grant from NEH to have a concurrent institute that brought 25
college and university teachers from across the country and
people came from New Hampshire to Hawaii, 25 college teachers
who were able to take advantage of what the institute was doing
and then take that back to their students, all the students
that they would be teaching over the years. And that again was
a very small grant, something like $25,000, that paid summer
stipends for the 25 people as well as faculty to teach them.
That same summer, I got a very small grant, $3,500 from the
D.C. Humanities Council, and that is funded by the NEH's
Division of State Programs, and what I did was put on a little
program, a public program about conversations between women and
men. So we hired actors from a little theater group and they
acted out these scenarios. We got some free publicity because I
and a couple of other faculty members went on the Donahue show,
which at the time was a very small, just starting out local
show, so because of that, people came from all over Washington,
attended this, and it was one of the first signs that I had
that this work on how communication between women and men could
be understood as linguistic differences had a broad appeal, and
so all of this was laying the seeds, planting seeds for what I
later was able to write about.
One more grant I got from NEH, a basic research grant that
gave me a year off from teaching in order to develop in more
detail my work which if you looked at it at the time would seem
very technical, very academic, very limited, poetic features in
every conversation, comparing the language of everyday
conversation with the language of literature. But it is that
scholarly work that may seem to be a very limited audience that
really laid the foundation for the work that I was later able
to build on in writing books that just about anybody could read
and take advantage of.
After the book You Just Don't Understand was published and
the reaction that it got, I did not seek any more funding
because I did not need it anymore. But I did try to repay my
debt to NEH by serving on panels and by reading proposals, and
I think this is--I want to mention that because it is another
way that the work of NEH is enhanced by a lot of volunteer work
by academics. Yeah, you get these proposals, nobody pays you.
You read the proposals and rate them. If you are on a panel,
you get hundreds of grants that you have to take your time that
you do not get paid for reading them and rating them and then
coming and spending days on those panels.
It is maybe a little bit surprising to hear from a linguist
at a panel like this because they get support from NSF, and
that is true. There is a formal branch of the field that gets
support from NSF. The work I do has something to do with human
relationships and psychologists get a lot of support from NIMH
for that. The kind of research that I do and linguists like me
do that is the role of language in everyday life really does
not have any other source of support. In fact, that institute
that I ran was called Humanistic Approaches to Linguist
Analysis, and that has kind of been my goal in all of this.
But the amounts of money that are required for this kind of
research are really very small compared to what is required for
scientific laboratories or large psychological studies, and I
will echo what my colleague said about we all know the
importance of science. In the current issue of New York Review
of Books, there is an essay by Freeman Dyson, the great
Princeton physicist, and he said science is a creative
interaction of observation with imagination, and he was talking
about the importance of the arts for the sciences, and again
echoing some of what you just heard, the United States has been
the source of global innovation not because we are a nation of
technicians. What informs our technology is our imagination and
creativity and these are the domains of the humanities.
So that is the gist of what I wanted to say, just to give
you a personal account of the huge difference that can be made
by these small grants in the humanities.
Before I close, I want to thank you for one more thing. It
is the hugest gift that anyone could be given, and I suspect I
am not the only one to have gotten this gift from an NEH grant,
but I do not think it could ever be guaranteed by a funding
institution, but at that 1985 linguistic institute that I ran
that was supported by the NEH institute, one of those college
and university professors who came to take part in that became
my husband. So for that very special gift, I want to thank you.
[The statement of Deborah Frances Tannen follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Moran. We will give NEH a tip.
Ms. Tannen. And he was born on St. Patrick's Day, by the
way.
Mr. Cole. Let me just say as an old Victorian historian, as
the father of a son who is writing, I hope to God, finally his
dissertation in philosophy, both of you give me enormous hope.
Mr. Moran.
Mr. Moran. I know that you share my love of the humanities,
Tom, and this is one of the nice things about this Committee,
that we have some tangential input into promoting them. Tom is
always reading every time I go on a trip. He is always deep
into a book. And I do not know what we would do without the
humanities. The little push that this program provides to
people who otherwise would have to give up is useful. Some
potential authors would say, you know, that there is no way I
can spend the summer writing a book or the ideas that are in my
head, because I am just going to have to go and do something
else to put food on the table. NEH helps and oftentimes is
there for them. So I thank you for your comments, Deborah.
And Mr. Rawlings, how wonderful it would have been to be an
undergraduate in your classics course at Cornell. Here you are
the President of the university and you went back and you
taught a classics course to undergraduates. Cornell is such an
outstanding institution, and I know they were having some
trouble and they brought you back after you had been president
for many years. To pull that sprawling campus together and give
it some meaning, some focus, some purposefulness in terms of
what students and graduate students do when they get out, and
your impact on so many thousands, countless lives, is just
priceless. I appreciate you for all that you have done
throughout your life on behalf of the humanities and others'
ability to appreciate them. So thank you.
Mr. Rawlings. Well, thank you very much. I just thought if
James Madison could go up and help Alexander Hamilton with the
ratification process in New York, it was the least that I as a
Virginian could do for New Yorkers.
Mr. Moran. Well, I appreciate that perspective too. But,
you know, your whole statement was extemporaneous. I wish it
had been written down, but it was just from the mind and heart,
and we thank you.
Mr. Rawlings. Thank you.
Mr. Cole. Mrs. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. No questions, but I deeply appreciate you
being here today and your advocacy for the humanities.
Mr. Rawlings. Thanks.
Mr. Cole. Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. Well, I wish I would have studied Latin
harder. That is all I can say.
Mr. Rawlings. It is not too late.
Ms. McCollum. Talk to my Latin teacher. And tell my son
there are other careers for linguists besides living abroad in
Japan, teaching at Japanese universities. Maybe you can help me
bring him home with us.
I think the story that you tell is impactful. If we are to
be creative, if we are to be successful as human beings and if
we are to be successful as a country, we have to take the time
to sit, reflect, read and have an open mind. The humanities,
the arts, the environment, the sciences, religion, they all
come together, and you are the home of all that. Thank you for
being here today, and sharing stories both past and present
that remind us of how interconnected the humanities are to
everything that we do. We all are, after all, human, so thank
you.
Ms. Tannen. In the spirit of there is hope, I started out
just moving to Greece and teaching English there for several
years, and I came back.
Mr. Moran. That is so true about China and Russia. No
matter how much they invest in science, no matter how many
people they put into ``productivity'', they are never going to
have the innovative and creative capacity that we have, and it
is because of the humanities. Thanks for coming.
Mrs. Lummis [presiding]. Thank you both so much.
Mr. Rawlings. Thank you for the opportunity.
Mrs. Lummis. We would now like to call up our next panel.
It consists of Mr. Ulrich, Dr. Grossman, Mr. Hein, Mr. Cassidy
and Ms. Pierpont, and so if you would all join us at the table?
So Ulrich on the end. Next to Mr. Ulrich, Dr. Grossman, please.
Next to Dr. Grossman, Mr. Hein. Next to Mr. Hein, Mr. Cassidy.
And certainly last but not least, Ms. Pierpont.
Ms. McCollum. And I think for the first time in history,
two women are sitting at the head of this table.
Mrs. Lummis. It is my pleasure and honor actually to
welcome you to the table, and especially my dear friend Paul
Ulrich, who is from Wyoming.
Now, let me tell you a little bit about Paul before we all
began. Paul Ulrich and his family are the perfect marriage
between what our previous speaker spoke of, and that is the
intersection of science and art. Paul's grandparents, Carl and
Shirley Ulrich, are world-class fossil preparers, and for
people who are artists in the preparation of artistic fossils
for display, people who know them can walk in a room and across
the room they can tell that a fossil was prepared by Carl
Ulrich. He is a world-class fossil artist, preparer. These
people have for three generations been an intersection of art
and geology, and Paul is here in his capacity as a member of
the board of directors of the Wyoming Humanities Council. But
it shows you how the geologist in him, and he is an oil and gas
company executive by professor, but he is by avocation and
first love someone who works in that intersection between art
and geology and science and the humanities, and he is also just
a wonderful, dear individual. So I am delighted, Paul, that you
are here today and delighted to welcome you. Would you begin?
----------                              --
--------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

WYOMING HUMANITIES COUNCIL, REPRESENTING THE FEDERATION OF STATE
HUMANITIES COUNCILS

WITNESS

PAUL ULRICH
Mr. Ulrich. Madam Chair, Representative, thank you very,
very much. It is a significant honor for me to be here
testifying, and testifying in front of you, my dear friend.
Thank you for the kind words for the family. I will carry that
message on.
First and foremost, though, I need to carry a message about
the Wyoming Humanities Council and the state-federal
partnership, and I will walk through that and then I would love
to take some questions.
I have got a bit of written testimony here that I will try
to walk through, but I will probably talk a little bit off the
cuff as well. As mentioned, my name is Paul Ulrich. I am from
Wyoming. And given some of the previous speakers, I think it is
important to cover a little bit of background. First and
foremost, several years ago, if you would have asked me to
describe what the humanities was, I would have had a very, very
difficult time doing that. Today is a different story. I had
the opportunity to enter the board of directors of the Wyoming
Humanities Council and I have learned over the past several
years truly what humanities is, and bottom line is, it is the
experiences, it is the stories, it is the ideas and the words
that we share every day amongst ourselves, whether it is around
a beer or a water cooler or through a music festival or an arts
festival or a reading discussion. It is all those wonderful
things that make us, us, and all those wonderful things that we
share.
So I wrote down a few notes, stories and ideas and words
that connect us. They allow us to address challenges. Most
importantly for me, they have allowed me and others in Wyoming
to listen and learn from each other, and not only from my
neighbor but from somebody from back East or somebody from
across the world that I may have not or others may have not
ever had experience before. When you grow up in a small town in
Wyoming, Matetsi, Wyoming, where I went to elementary school,
we had a population of a little over 500. We are at about 300
today. So my 10 classmates and I did not have much of a chance
to explore the world except for the library and the programs
that the Wyoming Humanities Council bring to small libraries
like that across our great state. It allows us to explore and
to learn.
Most importantly, when you come from a science background,
as the chairman mentioned, my family are all scientists,
geologists, paleontologists, you lean that direction during the
day. In the evenings when you are reading and discussing what
you have read and discussing what you have learned, that is the
human experience. That is what humanities is all about. And
that is why I and I suspect all of us have a passion for it,
whether or not we identify it as humanities. Our lives are
meant to be shared, and the humanities is a perfect vehicle for
that. It brings us together. It allows us to listen and learn
from each other.
And the reason I am here to testify today, down to the
brass tacks, I am here to request $154.255 million for the
National Endowment for the Humanities, and out of that, $44
million for the state humanities councils for fiscal year 2013.
Last year, councils reached 5,700 communities across the
Nation. Hundreds of programs in each Congressional district
serve hundreds of thousands of students, teachers, health care
professionals, veterans and more. And in 2011, on average,
these local councils, these state councils, 56 of them, are
leveraging $5 for every dollar that the NEH provides us. That
is a heck of a return on your investment. And these are
leveraged in the small communities across the Nation. We
receive our core funding through the state-federal partnership
as a line of the NEA budget, and we have received throughout
the past through special initiatives such as We the People
funding as well, and that has been awfully important to these
state humanities council budgets.
Real-world needs--dozens of councils offer family literacy
programs which in the past year alone have benefited hundreds
of families in rural and urban communities. Dear to my heart, I
am a veteran. Councils serve veterans. The Missouri council
offers creative writing workshops and mentoring for veterans,
literature and medicine in Maine now offered by 26 other
councils, provides invaluable resources for caregivers of
returning veterans.
After Hurricanes Irene and Lee hit last year, the New York
council swiftly distributed funds from the NEH chairman's
discretionary grant to provide relief to 31 small cultural
organizations.
Most importantly from my standpoint in Wyoming, these
councils reach small communities that do not get reached.
Idaho, Let's Talk About It, a reading and discussion program,
has been very successful. In Wyoming, we are doing things this
year regarding Giving Voice, which is an outcome of Civility
Matters, and that program in itself is going to give us an
opportunity to listen and learn from under-heard individuals,
most importantly, as I mentioned, veterans, to some extent also
youth, individuals and families below the poverty line and
those struggling with mental health issues. We work with about
9,800 organizations across the Nation including Minnesota's
council traveling exhibit, Why Treaties Matter, and many other
organizations.
We touch a lot of small museums, small populations that
otherwise would not be reached by the humanities and would not
understand what these dollars are leveraged for. In sum, we
serve the citizens' real-world needs. We nurture their
communities' cultural institutions and we preserve our Nation's
cultural heritage.
By partnering with over 9,800 local organizations, our
councils achieve a fivefold return on your federal funding, the
funding you provide us. The councils ensure that this federal
investment benefits the public as a whole, citizens in every
Congressional district and 5,700 communities in ways both
intangible and concrete. The humanities programs made possible
by the federal funding to the councils simply make our
communities a better place to live.
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
[The statement of Paul Ulrich follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Lummis. Thank you so much, Paul. I deeply appreciate
your testimony and your presence here today and your
friendship.
Rather than take questions now, we will go through the
panel and take questions then. So I now would like to welcome
Dr. Grossman.
----------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

AMERICAN HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION

WITNESS

DR. JAMES GROSSMAN
Mr. Grossman. Thank you, and I want to thank the members of
the Subcommittee for the opportunity and the honor of
testifying in support of funding for the National Endowment for
the Humanities.
Congresswoman McCollum, I can share your sensibilities,
having one daughter who has spent the last 2 years teaching
English in a Spanish public school and another one who is about
to head off to Tbilisi to learn Georgian and Chechen. So we can
discuss this issue of parenting at some other point long
distance. Thank God for Skype.
I am testifying on behalf of both the American Historical
Association, which I serve as the Executive Director, and the
National Humanities Alliance, a coalition on which I serve as a
member of the board of directors.
For fiscal year 2013, we strongly urge the Subcommittee to
provide no less than $154.3 million in funding--I have rounded
a little bit. Outside of the sciences, we tend to be somewhat
less exact sometimes. This is what we humanists do. We trade in
uncertainty, and that is what we contribute to our national
culture--which is the same amount requested by the
Administration. This represents a modest $8.2 million increase
over the final 2012 appropriation of $146 million. The NEH
budget has suffered a significant reduction over the last 2
years, more than $21 million, which is 13.2 percent, in the
last two fiscal years.
I have had the privilege and the good fortune to co-direct
an NEH summer seminar for college teachers, similar to the one
that Professor Tannen referred to earlier, on how historians
use biography in our teaching and research. The participants
were faculty members from teaching-oriented colleges and
universities. We read biographies of individuals who shaped
American history. We talked about how historians reach broad
audiences by writing biography and how we use biographical
materials in our classrooms to bring history alive to students
interested in individual stories. We exchanged ideas about how
we integrate our reaching and research and how we create new
knowledge through the study of individuals in historical
context. This is what the NEH does, supports programs like
this. And this work is important beyond our campuses. The
research and teaching supported by the NEH are central to
understanding not only our own heritage but also foreign
cultures and languages.
We can neither formulate informed foreign policy or even
military strategy nor compete in the global marketplace without
continuing to support research and teaching in these areas.
That support is currently inadequate, especially given the
limits of other sources of funding. Our inability to support
the work of young scholars through the fellowships program that
I benefited from early in my career and that Professor Tannen
referred to is akin to plowing under our seed corn. Young
scholars need the kind of opportunity that I had in 1985 to
write books that launch careers. Currently, NEH funds only one-
sixth of its applicants. I have served on enough peer review
panels to know that many more proposals merit support.
I have also worked with NEH staff for more than two decades
and have been consistently impressed by the efficiency and
fairness with which they have dealt with a budget that has
precipitously declined in real dollars. I have also seen the
damage that has taken place because the endowment can no longer
support humanities infrastructure and projects in the way that
it should.
We do our humanities work well in the United States.
American higher education remains the best in the world, a
beacon for students across the liberal arts disciplines and an
inspiration for the teaching and modeling of creative and
critical thinking. I was at a conference in Beijing in October
and had the opportunity through a translator--I do not have
those sorts of linguistic skills--to speak with many of my
colleagues. What was interesting was that the younger Chinese
scholars are planning to send their children to the United
States for liberal arts education. They know where one gets a
good education.
The research and education programs funded by the NEH are
essential to maintaining the quality that enables American
universities to attract these students from across the world.
This brings money into our economy and it builds ongoing
networks as graduates return home as leaders in business and
government.
The work of the NEH benefits all Americans in other ways as
well. The humanities are a lifelong enterprise and a public
resource. Think about the educational role of our museums and
libraries for Americans of all ages and backgrounds. Perhaps
some of you might have seen the exhibition a few blocks away at
the Folger Shakespeare Library last year on the history of the
King James Bible. NEH support enables a version of that
exhibition and others on Ben Franklin and Abe Lincoln to travel
to Laramie, Wyoming, and other towns and cities across the
Nation. NEH grants enable institutions like the Idaho State
Historical Society--sorry the chairman has left--and the
Mountain Home Public Library to preserve the thousands of
photographs, maps and oral histories that document our
heritage.
The NEH has also moved aggressively in developing digital
resources that have transformed how people discover and
experience the past. To this generation of students, if it is
not online, it does not exist. From a first grader doing a
school report on Abraham Lincoln to high school seniors trying
to understand the complexities and historical context of the
American experience in Central Asia, their first destination is
the Internet. Digital humanities programs supported by the NEH
help ensure that students have ready access to the best
scholarship. Through its EDSITEment website, the NEH makes it
easy for high school teachers to find high-quality materials
specifically oriented towards teaching and learning.
In light of what Congressman Cole said earlier, I recognize
that the subcommittee confronts difficult and complex choices
in allocating priorities. My colleagues and I remain grateful
for the strong support that the Subcommittee has demonstrated
for the NEH in the past, and we hope that you will continue to
consider the endowment as a vital investment in the Nation's
global competitiveness, the strength and vitality of our civic
institutions, the preservation and understanding of our diverse
cultural heritage and the lives of our citizens. Thank you.
[The statement of James Grossman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Dr. Grossman. If I were a
basketball referee, I would be fired because I have been pretty
liberal with the clock.
So I will ask Mr. Hein to pay note to the little device in
front of you, and when you see it go red, start to wrap up, and
we gratefully welcome your attendance today. Welcome.
----------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

PRESERVATION ACTION

WITNESS

ERIK M. HEIN
Mr. Hein. Thank you very much for the opportunity to be
here today, and I will try very hard to keep my remarks to the
5-minute limit. The pressure is on.
I would like to shift gears slightly and talk about
historic preservation. I am Erik Hein. I am the President of
Preservation Action, which is the only national grassroots
advocacy organization dedicated only to federal preservation
policy, and I am also a graduate of the humanities program at
Penn State University, so I am very sympathetic to the remarks
of those who preceded me.
The National Historic Preservation Act is an amazing
document. It establishes core principles for the preservation
of our heritage and a collaborative process that lets people
help determine what is worth saving, and it rejects the notion
that the only way to preserve something is for the government
to own it. It is designed to encourage partnerships and to give
every American community the opportunity to access our
collective heritage, and at the same time helping them to find
their own sense of place.
Key to this process was the creation of the State Historic
Preservation Offices. To help fund the SHPO offices, as we
often refer to them, in 1976 Congress established the Historic
Preservation Fund. Modeled after the Land and Water
Conservation Fund, it is authorized to receive $150 million per
year, although it has never actually received that, and it is
derived from lease revenues from the Outer Continental Shelf. A
portion of this funding on a matching basis is given to SHPOs
to help them complete federal reviews, National Register
nominations and to administer the Federal Rehabilitation Tax
Credit program, which in 2011 leveraged over $4 billion in
investment and created over 55,000 jobs. And to keep these
programs moving, we would like to request level funding, which
is in line with the Administration's request, of $46.925
million, to be precise, for fiscal year 2013.
Also key to this process are Tribal Historic Preservation
Offices, or THPOs, who carry out many of the same functions as
SHPOs but on tribal lands. Each year, as we recognize more
tribes, new THPOs are added. In 1996 when the program began,
there were only 12. Today, there are over 130. Unfortunately,
funding has not kept pace so each new THPO means less money to
go around. Therefore, we would like to see a small increase in
THPO funding to $9.7 million from the Administration's request
for level funding at $8.9 million.
The National Historic Preservation Act also recognizes the
funding need for the restoration of nationally significant
places. With this in mind, we would also like to request $10
million from the Historic Preservation Fund for a fully
competitive grant program administered by the SHPOs. This
represents only one-third of the total previously funded
through the Save America's Treasures and Preserve America
programs that used to serve this purpose. Last year, rather
than reducing funding for these programs, the Administration
requested the elimination of all $30 million in funding by
saying it would allow the Park Service to focus available
resources on managing national parks and other primary
responsibilities. As a steward of more than 27,000 historic
structures and 66,000 archaeological sites and the department
managing components of the National Historic Preservation Act,
we would argue that preservation is our primary responsibility.
Unfortunately, the Administration also proposes a $1.4
million reduction in cultural resource stewardship, a reduction
in construction and major maintenance, and a 50 percent cut for
National Heritage Areas which for the record we would like to
see level funded. At the same time, there is $215 million
proposed for natural resource stewardship programs, which is
twice the amount of cultural stewardship programs, and a more
than 50 percent increase to the Land and Water Conservation
Fund, which is used primarily for land acquisition. But why
does there have to be this tension between natural and cultural
resources or between park and non-park programs? Why does it
have to be feast versus famine? Last year, Preservation Action
convened a task force that included 11 national historic
preservation organizations and we issued a report that analyzes
this problem and concludes there needs to be increased levels
of leadership, partnership, innovation and, above all,
visibility.
To achieve this, we have issued a set of no-nonsense
solutions that do not require a great deal of funding, and they
attempt to maximize return on investment. You will find those
recommendations in our written testimony. We would welcome the
opportunity to work with members of this committee to find a
way to help facilitate these changes.
Our Nation's cultural resources and natural resources are
both important. We believe that they are not an either/or
proposition. During this time of widespread discussion on jobs
and investment in infrastructure, we respectfully ask that you
consider investment in our cultural resources, the preservation
of our great American heritage and the jobs that go along with
historic preservation as a vital part of the equation.
[The statement of Erik Hein follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Hein, and we deeply appreciate
your testimony too. As someone who is married to a guy who has
never seen an old building he did not want to fix up, and who
has probably taken more buildings to the National Trust for
Historic Preservation process in Wyoming than anybody else and
who was on the board of advisors of the National Trust for
Historic Preservation for many years, loved it, and I have done
many, many historic preservation trips and tours in my role as
a spouse, so I have a certain affinity for what you are trying
to accomplish, and if I did not, I could never go home.
I would like to welcome now Mr. Cassidy, who is the Vice
President of the National Trust.
----------                              --
--------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

NATIONAL TRUST FOR HISTORIC PRESERVATION

WITNESS

TOM CASSIDY
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you, Madam Chairman and members of the
Subcommittee. I appreciate this opportunity to present the
National Trust for Historic Preservation's fiscal year 2013
budget recommendations. My name is Tom Cassidy and I am the
Vice President of Government Relations.
The Nation faces a challenging fiscal environment. We
recognize the need for fiscal restraint and cost-effective
federal investments. However, we do not believe that
preservation, conservation and recreation programs should
suffer from disproportionate funding reductions. We look
forward to working with the Committee as it addresses the
challenge of sustaining our Nation's rich heritage of cultural
and historical resources but also generates the economic
vitality of communities throughout the Nation.
The Historic Preservation Fund, as Erik described, is the
principal source of funding to implement the Nation's historic
preservation programs. The President proposes level funding.
While we appreciate that is not a cut, we recommend the
Committee provide a modest increase for the HPF, reflecting
both the ongoing demands of preservation services from SHPOs
and the increasing number of tribes who qualify for HPF
funding.
We would also like to work with the Committee to restore a
program of competitive matching grant funding such as was
formerly provided by Save America's Treasures to restore and
preserve significant historic resources.
I would also like to address the cultural resources
stewardship account within the Park Service operations budget.
Two-thirds of our national parks were created to protect our
most important cultural and historic resources yet there is a
longstanding disparity between funding for cultural and natural
resource programs. This problem continues in the fiscal year
2013 budget, which proposes an increase in natural resources
stewardship but a reduction for cultural resources. We urge the
Committee to at least restore the cultural resources account to
its fiscal year 2012 enacted level.
Of the nearly $11 billion of deferred maintenance needs for
NPS, $3 billion is for the 27,000 properties in park units
listed on the National Register. More than 40 percent of
historic buildings in our parks are in fair or poor condition.
Without funding, the condition of these properties will
continue to deteriorate and become more expensive to repair and
preserve in the future. Therefore, we recommend the Committee
restore the proposed $15 million cut from the repair,
rehabilitation and maintenance accounts and provide funding at
the fiscal year 2012 enacted level.
The National Trust is conducting fundraising efforts to
address this gap, most recently and successfully in Wyoming at
the White Grass Dude Ranch in Grand Teton National Park but
private money must be matched by federal funds. We also very
much appreciate the Committee's inclusion of language in the
fiscal year 2012 conference report recognizing that historic
leases can provide a cost-effective and innovative solution to
mitigate the maintenance backlog of historic properties. We are
working with the Park Service and private partners to
successfully implement such leases and bring investment to
rehabilitation expenses.
We also are disappointed the Administration has proposed a
50 percent decrease in funding for the National Heritage Areas.
The proposed reduction would severely impair the sustainability
of individual NHAs. A recent actually 2012 study of the Park
Service found that without funding to replace the NPS
investment, few NHAs are expected to survive longer than a few
years. During these challenging times, every program that
receives federal funding needs to justify its worth and deliver
substantial benefits to the American public. NHAs more than
meet this test. They are community-driven partnerships that
advance conservation and economic development and where each
federal dollar is leveraged by $5\1/2\ of non-federal
investments. We urge the Committee to maintain funding at the
enacted level.
Finally, the Bureau of Land Management oversees the largest
and most diverse body of cultural resources of any federal land
management agency yet BLM receives the least amount of cultural
resources money per acre of any agency. We strongly support the
president's fiscal year 2013 request of a modest and well-
justified increase for the cultural resources management
account.
I feel that I have to talk about the Land and Water
Conservation Fund since I still have 18 seconds left to go, and
we would support robust funding for the LWCF. Many of the
Nation's most significant and cultural landscapes have been
permanently protected through LWCF investments including the
Flight 93 National Memorial, Minidoka National Historical Park,
Gettysburg National Military Park, and we support the
Administration's request for the Park Service Civil War
Sesquicentennial Units and the American Battlefield Protection
program grant.
Thank you very much.
[The statement of Tom Cassidy follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Cassidy, and you are right
about White Grass. It is fantastic and I highly recommend
anybody who has a chance to get out to Grand Teton National
Park, go see the efforts they are making to preserve those
historic structures.
Ms. Pierpont is with the preservation officers, and we
welcome you.
----------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICERS

WITNESS

RUTH PIERPONT
Ms. Pierpont. Thank you very much. I am Ruth Pierpont,
President of the National Conference of State Historic
Preservation Officers, and I am also the New York Deputy State
Historic Preservation Officer, or SHPO for short, as Erik said.
On behalf of Jan Gallimore, the Idaho SHPO, Mary Hopkins,
the Wyoming SHPO, Kathleen Kilpatrick, who is the Virginia
SHPO, and all the SHPOs across the country, I would like to
thank the chairman, Ranking Member Moran and all the members of
the subcommittee for your support of SHPOs and for the
opportunity to testify before you today. I also want to take
one second to thank Mr. Hinchey and Mr. Serrano as a New Yorker
for all their support, and Mr. Hinchey should not be allowed to
retire but nobody asked me, so anyway.
The National Historic Preservation Program is an
outstanding example of federalism with the National Historic
Preservation Act setting the policy and the states through the
SHPOs administering the program which has flourished for the
past 46 years. This year, our theme is Preservation Equals
Return on Investment. This return on investment takes many
forms including economic development, job creation, community
livability and sustainment of America's heritage. Even in an
economic downturn, investment in preservation has been
sustained and continues to be a driving force. The Federal
Historic Preservation Tax Credit program, which is administered
by the SHPOs in partnership with the National Park Service, is
a shining example of how this program works. As Erik mentioned,
in 2011 these rehabilitation task credits stimulated over $4
billion in private investment and created over 55,000 jobs in a
wide range of both general and specialized skills.
Preservation's return on investment also equals heritage
tourism. In 2010, the Department of Commerce conducted a survey
of international visitors' activities. This survey found that
visiting America's national parks ranked tenth but visiting
America's non-national park historic sites ranked third. And,
by the way, number one and two were shopping and dining, so I
cannot complain about that.
As you know, it is the SHPOs who assist these non-federal
historic sites and work with the communities to help maintain,
rehabilitate and use their historic assets and resources. These
are the places that international and domestic tourists alike
come to visit, places like Chesterfield, Idaho, Alexandria,
Virginia, Summit Avenue in St. Paul, Minnesota, and closer to
my home, Ithaca, New York, and of course Jackson Hole, Wyoming,
which I had the pleasure to visit a couple of years ago. And we
do this on a shoestring budget of less than 50 million federal
dollars which is a small fraction of the National Park
Service's $2.6 billion budget. As they say in infomercials, but
that is not all. For less than that $50 million, in 2011 the
return on investment for American taxpayers also included
reviews of over 140,000 federal undertakings, over 100,000
National Register eligibility opinions, over 1,000 new listings
on the National Register, surveys of over 20 million acres to
determine the presence or absence of cultural resources, and
this is all in addition to the $4 billion in private investment
and 55,000 jobs through the tax credit program.
In a brief aside, while these statistics are I think very
impressive, I do need to underscore what has been mentioned
previously, the continued need for a historic preservation
grant program. In the states, we certainly understand the need
for fiscal austerity but it is disappointing to see job-
creating grant programs such as Save America's Treasures and
Preserve America go unfunded. And while these were successful
programs, Congress also has the option of running a grant
program through the SHPOs as authorized by the National
Historic Preservation Act. While a much greater need exists,
there is no question that a $5 million to $10 million capital
grant program would create jobs, spur economic development and
help communities preserve their historic heritage, catalyzing
even greater economic opportunities.
I want to emphasize that SHPOs are very grateful to have
experienced modest operating funding increases over the past
couple of years. This is why our fiscal year 2013 operational
funding request is level funding from fiscal year 2012 at
$46.925 million. We also support $9.7 million for the Tribal
Historic Preservation Offices.
And here is a quick trivia question. You do not really have
to get this but I will ask it anyway. Aside from fiscal year
2012, which other year did SHPOs receive around $27 million,
the highest year? It was 1979. So inflation aside, you can see
that SHPOs are very efficient with their resources although we
are reduced to maintaining very basic and minimal services and
unable to take on other activities that are called for under
the National Historic Preservation Act.
So in conclusion, thanks to this very efficient federal-
state partnership, people across the Nation from rural
communities to large metropolitan cities can walk down the
streets and realize that the historic structures that make up
the places that they live in are more than just bricks and
mortar. Rather, they are building blocks from our past
fulfilling the needs of today. Thank you.
[The statement of Ruth Pierpont follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Lummis. Thank you very much, and I want to thank the
whole panel for their testimony.
Before I yield to my colleagues, I have a quick question
for Mr. Ulrich. The We the People program was something that
NEH funded through the councils but the reduction of about $7
million in funding has caused to the councils specifically over
time has caused the elimination of such programs as We the
People from being funded at the council level. Have you been
able to make up for those funds through other sources?
Mr. Ulrich. Chairman Lummis, most of the councils are
struggling to make up those significant reductions in funds. A
lot of that is through obviously working towards increasing
private donations and et cetera but the short answer is no. We
are hopeful, however, that through NEH's line item on Bridging
Cultures that the majority of those funds can flow to the state
humanities councils. We are certainly strong believers that the
closer you can get those tax dollars to the communities and the
small and rural communities we certainly deal with in Wyoming,
the better off you are going to be and the more effective those
dollars are going to be spent, but the short answer, not yet.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you. And once again, I want to thank the
panel and yield to my colleague, Mr. Moran.
Mr. Moran. Thanks, Ms. Lummis. We have votes, we are told,
between 11:00 and 11:30 so I think in consideration of our
subsequent panelists, I am going to pass on asking questions
and we will try to get as many in because it is probably going
to be almost an hour of votes that we have ahead of us.
Mrs. Lummis. Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. Well, I would just like to say that this
committee took a strong bipartisan stance, with the chairman's
leadership with Saving America's Treasures; I was glad to see
the President did not zero out in his budget but was
disappointed at the funding level. So we thank you for your
testimony.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, panel. You are dismissed, and we
are very grateful for your being here today.
The next panel includes Mr. Kiernan, Mr. Werner, Mr.
Lightizer--did I get that right? What is the correct
pronunciation?
Mr. Lightizer. Lightizer.
Mrs. Lummis. Lighthizer, of course. Ms. Tulipane.
Ms. Tulipane. I am right here.
Mrs. Lummis. And did I pronounce that correctly? Okay. And
Ms. DeCoster, um-hum. It would help if I had my reading glasses
on. And Mr. Doyle, please. Okay. So do we have you in order?
Kiernan----
Mr. Kiernan. Right here.
Mrs. Lummis [continuing]. Werner, Lighthizer, Tulipane,
DeCoster, Doyle. Thank you and welcome. We will begin with Mr.
Kiernan with our apologies if we have to interrupt you for
votes. But please do begin. Welcome.
----------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

NATIONAL PARKS CONSERVATION ASSOCIATION

WITNESS

THOMAS C. KIERNAN
Mr. Kiernan. Great, thank you very much. Madam Chairman,
thank you very much, and members of the committee, thank you.
Tom Kiernan with NPCA. And Mr. Chairman, it is wonderful that
you joined us this morning.
Since 1919, NPCA has been the leading voice of the American
public to protect and enhance our National Parks. And on behalf
of our over 600,000 members and supporters throughout the
country and in every State, we are pleased to be here to
testify before you.
Mr. Chairman, we do recognize the extraordinary challenging
times that you and the Committee have in this budget climate to
identify spending priorities. First, we do want to thank you
for your work over the last couple years. This committee has
been doing its absolute best to protect the funding for the
National Parks. And we want to recognize that, thank you for
that. We also want to acknowledge the work of this committee to
keep the Appropriations Bill free from policy riders and we
very much appreciate that. And last thanks to you, personally,
Mr. Chairman. You spearheaded a letter back to the Super
Committee for commonsense approach to dealing with the deficit
and we want to particularly thank you very much for that letter
this past fall.
I am here to argue on behalf of healthy funding for the
National Parks. We believe that they very much need to be, in
these challenging times, a high priority for funding. Investing
in our National Parks is something that is investing in our
future as a country and very much in the economic vitality
throughout the country. And my written testimony includes a
number of new studies but to summarize it by saying that
National Parks create American jobs. In particular, they
generate $31 billion of economic activity and support 258,000
jobs throughout the country.
The Obama Administration acknowledges quite recently with
the President's announcement in the executive order to increase
tourism throughout the country, which we wholly support.
Unfortunately, the budget that they proposed is not fully
consistent with that because they are putting forward a budget
with a $22 million reduction in base operations to the Park
Service. And that does clearly concern us. It could lead to
approximately 200 FTEs in the Park Service being eliminated,
could potentially be--depending upon how they do it--600
seasonal employees. And it is, as this committee knows well,
the seasonal employees that are the frontlines in meeting,
greeting, ensuring the safety of the visitors throughout the
National Parks.
We cannot realistically hope to encourage tourism to the
National Parks at the same time that we are cutting the budget.
And we are duly concerned we may be sliding back into that era
of endangered rangers and of shuttered visitors' centers and of
dirty or closed bathrooms through the country and unsafe roads
and buildings and visitors' centers in the National Parks. That
is not what we want to go back to, especially at a time that we
are trying to increase tourist activity through the National
Parks throughout the country.
So a concern on the park funding side, also want to talk
about the construction budget for the National Parks. Over the
last two years, that budget has been cut by 35 percent, an $84
million reduction in the construction budget. And we can
empathize with the viewpoint that delaying some of those
construction projects may need to be needed to deal with the
budget challenges, but in reality what we are doing is
increasing the backlog, the maintenance backlog, which is
currently $11 billion in total, $3 billion for critical systems
in the park system. And at the current funding level, that
backlog is growing. The Park Service estimates it is increasing
by $300 million per year. So we believe we need to increase the
construction budget; otherwise, we are just making that backlog
larger and more of a problem for future years.
The third main program that I want to speak about is the
LWCF program. We do understand that it can be an easy target
from a budget perspective, but LWCF is not a luxury program
from our viewpoint. Funding the Land and Water Conservation
Fund is about improving the management efficiency, at least in
the Parks domain in our National Parks. It enables the Park
Service to more efficiently deal with the fire risks; it helps
them more efficiently deal with invasive species, removing some
of the obstacles to recreation and wildlife movement in the
Parks and it helps facilitate the conservation of historic
resources.
So LWCF we strongly support and very much want to thank
you, Congresswoman Lummis, for your and other members of the
committee's support for the Wyoming State School lands
purchase. That is a very high priority for us to help protect
Grand Teton National Park.
From the American public's perspective, the polling and
support for the National Parks could not be stronger. Even
during the very significant economic recession over the last
many years, 85 percent of the American public is still calling
for funding increases in our National Parks so that they are
ready to serve the American public for a second hundred years.
With that mentioned of the coming Centennial in 2016, let
me just say that NPCA, the National Park Foundation, the
National Park Hospitality Association in collaboration with the
Park Service held America's Summit on National Parks this past
January. The parks community is coming together to craft a
common agenda for the parks as we approach the 100th
anniversary. And that community is very much looking forward to
working with this Committee and supporting this committee in
giving the parks the right budget so that the parks can be
prepared for a second hundred years of extraordinary service to
the American public.
So thank you very much again for your past support for
parks. We have got the Centennial out there and we have got the
community organized to support you in well funding the parks.
[The statement of Tom Kiernan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Mr. Kiernan. Thank you very much.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Werner.
----------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

PARTNERSHIP FOR THE NATIONAL TRAILS SYSTEM

WITNESS

GARY WERNER
Mr. Werner. Mr. Chair, members of the Committee, I am Gary
Werner. I am here from Wisconsin representing the 35
organizations that are partners with the Park Service, the
Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management, and indeed with you
in the stewardship of an important portion of our public land
heritage. And I want to thank you and your predecessors on this
Committee for the strong support over the last two decades that
you have given for the 30 congressionally authorized National
Scenic and Historic Trails--and actually I should pass a map
down this way--which, as you can see, Mr. Chairman, they extend
for over 50,000 miles through 49 of the States, through 80
National Parks, 70 National Wildlife Refuges, over 100
wilderness areas, and just as importantly, through 465 state
parks. And also, just as importantly, they extend the values of
these public lands but they also go through 100 of the
metropolitan areas of over 50,000 population in the country, so
providing opportunities to connect people close to home with
our natural, historic, and cultural heritage.
And Wyoming, of course, has the distinction of having the
most trails, five national historic trails and one scenic
trail. Idaho of course has a crossroads of Continental Divide,
Nez Perce, Oregon, California trails. Minnesota has the
distinction of having some of the more spectacular portions of
the longest national scenic trail, the North Country Trail. And
Virginia here, you have Potomac Heritage, you have Appalachian,
you have the Overmountain Victory, and you have the Captain
John Smith Chesapeake, so a real treasure house of these
resources.
You know that you authorized these trails as public-private
partnerships, and we are proud to say that our commitment as
your partners remains strong. We are proud to report to you
that for the second year in a row in 2011 we conservatively
recorded over 1,150,000 volunteer hours among our
organizations. That amounted to over $24 million of labor value
plus another $8 million of financial value, about 33 million
that we are directly contributing to the 26 million or so that
you are providing to the three agencies that administer and
manage these trails. That amount of volunteer labor amounts to
556 full-time employees, so we are extending the federal
workforce, your workforce by that amount. But we are also, more
importantly, engaging thousands of citizens all across the
country in stewardship of our American public heritage. And we
think that is one of the geniuses of the National Trail System
to have this public-private involvement.
For 2013, we have a couple of requests. In the operations
for the three agencies for the trails, we are asking for 16.2
million for the Park Service for the 23 trails that it
administers; for the Bureau of Land Management, about 8.9
million for the three trails it administers and the 10 trails
it manages on the public lands in the west; for the Forest
Service, 9.1 million for six trails it administers and 16
trails that it manages.
We also support very strongly the Administration's request
of 69.5 million to fund the overall 26 million acres of the
National Landscape Conservation System in the Bureau of Land
Management. We also, like the National Parks Conservation
Association and others, strongly support the Administration's
$49 million for the Land and Water Conservation Fund and
including about $40 million for acquisitions along 17 of the
trails.
There are two quick things I want to say that we need some
specific help from the committee. You have tried in the past
and it did not quite work. The Bureau of Land Management budget
does not recognize funding directly for the National Scenic and
Historic Trails, nor the wild and scenic rivers. Rather, they
draw funding from about 15 to 20 sub-activity accounts to fund
the trails. We are asking that you provide direction to the
Agency to set up sub-activity accounts for these components of
the National Landscape Conservation System. You did that two
years ago in your report language, but the Office of Management
and Budget told the Agency to disregard your guidance. And the
Agency would love to comply if they were given the right nudge
I think.
The second thing is the agency budgets are putting travel
ceilings on the ability of their staff to go out and meet with
the partners that are essential for making these trails work.
And we would hope that you could give some guidance to perhaps
revisit the understanding that being able to meet with your
partners is essential to doing the work of particularly
projects that are as extensive as the National Trail System.
So once again, I want to thank you for your strong support.
[The statement of Gary Werner follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. We are going to have votes. In fact
they started right now, but I would like to get through this
panel if we could please. So if everybody could summarize their
remarks because the next panel is going to have to wait until
12:30 when votes will be over. And I figured you would rather
be here than wait until 12:30. So go ahead, Jim.
----------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

CIVIL WAR TRUST

WITNESS

O. JAMES LIGHTHIZER
Mr. Lighthizer. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, members of the
Committee, my name is Jim Lighthizer. I am president of the
Civil War Trust. I would like to echo what the two previous
figures say and thank you all for your support and the staff I
might add over the past two years. I know it has been a very,
very difficult time economically but you all have been
tremendously supportive and I thank you.
The Civil War Trust is a membership-based organization with
55,000 members around the country, and I come here to speak in
support of the American Battlefield Protection Program and the
funding that goes with it. I think the members of this
committee are very much aware of how it works. Suffice it to
say it is the sesquicentennial and it is a one-to-one match
program, and since I got to come up with the one, it is helpful
when you have a heightened public awareness like we have got
during the sesquicentennial. It is kind of get while the
getting is good.
So I come before you to thank you for your past support to
ask that you do the best job you can consistent with reality
and funding going forward and to tell the Congresswoman from
Wyoming that my wife and I are going to be spending a large sum
of money for us in your state at a dude ranch this summer. So
just remember the door swings both ways, okay?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement of O. James Lighthizer follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. And, you know, you can come over the pass,
into Idaho, too.
Mr. Lighthizer. That is where all the rich people are.
Mr. Simpson. Go ahead.
----------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

NATIONAL RECREATION AND PARK ASSOCIATION

WITNESS

BARBARA TULIPANE
Ms. Tulipane. Hi, I am Barbara Tulipane with the National
Recreation and Park Association. Thank you for this
opportunity.
NRPA represents local parks so although we like parks, we
really focus on the community parks and the state parks. I am
here today to talk about funding for LWCF, specifically, the
State Assistance Program. I am trying to be very fast so I am
going to cut right to the chase.
First, we ask that you provide ample funding for LWCF,
especially for the State Assistance Program. Second, we ask
that you choose to direct the LWCF investment to state and
local communities by allocating 40 percent of total LWCF
appropriations to the State Assistance Program. It is important
to note that over the last 25 years, the State Assistance
Program has received only 11 percent of total LWCF funding, but
the reality is that local parks are where the Americans are. We
do not have to worry about attracting visitors. Our parks are
being overrun and yet we only receive 11 percent.
Third, we ask that you specify that no state assistance
dollars are to be used for the DOI's proposed Competitive Grant
Program, which will diminish the current ability of this
program to serve more people in more communities.
Funding LWCF in 2013 is a sound fiscal policy and good for
national health and the economy for all the reasons you know,
investment in local economies, jobs, et cetera, et cetera. We
strongly oppose changing the funding formula to allow a new
Competitive Grant Program. The distribution formula to the
States is tried and true and it does not need fixing. One
hundred percent of the funding is equitably distributed among
States based on a formula approach which does not favor one
Congressional District or partisan affiliation over another. We
urge the Committee to prohibit any diversion of LWCF State
Assistance Funds from their original intended purpose.
We ask that you adopt three simple recommendations: provide
ample funding for LWCF, allocate a minimum of 40 percent of
total LWCF funding to the State Assistance Program, prohibit
any diversion of formula funds to a DOI Competitive Grant
Program. Local parks and recreation agencies are not merely
amenities; they are essential for the health and the vitality
of the American public. As the authors of this Act clearly
understood nearly 50 years ago when they mandated that 60
percent of LWCF funding should go to the State Assistance
Program, the benefits of this program have been invaluable and
every member of this subcommittee can point to what it has done
to his or her community. Please continue to strengthen this
legacy of conservation for all Americans.
Thank you.
[The statement of Barbara Tulipane follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Barbara.
Katherine.
----------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

THE TRUST FOR PUBLIC LAND

WITNESS

KATHERINE DECOSTER
Ms. DeCoster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
Subcommittee. My name is Kathy DeCoster and I am representing
the Trust for Public Lands today. And I did want to thank the
members of the Subcommittee for the time you spend listening to
the public over these two days and every year. I think it is
unrecognized how much time you spend doing this. I wanted to
say that.
Quickly, we are here to reiterate what many on this panel
have already said, which is support for the Land and Water
Conservation Fund, which in this budget we see it as a balance
between the needs at the federal level and through the State
Grants Programs for parks as Barbara mentioned and also for the
Forest Legacy Program, the Civil War Grants that Jim mentioned,
and the Section 6 Program. All of that money goes to States and
localities to do community-based conservation at that level.
Often people ask why there needs to still be an investment
on the federal level, and I think, you know, we are very
appreciative of the understanding you have of the needs in
Idaho and other members in their own States. I wanted to raise
one example that we are experiencing with the challenges of the
funding level right now at Kennesaw Mountain National
Battlefield Park right outside of Atlanta. We have been working
with a landowner for two years on a property. It was in the
budget last year. It did not get funded. The landowner informed
us last week that they would not be renewing their option and
they are putting it on the market on a short sale. We hope that
does not occur but that is the stress and the strain that is
occurring. They were a very willing landowner, very patient
landowner, and we are afraid that sesquicentennial is 2014 that
we will actually be seeing houses built rather than a great
park celebration. So we hope we can work that out but I just
wanted to point that out.
And then on the issue of the Competitive Grants, you know,
we are in a slightly different place than Barbara is in that
our work at the state and local level creating parks in cities,
we see a need missing. There is not a program directed at urban
parks or parks in cities. When those come up, advocates have to
figure out which program they can go to but there is not one
just for parks and cities. So we see this Competitive Grants
Program as meeting that need, how we balance out, you know,
where it comes from and all that kind of stuff. We look forward
to working with you on trying to figure that out, but there is
an urgent need at the very local level that we see continuing
to be unmet.
And lastly, just wanted to mention quickly the Community
Forest Program. You have appropriated three years increasing
amounts each year so they can finally get the first grant
round-out. There is a huge demand for that. It allows local
communities and tribes to buy forests locally and control them
and generate revenue through sustainable timber harvesting or
outdoor recreation and benefit that local community. So it is
kind of a new program but we appreciate your past support and
hope you will continue to do that.
Thank you.
[The statement of Katherine DeCoster follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thanks, Katherine.
Go ahead, Robert.
----------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

EAST BAY REGIONAL PARK DISTRICT

WITNESS

ROBERT E. DOYLE
Mr. Doyle. Thank you very much, Chairman Simpson and
Ranking Member Moran and members of the Committee. My name is
Robert Doyle. I am the general manager of the East Bay Regional
Park District in Oakland, California. We are the largest and
oldest regional park agency in the Nation. I guess that would
mean that we were the first created. Another way of saying it,
we were created in the Depression and we are mindful of the
Depression and what my parents went through and probably what
your parents went through and what people did to get through
that. So people in the Depression in East Bay decided to create
a park system, a small miracle at that time. And we take that
very seriously.
We operate 65 parks, 100,000 acres, but we also now are
operating state parks, the unprecedented closing of 70 of the
state parks in California because of the budget. So what falls
to the locals is to pick up the slack. So as was mentioned
earlier, our agency and other agencies are trying to step up
and operate state parks. We also operate federal lands, Bureau
of Reclamation lands, Water District lands, things like that.
So we have a long history of competing for money because we are
not a state agency. We are often not even recognized in some of
the grant programs, so we have to really compete.
We also employ 200 young people every year in summer
seasonal jobs. Those young people are getting their college
education goals met by having jobs in parks. Many of them come
back to the institution; many of them go on to better things.
And so we are very happy and that is very important. Kids are
really having a hard time funding their education, and parks
help do that.
We are here today to support funding for stateside LWCF and
LWCF in general and we think it is critical at this time that
stateside funding be increased because of the impact on urban
parks, because of the impact on state park closures, because of
the impact on urban communities. Both rural and urban
communities have felt this recession really tremendously. They
are not traveling as much. They are going to those local parks.
And those local parks, therefore, are really crowded and I
think what I really want to leave you with today is we have a
national crisis on obesity and health for kids.
Mr. Simpson. Oh, thanks for bringing that up.
Mr. Doyle. You are very welcome. But our parks make life
better for families dealing with health. Our parks make life
healthier for kids. And our urban parks create the opportunity
for people to learn about these beautiful lands you have up
here behind you, but they come from cities more and more now
and so stateside LWCF really helps with that.
We do think that a competitive program through Land and
Water Conservation Fund is healthy; competition is healthy. We
know that from what we do and we hope there is a way that we
can find to do that.
We thank you for the time to do that and hope that
specifically that local and regional parks could qualify for
any Competitive grant Program. Thank you very much for your
time.
[The statement of Robert E. Doyle follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. And thank all of you for being here
today. And I am sorry that we have to rush off. We have got
about one minute left in this vote, which means I have to make
it over to the Capitol by then. And by the way, Jim, all of
these pictures are from Idaho.
We will start our next panel at about 12:30 when we
anticipate being done with these votes. Thank you all.
[Recess.]
Mr. Simpson. I apologize for keeping you around for however
the heck long we were over there voting, but unfortunately,
they make us do that every now and then. We appreciate you all
staying and I guess I do not have to call up this panel because
this panel is now up. We appreciate it. It is sometimes hard
getting hearings completed here, especially on the last day of
voting. Normally they do not have votes until one o'clock and
so you can do things in the morning and get them done without
the interruption of votes. But on the last day, they vote
whenever they can because after last votes, people are headed
home for the weekend. So I appreciate you all waiting around.
First of all, Ken Pimlott, Director of the California
Department of Forestry and Fire Protection for the National
Association of State Foresters.
----------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF STATE FORESTERS

WITNESS

KEN PIMLOTT
Mr. Pimlott. Yes, that is me, thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Yes.
Mr. Pimlott. And we know you all are busy so we very much
appreciate the time in allowing us to speak, great opportunity
to represent NASF today.
As State Foresters, we are stewards of over two-thirds of
America's forests in state and private ownership. We deliver
outreach, technical, financial assistance, as well as wildfire
protection--that is a particular issue in the West and
California--in partnership with the Forest Service state and
private forestry programs. Difficult, difficult fiscal times
around the country and State Foresters fully appreciate the
difficult decisions that need to be made relative to spending.
Our fiscal year 2013 funding recommendations are tied to
the priority Forest Action Plans that were approved as part of
last year's Farm Bill. My written statements include a complete
set of our priority recommendations from NASF and include that
as part of our program today and particularly the Forest
Stewardship and Urban and Community Forestry Programs. However,
this afternoon, I just wish to highlight a few of the key areas
that are important to us.
State Forest Action Plans like this one provide an
assessment of forest conditions and trends in each State and
identify the priority rural and urban forest landscape areas
within those States. These plans depend on a robust forest
inventory and analysis program. They are managed by the USDA
Forest Service Research Forest Inventory and Analysis Program
and it provides unbiased data for assessing wildlife risk,
insect and disease threats, and other resource questions which
often span across forest ownerships. And certainly in
California like the West we have multiple small landowners that
make up the bulk of our forest land, and so it is important
that we have the ability to reach out and work with each of
those small and non-industrial as well as industrial
landowners.
NASF recommends an FIA funding level of $69 million for
fiscal year 2013 and supports the proposal to consolidate the
program under the Forest Service Research and Development
Program. We ask that direction be provided to the Forest
Service to look for the most efficient ways to deliver the
program, including contracting with partners such as the State
Foresters who can accomplish necessary fieldwork, oftentimes at
lower costs.
These Forest Action Plans provide long-term strategies for
investing state, federal, and other resources to where they can
make the most impact on the ground. Among the issues that the
Forest Action Plans have identified as priorities include
wildlife preparedness and response. Over 74,000 wild land fires
burned and over 5,200 structures were destroyed in fiscal year
2011 alone. State fire assistance funding helps communities
prepare for, mitigate, and respond to wildlife threats. And
this is certainly important and critical to California as well
as the West. We have invested numerous state fire assistance
dollars both in urban interface vegetation treatments to help
those communities in the Sierra Foothills that are plagued by
wildfire, as well as in Southern California we have focused
equipping and training firefighters in a regional training
facility that help not only Cal fire but our local and federal
partners in the region.
NASF supports funding for the program at no less than
current enacted levels of $86 million and endorses the proposal
to consolidate the program into one line item under wild land
fire management. This recommended funding level was also
endorsed by a broad coalition of stakeholders, and we ask that
the March 19 letter be entered into the record.
Mr. Simpson. It will be.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pimlott. Thank you.
The State Forest Action Plans also identify forest health
threats as a major priority around the country. Hundreds of
invasive pests and diseases damage our Nation's forests every
year. The Forest Action Plans utilize funding from the
Cooperative Forest Health Management Program to maintain
healthy and productive forest ecosystems. Again, California
like the West is facing a number of forest pest, insect, and
disease issues. As an example, the gold-spotted oak borer is
attacking thousands of native oak trees in the San Diego area
and there is the potential for that to spread throughout many
of the native oaks in California creating significant fire
hazard and, you know, devastation to the ecosystem and wildlife
habitats. So just one of many issues that the Forest Health
Program is focusing on and assisting us with in California.
NASF supports the proposed consolidation of that program,
Forest Health Program, under State and private forestry and
urges the program to be at the fiscal year 2012 enacted levels.
The program at current levels is also supported by many diverse
organizations, and we also ask that our letter of March 19 on
that be entered into the record.
Mr. Simpson. It will be.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pimlott. Thank you.
NASF supports the proposed landscapes scale restoration
line item with the understanding expressed in the fiscal year
2013 budget. One, that the current competitive process would be
formalized; and two, that options for providing flexibility for
the State Foresters to apply cooperative forestry funding to
respond to priorities in their Forest Action Plans are not
eliminated. It is critical that we have that ability to utilize
that funding in those plans.
NASF greatly appreciates and requests the continued support
from the Subcommittee to further explore options for States to
apply federal funds in the highest-priority areas. We believe
this can be accomplished through the new landscape scale
restoration line item, as well as other flexible spending
options under the Cooperative Forestry Program.
In conclusion, we recognize again the difficult budget
climate and are not recommending any funding increases in our
priority programs. The Cooperative Forest Programs we deliver
are matched dollar for dollar at the state and local level,
really leveraging those funds in significant return on the
federal investment.
Again, I thank you for the opportunity to testify today and
happy to answer any questions or further information if you
would like.
[The statement of Ken Pimlott follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. You get your funding from both
State government and Federal Government, right?
Mr. Pimlott. Correct.
Mr. Simpson. What has happened to the State government
funding over the last several years?
Mr. Pimlott. California, like many other States, are facing
significant fiscal crisis. Our department alone in the last 2
years has faced about an $80 million reduction primarily to our
fire protection program but we have also had to close the last
of our forest nurseries and we have had to scale back some of
our Forestry Assistance Programs again as we try to be more
efficient and consolidate. But we are facing some difficult
times with our budget. And the funding from these programs are
critical to help offset some of those cuts. We are able to
again leverage these dollars with what we have to really make
it go further and continue to support some of the programs that
we may not be able to do otherwise.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Next, we have Tom Martin, President and CEO of the American
Forest Foundation.
----------                              --
--------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

AMERICAN FOREST FOUNDATION

WITNESS

TOM MARTIN
Mr. Martin. Thank you, sir. Good to see you again.
Mr. Simpson. Good to see you.
Mr. Martin. Thanks for having us here and I appreciate your
taking time out of such a busy schedule. I know it is tough,
these things----
Mr. Simpson. No problem, this is what we do.
Mr. Martin. And we are darn glad you are doing it.
The American Forest Foundation, as you probably remember,
works on the ground with educators, with policymakers, and with
landowners to make them better stewards. Our American Tree Farm
System has 90,000 members across the country, 27 million acres,
and all of them produce sustainably managed timber, certified
to international standards. In addition, our Project Learning
Tree Program work provides professional development for 30,000
educators a year in environmental education. So that is what we
do, who we are. You have got my testimony so I do not really
want to reiterate that but maybe a couple of stories.
I was out in Idaho earlier this week; I was in Moscow at
the Idaho Forest Owners Association meeting and gave the
keynote out there. But what was cool is I got a chance to talk
to Steve and Janet Funk. Now, they are the national outstanding
tree farmers of the year that steal sponsors. Terrific stuff.
And why do they get it? Why is their forestry better than
anybody else's? Well, a big part of it is they see their land
being absolutely interdependent with that of their neighbors',
including the Forest Service, the state-owned lands, as well as
other private lands. And a few years ago--they have this
beautiful creek, Wolf Lodge Creek, big blowout because there
had been a massive clear-cut up on the public forest land. The
runoff came in, blew everything out. And they were able to use
stewardship dollars to begin to get together a plan to restore
the creek. They put in most of the money to make it work. There
is a little bit of EQIP dollars in it but almost all of it was
theirs. And then using stewardship dollars, they were able to
get the State Service Foresters to work with the other
neighbors and come up with a restoration plan for the entire
creek.
The Stewardship Program is one we think is terrific because
in so many ways it is the glue that holds together the forestry
that happens on the ground, its connection to clean water, its
connection to clean air, good habitat and, yeah, good-paying
jobs. So for us, it is that kind of investment that brings
together States, private folks, and the Federal Government in a
way that really allows us to address problems.
The other kind of help that it gives is in areas of
interdependency, and Idaho, what, 80 percent of the forest land
is publicly owned? But there is this interdependency. If you
are going to fight the tussock moth, if you are going to fight
the emerald ash borer, you have got to figure out how to get
everybody to play in the game. The help that folks get there is
enormous through the Service Foresters that are supported by
the Stewardship Program. So we hope that you guys will give due
consideration to that program.
As well, I would like echo Ken's support for the research
portion of the Forest Service budget. All of us depend on that
to make good long-term decisions.
So with that, thank you. I am happy to answer any
questions.
[The statement of Tom Martin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. I appreciate you being here today,
Tom.
Robert Malmsheimer----
Mr. Malmsheimer. Yes.
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. Ph.D., J.D., Chairman, Committee
of Forest Policy, the Society of American Foresters.
----------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

SOCIETY OF AMERICAN FORESTERS

WITNESS

ROBERT MALMSHEIMER
Mr. Malmsheimer. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Good afternoon.
Mr. Malmsheimer. How are you today?
Mr. Simpson. Good.
Mr. Malmsheimer. My name is Bob Malmsheimer. I am a
professor at the State University of New York, College of
Environmental Science and Forestry in Syracuse. I am here today
to testify on behalf of the Society of American Foresters, SAF.
My testimony will focus on three key areas that directly affect
programs within the Department of Interior and Forest Service
budgets, forest health on public and private lands, barriers to
active forest management, and specific budget recommendations.
I will start with forest health.
Annual growth on U.S. forests is 32 percent higher than
annual removals and greater than harvest immortality combined.
This in part has led to the need for restoration on 65 to 82
million acres of national forest. We are encouraged by the
Forest Service's goal to complete 4 million acres of
restoration in 2012. But this is not enough to address the
threats to forest ecosystems and the surrounding rural
communities. Constraints on forests and forest management have
led to a steady decline in the forestry-related jobs sector.
From 2005 to 2010, the U.S. lost 920,000 primary and secondary
forest jobs. U.S. annual timber harvests are at their lowest
level since 1960s. The lack of production has led to more than
1,000 mill closures from 2005 to 2009 and lowered production
levels below the 50 percent capacity at the remaining mills.
Congress took steps to increase restoration and forest
treatments last year by requiring the Forest Service to
increase National Forest System timber harvest from 2.4 billion
board feet to 3 billion board feet. SAF supports this effort.
Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Um-hum.
Mr. Malmsheimer. I would like to next speak about one of
the perceived barriers to active forest management--the Equal
Access to Justice Act, also known as EAJA. Last year, the
Committee included report language in its budget recommendation
that addressed the complexity and conflicts often associated
with EAJA. A recent study that examined Forest Service EAJA
payments by Dr. Michael Mortimer and myself demonstrates the
need for this language. Our results documented that EAJA fee
records differ considerably among agencies. Given these
inconsistencies and the controversy surrounding EAJA payments,
SAF supports the inclusion of reporting requirements in this
year's budget.
I would like to finish today with SAF budget
recommendations on several of our top priorities. SAF
recommends that Congress support FIA at no less than $69
million for fiscal year 2013. SAF supports the Forest Service's
state and private forestry funding, including Forest Health
Management for both federal and cooperative lands. We recommend
funding at fiscal year 2012 enacted levels of $112 million.
SAF supports the Administration's request to permanently
reauthorize stewardship contracting within the Forest Service
budget. SAF also commends the Administration for its request to
fully fund the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration
Program at $40 million. Hazardous Fuels funding is a critical
component to Forest Service and DOI fuels reduction efforts.
SAF recommends maintaining the fiscal year 2012 funding levels
of $318 million for the Forest Service and $184 million for
DOI.
Forest product funding is important to SAF and its members
also. If Congress does not fund the proposed Integrated
Resource Restoration line item, SAF recommends funding the
budget line item at enacted 2012 fiscal year levels.
I would like to close by noting that the 41 percent
decrease in the BLM's Public Domain Program would reduce from
80 to approximately 50 employees, the employees that are
managing 60 million forested acres. SAF recommends funding this
program at enacted fiscal year 2012 levels.
We also have two additional documents supporting elements
of my testimony that we would like to submit for the record.
Mr. Simpson. You bet.
Mr. Malmsheimer. And I would like to thank you for the
opportunity and I would welcome any questions that you have.
[The statement of Robert Malmsheimer follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. You bring up a couple of really
good points about the EAJA funding. The reason we got on that
is because nobody could really tell us who was paying out these
funds. One time I asked the former chief of the Forest Service,
when they go out and make any given decision--whether to, you
know, do a timber sale or whatever--how much of the money is
spent on making what they believe to be a good, sound
scientific decision and how much trying to make it bulletproof
from lawsuits? And he said between 25 and 50 percent is making
a decision; between 50 and 75 percent is probably made in
trying to make it bulletproof. Would we all not be better off
if those resources--or at least a majority of those resources--
were used in managing public lands rather than in courts? We
are trying to get a handle on that but first we have to find
out where the money is going which is why we put the EAJA
language in there.
Stewardship contracting is something that I think everybody
on this committee supports. We ran into a budgetary problem
last year with the Budget Committee and how it scored and all
that kind of just gobbledygook nonsense. But we are going to
still push forward with that and try to get it done.
Mr. Malmsheimer. Great.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Bill--hi, Bill. The executive director of the Federal
Forest Resources Coalition--do you want to say your last name
for me?
Mr. Imbergamo. Sure. It is Imbergamo.
Mr. Simpson. Imbergamo. I would have screwed it up totally;
that is why I did not say it.
Mr. Imbergamo. There are debates within my family about the
pronunciation so I do not take offense.
----------                              --
--------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

FEDERAL FOREST RESOURCE COALITION

WITNESS

WILLIAM IMBERGAMO
Mr. Imbergamo. Appreciate the opportunity to be here on
behalf of the Federal Forest Resource Coalition. Our members
are mostly family-owned sawmills, mostly independent sawmills
around the country. We have over 650 member companies with
350,000 workers and $19 billion in payroll, including Idaho
Forest Group. Bob Bay from Idaho Forest Group is on my board.
And we appreciate the support you and this Subcommittee have
shown for sustainable management on these lands. Obviously,
these are the lands that we need to be sustainably managed. Our
mills are the ones that have to do business with the Forest
Service and we have survived this downturn and we would like to
persist into the future and be there for the Forest Service so
they can actually manage their lands.
Sustainably managing these lands produces a lot of
benefits. I do not need to tell you. You are from Idaho; it
produces habitat, it produces clean water, and it produces jobs
in our rural communities. And they can do more and the chiefs
acknowledge this with the announcement in February about
increasing the pace of management.
And while we appreciate that announcement that would
involve both the chief and the secretary, we do not think it
goes either far or fast enough. At the current pace that they
proposed in February for treatment, it will take them 59 years
to treat the 12.5 million acres that they identified as needing
mechanical treatment. And as I have talked with staff about
there are several Forest Service studies out there that show
the actual acreage that needs treatment is considerably higher
than that. To do this, they have got to reduce their unit
costs.
They spend--I think Region 1, which includes north Idaho--I
was just in a meeting with the deputy regional forester and
they spend $35 million on NEPA compliance and they do about
7,500 acres in mechanical treatment a year. That is not
tenable. So we have been trying to work with them to find ways
of reducing these unit costs and they are making as many
administrative steps as they can that we think some new
authorities, quite designation by description, which they are
currently using on stewardship contracts, using those in normal
timber sales would be a way of reducing unit costs. They are
frequently spending an awful lot of money marking trees that
are very low value. In essence, they are still running the
program as if it was a 12 billion board-foot program with very
valuable timber when the reality is it is much smaller than
that.
We are very thankful for your efforts in directing the
Agency to increase outputs to 3.0 billion board feet in 2012
and we urge you to continue raising the bar for them in the
fiscal year 2013 budget and set a goal of 3.5 billion board
feet to be right now less than 10 percent of growth and less
than half of the ASQs on the existing forest plans. You know,
this activity takes place in counties that frequently have 20
percent or more unemployment and where poverty averages well
above state averages, even in some States where some of the
poverty rates are pretty stunning.
We do urge the Committee to make some new investments in
National Forest Timber Management. The program has not received
an increase since about 2008 and overhead, including cost
pools, is eating up 124 million or 37 percent of the program.
To help them keep moving in the right direction, we urge you to
move that up by 36 million to 371 million and set that target
of 3.5 billion board feet.
Our other two key priorities are restoring if possible the
cuts in Capital Improvement and Maintenance roads budget and in
the wild land Hazardous Fuels Reduction Program. We have
millions of acres throughout the mountain west that did not
improve in condition dramatically since 2011 and there is a
real backlog and they need to keep making that investment.
And we also oppose the Administration's blanket prohibition
on new roads. This would prevent the Agency from doing even
prudent steps like relocating poorly designed or poorly located
roads. So combined with more efforts to reduce NEPA compliance
costs--and by the way, the Natural Resources Committee asked
the Forest Service what they were spending on NEPA compliance,
and nationwide I think the number that I got was $356 million,
which is more than they are spending on state and private
forestry and more than they are spending on Forest Service
research----
Mr. Simpson. Yeah.
Mr. Imbergamo [continuing]. Right now. So, you know, a more
focused effort to reduce NEPA compliance cost, collaboration
that involves timber sales and hazardous fuel reduction will
help improve the health of all the National Forests. We
recognize that you are in a tough fiscal situation. Obviously,
that has kind of been a refrain today. It has not been in the
headlines this week either. But we think that a big part of
that solution would be stopping the investments in land
acquisition. We understand the priority that some place on this
but right now it does not make sense to be cutting the
management and infrastructure that you need to be acquiring new
lands.
Last year was a demonstration of the relationship between
forest health and all users of the forests, not just my
members, the recreationists. The fires in Arizona destroyed
hundreds of recreation cabins and caused the cancellation of
4th of July celebrations. There are still lots of campgrounds
and roads that are closed. There is a campground owner in the
Black Hills who is spending $100,000 a year to try to keep pine
beetles out of his campground. And then the Pagami Creek fire
in Minnesota closed the Boundary Waters Canoe Area for the
majority of August and September last year.
So hikers, hunters, skiers all want healthy, green and
growing forests and that is what my members need as well. And
investing in managing those forests does not just yield timber
to the mills I work for; it yields healthier forests for all
those users.
So I appreciate the chance to be here and I appreciate the
chance to be with some of my colleagues.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Bill.
Mr. Imbergamo. And thank you for letting us come out.
[The statement of William Imbergamo follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Appreciate your testimony. Thank you.
Elena Daly.
Ms. Daly. Daly.
Mr. Simpson. Daly, you are up.
Ms. Daly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. You bet.
Ms. Daly. How do I turn this on?
Mr. Simpson. There you go.
Ms. Daly. There I go. Okay.
----------                              --
--------

Thursday, March 22, 2012.

PUBLIC LANDS FOUNDATION

WITNESS

ELENA DALY
Ms. Daly. I really do appreciate the opportunity to address
you and the Committee, present the views from the Public Lands
Foundation. And as you may know, we are a nonprofit
organization with more than 700 members, primarily BLM
employees who remain engaged and interested in public lands
issues. We are independent of the Bureau, although we support
it. Sometimes we are a little too independent. That is okay and
really want to help make the Bureau's job better.
Some of the most significant management challenges facing
the Bureau, as you are well aware, is urban development and the
increased demand for access and use of public lands by a
growing population, particularly in the West. And the BLM's
customers are as diverse as the natural resources it manages.
The public lands provide the Nation with opportunities for
expanding the development of renewable energy, as well as
traditional needs for oil, natural gas, coal, non-energy
minerals, grazing land, and timber. Recreation, wildlife, wild
horses, cultural resources, and special places are also
significant attributes. And I know you are aware of that with
what Idaho has particularly.
Management activities contribute to the vitality of state
and local economies generating an expected $4.5 billion in
2012, primarily from energy development.
PLF, like everybody else, recognizes the reality of the
funding constraints and the need to reduce the federal budget
deficit. In general, we feel the Administration is seeking a
very constrained budget in consideration of the fiscal issues
being faced, and in that light, we are pleased with several
aspects of the overall budget.
The America's Great Outdoors Initiative would provide
funding for some of BLM's most underfunded programs--
Recreation, Cultural Resources, and the National Landscape
Conservation System. The NLCS is a unique compilation of
incredible landscapes within the BLM's National System of
Public Lands, which have been designated for their outstanding
cultural, ecological, and scientific values. We feel that the
management of NLCS has long been under-funded.
We believe that BLM's energy programs need to be fully
funded as well. These programs generate the bulk of receipts
from the public lands, can have significant impacts on the
ground, and should be primarily funded from appropriations or
the receipts generated by the leases. Increased oil and gas
inspections are important and must be funded, but we are very
concerned that some of the new fees being proposed are coming
ahead of the actual legislative proposals where the program
changes could be fully vetted.
Of particular concern is production accountability to
ensure that all producers of energy or minerals under the
Mineral Leasing Act and Federal Land Policy and Management Act
are accurately reporting their production to the United States.
More funding for this purpose would mean improved oversight and
ultimately more money for the U.S. Treasury.
The potential listing of the sage grouse as an endangered
species has major implications for energy development and other
uses of BLM public lands. It is essential that the BLM's
funding increase be supported so that it can continue to make
progress in preventing the need to list the sage grouse.
We believe the Abandoned Mine Lands fees combined with a
proposed budget increase will provide a process to begin
reclaiming both the safety and environmental hazards that
remain after 150 years of hard rock mining on millions of acres
in the West and are also pleased to see increases in several
other programs which are listed in my testimony for you.
We are really pleased that in recent testimony before
Congress, the Secretary announced a scaled-back proposal for
the realignment of functions of the Office of Surface Mining,
Reclamation and Enforcement, and the BLM. There was simply too
much opposition to this effort.
However, we do have some concerns. We are very concerned
about Rangeland Management Program. We know that administrative
costs are being driven up by numerous factors, not the least of
which is the cost of litigation. And while we support BLM's
proposed pilot grazing administrative processing fee of $1 per
animal unit month to assist the BLM in processing permits, we
are very concerned with the proposed reduction in the Rangeland
Management Program for administration of livestock grazing. The
reduction far exceeds the increased revenue from the pilot
program and will deeply impair the BLM's ability to meet its
legal requirements on the ground. We believe funding for this
program should be restored.
We are also concerned about the reduction of $12.4 million
from the Alaska Conveyance Program and we consider it to be
devastating to the BLM in Alaska and the U.S. Government's
commitment to the State of Alaska, the Native Corporations and
individual native allottees to transfer lands that have been
promised to them for over 40 years. This would be roughly a 20
percent reduction in land transfer capability and will result
not only in reductions in force but the loss of many of the
Survey Contracts that go to individual villages in Alaska.
And last but certainly not least, while we are pleased that
the Administration has requested sufficient funds to support
efforts for the Wild Horse program, we remain dismayed at the
seemingly unsolvable issues that continue to haunt efforts to
maintain healthy horses on healthy ranges. We would like to see
Congress step in at some point and write more effective
legislation and provide specific guidance, particularly to
resolve the issue of spending many millions of dollars
maintaining unadoptable horses. The current situation is simply
not sustainable.
Mr. Chairman, we hope these comments and concerns assist
you in your deliberations for the budget for BLM and we remain
sincere in our efforts to assure proper management of for the
National System of Public Lands. Thank you.
[The statement of Elena Daly follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. And thank you for your testimony.
We, too, are dismayed by the proposed reductions in Rangeland
Management. We have been trying to put resources in there so
that the BLM can adequately manage range. The proposed
reductions are unacceptable as far as I am concerned, but we
will see how the Committee reacts when we start putting this
budget together once we find out what our allocation is going
to be.
Ms. Daly. Um-hum.
Mr. Simpson. If you can find a solution for these sources,
let me know.
Ms. Daly. I have several but none would be popular.
Mr. Simpson. That is exactly the problem. I thought maybe
we ought to just give them over to--what is her name? Madeleine
Pickens----
Ms. Daly. Ms. Pickens.
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. Who wants to take them over.
Ms. Daly. At one point we offered them to the Forest
Service but they were not interested.
Mr. Simpson. You mentioned in your testimony how much of
the forest land in this country is private and state versus how
much is the Federal Government's. What was that percentage?
Mr. Pimlott. Two-thirds. And I would probably have to defer
to staff or the other panel members to get you exact numbers.
Maybe Tom knows the----
Mr. Martin. Yeah, it is about almost 60 percent of the land
is privately owned forested landscape, and most of that is
owned not by the Plum Creeks or the warehouses or the IFTs. It
is owned by family forest owners.
Mr. Simpson. It is really surprising. I had never really
thought about it before and one day I saw a map that showed all
the forested lands in the country and listed how much of them
were privately owned and state-owned and how much of them were
owned by the Forest Service. In the West it is primarily Forest
Service and in the East, it is almost all privately owned.
Mr. Pimlott. And California is kind of a mix. It is about
one-third federal land, one-third private ownership, which is
predominantly what we as the State Forester in California
protect and the remaining third are in local government and
incorporated cities. And so it is true everybody thinks of
forest land, big companies; well, certainly in California and
other parts of the West it is the small landowner that makes up
again in California probably two-thirds of the ownership of
forest land is the small landowner.
Mr. Simpson. Did you put these plans together?
Mr. Pimlott. Yes. And every State under this Farm Bill has
one.
Mr. Simpson. Do they then use that to determine where fuels
reductions would be----
Mr. Pimlott. Yes.
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. Most effective and so forth?
Mr. Pimlott. Correct. We identify our priorities as
required under this and that is where we focus--we actually
take this as our parent document and then build a state fire
plan to mirror these priorities so that we can implement it
across the State.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. Jim, welcome. Do you have any questions
or anything?
Mr. Moran. No, I am fine, Mike.
Mr. Simpson. We thank you for being here today. It is, as
each of you mentioned, a tight budget year and I do not see
anything in the foreseeable future but tight budget years until
we get our deficit under control, but there are certainly some
important programs in our bill and we appreciate your input.
And as we work through our budget, we will certainly keep those
issues and your testimony in mind. Thank you.
Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

TESTIMONY OF INTERESTED INDIVIDUALS AND ORGANIZATIONS

PUBLIC WITNESSES--AMERICAN INDIANS AND ALASKA NATIVES

Mr. Simpson. The Committee will come to order.
Mr. Moran is apparently on his way and will be here in a
few minutes, but good morning and welcome to the first of three
public witness hearings specifically for American Indians and
Alaska Native programs. Despite a somewhat abbreviated hearing
schedule this year, I am proud that the Subcommittee is able to
hold hearings on these very important programs. They have been
and will continue to be a funding priority for this
Subcommittee in a bipartisan way.
The chair will call each panel of witnesses to the table
one panel at a time. Each witness will be provided with 5
minutes to present their testimony. We will be using a timer to
track the progress of each witness. When the button turns
yellow, the witnesses will have 1 minute remaining to conclude
his or her remarks. Members will be provided an opportunity to
ask questions of our witnesses, but in the interest of time,
the chair requests that we keep things moving in order to
conclude this morning's testimony at a reasonable hour.
I am happy now to yield to my good friend from Virginia,
Mr. Moran, for any remarks he may have.
Mr. Moran. Amen. Let's get on with the hearing.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. Let me tell you, I am going to screw up
so many names today. Do not be offended by it.
The first panel will be Jefferson Keel, President of the
National Congress of American Indians; Stacy Bohlen, National
Indian Health Board; D'Shane Barnett, the National Council of
Urban Indian Health; Brooklyn Baptiste, the Nez Perce Tribal
Executive Committee, Tino Batt, Council Member and Treasurer of
the Fort Hall Business Council; and Affie Ellis and Tom Gede,
Commissioners of the Tribal Law and Order Commission. Did I get
those all somewhat correct? Everybody pretty much knew who they
were?
Mr. Moran. Thank you all for making the effort to come
here. You know, we are here every day, but I know it takes a
lot of logistics and cost and disruptions in your schedules to
get here, but Chairman Simpson and I very much appreciate this
opportunity to hear from you. It is very important to us and we
do appreciate the effort.
Mr. Simpson. It is not easy to get here from Idaho. You
have to take a boat down the Missouri and then--no, I am just
kidding.
Tom, do you have any opening statement?
Mr. Cole. No.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. Mr. Keel, you are up first.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

NATIONAL CONGRESS OF AMERICAN INDIANS

WITNESS

JEFFERSON KEEL
Mr. Keel. Good morning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Moran, Representative Cole. Thank you for the
opportunity to allow us to testify this morning. This is an
important matter, and we certainly appreciate all that you do
on behalf of Indian Country. My name is Jefferson Keel. I am
the President of the National Congress of American Indians, and
I am the Lieutenant Governor of the Chickasaw Nation, and I am
honored to be here on behalf of Indian Country.
In my role as the National Congress of American Indians'
President, I have an opportunity to visit with tribal leaders
across the country, and I know that you will hear significant
testimony from many of those tribal leaders today, so I will
abbreviate my time here and summarize mine as quickly as
possible.
Mr. Simpson. Your written remarks will be included in the
record.
Mr. Keel. Thank you, sir.
Recommendations from Indian Country that were included in
the President's fiscal year 2013 proposal include increases for
contract support costs, some natural resources and
environmental protection programs, public safety initiatives,
and Contract Health Services. While the Administration's budget
proposal maintains support for many critical programs, some
cuts proposed represent significant setbacks to progress in
Indian Country such as for education construction. NCAI looks
forward to working with this Subcommittee to ensure that
federal programs that fulfill the trust responsibilities to
tribes continue to receive bipartisan support in the
appropriations process.
Indian Country recognizes the state of the economy, the
pressures on government at all levels, and the related
challenges for job seekers. Tribes take the responsibility to
manage federal funds as seriously as we do the federal trust
responsibility to provide them, and we propose the following
general recommendations for the fiscal year 2013 budget.
Continue to promote successful efficient initiatives in
Indian Country that work such as self-determination programs.
Critical to implementing these policies are the Bureau of
Indian Affairs' funding streams for tribal priority
allocations, contract support costs at the BIA and the Indian
Health Service, and tribal grant support costs for tribal
schools. NCAI also urges Congress to support legislation that
will fully restore the Secretary of Interior's authority to
take land into trust for tribes, particularly regarding the
Carcieri decision. We urge Congress to retain the language
included in the President's budget addressing the Carcieri
decision.
I would like to discuss public safety and justice at the
BIA. NCAI supports Interior's Protecting Indian Country
Initiative and the Priority Goal to reduce violent crime in
Indian communities. Since its inception, there has been a 35
percent overall decrease in violent crime across the four
tribal communities, far exceeding the 5 percent goal. The
successful program is now being expanded to two additional
Recovery Act. We would like to see it expanded even further to
reach even more tribes.
In the Indian Health Service, we commend the Administration
for including targeted funding increases that have long been a
priority for the Tribal Budget Workgroup such as for Contract
Health Services, staffing and contract support costs. While all
these increases are much needed, the IHS budget remains
woefully short of providing full funding to the IHS system.
A very concerning cut is in Indian school construction. The
fiscal year 2013 budget request for construction programs is
$17.7 million below fiscal year 2012, eliminating new school
construction. NCAI urges this funding to be restored. All
students in America deserve a safe, secure and culturally
appropriate environment in which to attend school.
A reduction affecting economic development is the proposed
reduction to the Indian Guaranteed Loan Program, which would be
reduced by $2.1 million. This program is the most appropriate
and urgently needed source of financing for business and energy
and other economic development in Indian Country. NCAI
encourages Congress to restore funding for the Indian
Guaranteed Loan Program.
We would also like to note that the President's budget
includes a rather large reduction due to streamlining measures
in the BIA, $19.7 million in streamlining measures and $13.8
million in administrative savings. We would urge respectfully
that caution be taken when cutting so deeply into the BIA
functions.
We look forward to working with the Members of Congress to
continue to build upon our successes. Tribal leaders urge
Congress to uphold its solemn promises to tribes, even as
policymakers seek to reduce the deficit through spending
reductions and revenue generation, and we look forward to again
working with this Committee and any other of your staff to
continue that progress. Thank you again.
[The statement of Jefferson Keel follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Thank you for being here.
Stacy.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

NATIONAL INDIAN HEALTH BOARD

WITNESS

STACY A. BOHLEN
Ms. Bohlen. Chairman Simpson, Ranking Member Moran, who is
my long-time Congressman, and Congressman Cole, thank you so
much for allowing me to be here today on behalf of the National
Indian Health Board. Our organization serves all 566 federally
recognized tribes solely on the provision of health care for
American Indians and Alaska Natives and improving that health
care. My name is Stacy Bohlen. I am the Executive Director of
the National Indian Health Board. I am a Sault Ste. Marie
Chippewa from Michigan, and today my remarks will only be about
the Indian Health Service 2013 budget.
The National Indian Health Board is very grateful to this
Congress and to this Administration for the 6 percent increase
in funding to the Indian Health Service in 2012. The recent
increases over the past year have made but small real gains in
health for our people, and together we must protect and advance
the progress that we have made.
For fiscal year 2013, for the IHS budget, we were pleased
to learn that the Administration recommends a $116 million
increase over fiscal year 2012. Under the new discretionary
limits with 3 percent increases, that is significant, and it
represents the continued commitment of the United States to
honor its legal obligations and the sacred trust responsibility
to American Indians and Alaska Natives. However, the increase
only allows for the continuation of IHS's current services.
While we recognize the budget realities we face as a Nation, we
urge this Congress to adopt funding levels for the Indian
Health Service that are closer to the fiscal year 2013 National
Tribal Budget Formulation Workgroup's recommendations, which
President Keel mentioned in his testimony as well. This
workgroup recommends preserving the basic health care programs
currently being funded and that would require an increase. The
funding levels that are needed to enable the Indian health
system to simply continue operating at its current level of
service. Also contained in this category are the binding
obligations that represent financial commitments previously
made by the Indian Health Service. Without these increases,
IHS's system would experience a decrease in its ability to care
for its current service population.
Inflation, both medical and non-medical, and population
growth, we urge you also to please consider this. Funding for
IHS programs has not kept pace with inflation. Medicare and
Medicaid accrue 5 to 10 percent increases. Not true for IHS.
NIHB urges this Congress to consider inflation during the
appropriations process, and we recommend a $59.9 million
increase just to address those costs.
The Indian Health Service currently serves 2 million
American Indian and Alaska Natives, and the service population
increases at an average of 2 percent per year. In accordance
with the Tribal Workgroup's recommendations, we propose a $52.4
million increase to the current services to account for
population growth.
Another majority priority under current services is funding
for contract support costs, as the president mentioned. Native
nations in all areas operate one or more such contracts, and
the ability of tribes to successfully operate their own health
care systems, whether they be substance abuse or entire medical
systems and hospitals, depends on this contract support cost
funding. The workgroup recommends addressing the CHS shortfalls
with full funding.
A current major service priority is funding for health care
facilities construction for the 5-year plan. The workgroup's
recommendations include $343 million for previously approved
health facility construction projects in accordance with the
Indian Health Service health care facilities fiscal year 2012
plan construction budget. Unfortunately, the Administration's
request does not reflect this binding obligation. NIHB along
with the tribes supports a $343 million increase for this
purpose.
Significant program increases are required to address the
overwhelming health needs in Indian Country. The recommended
increases are targeted and very realistic. The workgroup
recommends $688 million be added to identified programs and
facilities accounts. Under that increase is the Contract Health
Service program, and it is a major priority. Unfortunately,
this program is so grossly underfunded that Indian Country
cannot purchase the quantity and types of care needed for our
people, and many of our patients are left untreated and often
with very painful conditions that if addressed in a timely way
would both improve the quality of life and do so at a lower
cost, and the workgroup proposes, and we support, a $200
million increase for Contract Health Services.
Behavioral health was identified uniformly as a top
national priority. We propose an $80 million increase. I think
the Committee is aware that suicide is the number two cause of
death of our children. It is an untenable statistic that needs
to be addressed. This would go a long way toward helping with
that goal.
We also respectfully request that the Subcommittee work to
exempt the Indian Health Service from budget cuts, freezes or
sequestration. Should sequestration occur, there is some
protection for the Indian Health Service under the Budget
Control Act but the consequences of these reductions will be
tangible in terms of loss of life when it comes to American
Indian and Alaska Native health. So we urge you to work and
commit to protecting the Indian Health Service and our people
from budget cuts and sequestration.
Finally, we ask Congress to work toward full funding of IHS
and make a long-term commitment to that goal. IHS is currently
funded at about 56 percent of its true need. In 2010, IHS
spending for medical care was about $2,700 per person, and the
average federal health care expenditure was about $7,200 per
person. And on behalf of all the 566 federally recognized
tribes, we ask the federal government to design and implement
true funding that will fully fund the Indian Health Service.
Thank you very much for your time today and for allowing me
to make these remarks on behalf of our people.
[The statement of Stacy Bohlen follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Stacy. We appreciate it.
D'Shane.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

NATIONAL COUNCIL OF URBAN INDIAN HEALTH

WITNESS

D'SHANE BARNETT
Mr. Barnett. Good morning. My name is D'Shane Barnett. I
currently serve as the Executive Director of the National
Council of Urban Indian Health, also known as NCUIH. On behalf
of our 36 member organizations and the more than 160,000 urban
Indians that our programs serve annually, I appreciate the
opportunity to provide testimony today for the House Interior
Appropriations Subcommittee.
This year, NCUIH would like to make two recommendations
regarding the critical challenges facing our health programs.
First, we are requesting additional funding for the Urban
Indian Health Program line item. Funding for the Title V line
item currently stands at $42.9 million. This number is
estimated to represent approximately one-quarter of the total
health care need faced by Native American and Alaska Native
people who are living in urban areas. While NCUIH respectfully
and strenuously advocates for full funding of the entire Indian
health system, we find it necessary to point out that for the
past two fiscal years, the breakdown of the Congressional
appropriations process and relentless pressure to cut spending
has resulted in two consecutive years of reductions to the
Urban Indian Health Program line item. These reductions
threaten our base funding and limit our ability to provide
services to American Indians and Alaska Natives living in
America's cities.
In addition, the fiscal year 2012 IHS budget eliminated
nearly $1 million in grant funding that our urban communities
relied upon for health promotion, disease prevention, sexual
assault and domestic violence prevention, health care services
for our elders, long-term care, and health services for women,
children and youth, the most vulnerable members of our
communities. These cuts have forced our programs to discontinue
services to our patients and to lay off staff at a time when
employment and job creation are more important than ever.
In addition, the challenges posed by health care reform
will require that all of our programs acquire the staff and
resources necessary to bill private insurance offered through
state exchanges and public insurance like Medicaid, Medicare
and CHIP. Cuts to state budgets and dwindling grant
opportunities make our Title V base funding even more important
during these difficult times. In light of the imminent
challenges facing the urban Indian health programs from health
care reform, the bleak budget environment on both state and
federal levels, and emerging census data that is showing that
more than two-thirds of American Indians and Alaska Natives are
living in urban areas, NCUIH respectfully requests an increase
to the Urban Indian Health Program line item of $15 million,
bringing total funding to $58 million. This increase is needed
to offset the loss of both public and private funding
opportunities to compensate for the loss of State funding,
given relentless state budget cuts, to enable all of our
programs to access third-party insurance dollars as health care
reform is implemented and to remedy the longstanding
underfunding of the urban Indian health line item.
Second, NCUIH would like to call attention to the
precarious situation faced by our residential treatment
centers, or RTCs. RTCs promote healing and wellness in the
American Indian community by providing a continuum of substance
abuse prevention, treatment and recovery services that
integrate traditional American Indian healing practices with
state-of-the-art clinical substance abuse treatment
methodology. RTCs offer a variety of culturally competent
services such as talking circles, sweat lodges and other
ceremonies that have thousands of years of proven success for
our people. Traditional medicine and traditional healers are
made available to our patients, and many of these patients do
not reside in urban areas but travel from their reservation to
our programs because of the quality of the services that we are
able to provide and the holistic and traditional medical care
we can offer. Our RTCs create an environment of culturally
appropriate support for patients that are seeking to recover
from drug and alcohol addictions. By integrating patient
medical care into a structured social support network, RTCs
assist patients in recovering from their illness and
rehabilitating their lives. RTCs reduce overall health care
costs, help people recover from their addictions, return to
their jobs, stay off public assistance and form positive
relationships with their communities.
In the past, most of our RTCs have relied on state funding
to augment modest funding from the Indian Health Service. As
states are forced to make cuts in services due to their budget
shortfalls, residential treatment programs have been frequently
targeted for elimination. One example, in Portland, they have
reduced $1.25 million to a single RTC. In Seattle, cuts took
place in November of 2011 that resulted in a 50 percent loss of
long-term funding, which equaled a reduction of 10 beds and a
layoff of residential treatment staff who have now had to seek
other employment or rely on public assistance.
In conclusion, I would just like to express my gratitude
for the opportunity to testify here today. Funding for our line
item has fallen far short of the parity required to keep up
with medical inflation, and it falls even short of the full
funding required to address the health care needs of native
people living in urban areas. Even if the $58 million figure
suggested by NCUIH were appropriated by Congress, this would
still amount to only $362 per patient served. We are
respectfully requesting your support for long-delayed funding
increases in order for our programs to carry out their mission
of serving the American Indian and Alaska Native people in this
country regardless of where they reside. Thank you.
[The statement of D'Shane Barnett follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. We appreciate it.
Brooklyn.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

NEZ PERCE TRIBAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

WITNESS

BROOKLYN D. BAPTISTE
Mr. Baptiste. Good morning, everyone. I appreciate your
time this morning. My name is Brooklyn Baptiste. I serve as the
Chairman for the Nez Perce Tribal Executive Committee. I would
like to give you guys a huge thank you for allowing us to come
here this morning, especially the chairman, who is from the
beautiful State of Idaho as well. We would like to say thank
you to the Committee as it evaluates and prioritizes the
spending needs of the United States regarding IHS, BIA, EPA,
the Forest Service and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as it
pertains to the Nez Perce Tribe.
The Nez Perce Tribe clinic on the reservation has two
facilities which last year served close to 4,000 patients, and
not all tribal members but descendents as well and other tribes
as well. These patients represent close to 80,000 visits, which
included pharmacy and laboratory visits in addition to medical
provider visits as well. You have heard testimony from the last
three about the contract support costs and how vital it is and
how underfunded it is and what it does actually to kind of
hamstring the clinic itself as it tries to provide the best
quality service. Contract support cost is huge and continually
underfunded.
In addition, the tribe shortfall for fiscal year 2011 for
contract support costs was close to $9 million, and this is
what we are looking at for the next year as well. The
Committee's work on maintaining and increasing funding is vital
for the Nez Perce tribe and for our membership as they try to
serve the best quality health for the members and the patients
that visit the clinic as well.
The Nez Perce tribe also seeks restoration of past contract
support cost claims where the tribe was not fully funded. H.R.
4031 would help provide an avenue for the affected tribes from
the shortfall to find their day in court and try to explain the
claims that we have, and like I said, it is trying to play
catch-up on a lot of those things, but as years go on and those
annual shortfalls seem to add up, it really weighs on the
burden of the clinics and the health care on each reservation,
even in the urban areas as well.
So we would hope that you will do your best. I know you
guys do a lot of hard work for the tribes and the people out
there in the Nation for their health care, and we would
appreciate any help that you can give us.
The Nez Perce Tribe entered an agreement with the United
States in 2005 known as the Snake River Basin Water Rights Act
of 2004. A component of the agreement was to transfer
approximately 11,000 acres from the Bureau of Land Management
to the tribe. The lands were supposed to be surveyed in that
agreement and to this day that funding has not been met, so
those surveys have not occurred. Full funding for those surveys
in fiscal year 2011 budget request called for $695,000 for that
fiscal year to begin that process. The tribes support a renewal
of that appropriation request in the fiscal year 2013 budget. I
know, Mr. Simpson, you are very familiar with the SRB and the
process and how hard that was to get to that point, so we are
just trying to make sure that we can follow to the letter of
the agreement itself.
The Nez Perce Tribe is a founding member of the Columbia
River Intertribal Fish Commission, our policy and technical
coordinating agency for treaty fisheries, management for
Columbia River and international fisheries. We support the
testimony you will hear tomorrow Chairman Gerald Lewis. While
we support the funding increase for rights protection
implementation, we are concerned with the way allocations to
that account have been made since 2009. Individual accounts
have been reduced by as much as 40 percent and raised as much
as 60 percent without explanation or rationale. We ask the
Committee here that you direct the bureau to return to the 2008
allocation formula, which is consistent and effective, and we
see it as the best methodology.
The Pacific Coast Salmon Recovery Fund is an example of the
projects that we use under that fund. The Nez Perce Tribe
utilizes the Pacific Coast Salmon Recovery Fund to stock coho
smolts hatcheries in the Clearwater River Basin. We also add
additional smolts from Columbia River hatchery, Eagle Creek and
up to the Clearwater River for relief. Based on the PIT tag
information, 15,000 coho adults from our Clearwater releases
provided fishing for tribal and non-tribal members as well.
Chairman Simpson is very well aware of the impact that the
fisheries have on the local economy and subsistence for the
tribe as well. Continued appropriation for this fund will allow
this successful work to continue, and we appreciate any work
that you could help us on restoring this endangered species.
Finally, the Big Horn sheep. The Nez Perce Tribe
respectfully requests that the Committee not renew 2012
appropriations language contained in section 431 that prohibits
federal agencies from implementing existing federal management
decisions that protect struggling Big Horn sheep populations on
public lands. Big Horn sheep are an important resource for the
Nez Perce tribe economy but also the history and culture. We
are trying to save the last pure stock of Big Horn sheep in
Idaho. It is vital for the United States to honor the tribes'
treaty reserve rights to continue to hunt this culturally
important species on federal public land off the reservation
but within the ceded territory and protected by our treaty.
On behalf of the Nez Perce Tribe, I would like to say thank
you for your hard work and your due diligence on all the
budgets in Indian Country. I know it is not easy defending
these, and when we have such a budget crisis, it is always hard
for us to move forward. So thank you very much.
[The statement of Brooklyn D. Baptiste follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. We appreciate it.
Tino.
Mr. Batt. Good morning.
Mr. Simpson. Good morning.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

SHOSHONE-BANNOCK TRIBES OF THE FORT HALL INDIAN RESERVATION

WITNESS

TINO BATT
Mr. Batt. Good morning, Chairman Simpson, Ranking Member
Moran and other members of the Committee. My name is Tino Batt.
I serve as the Treasurer of the Fort Hall Business Council, the
governing body of the Shoshone and Bannock tribes of Idaho.
First, on behalf of the tribes, I would like to thank you,
Congressman Simpson, for your friendship and commitment to make
sure the federal government fulfills its trust responsibility.
My testimony will focus on the following areas: one, juvenile
detention center as a regional facility; two, funding for
educational and mental health services for our juvenile
detention center; three, funding for 6th grade expansion for
the Shoshone-Bannock Junior and Senior High School; and four,
EPA support to clean up the Eastern Michaud Flats Superfund
Site on the reservation; and five, funding increase for road
maintenance on BIA Indian reservation roads.
Juvenile justice system in Indian Country, like the broader
tribal justice system, has been crippled by federal laws and
court decisions more than a century. The tribe has many of the
same public safety concerns that other tribes have. However, we
face the added pressure of dealing with Public Law 280. In
1963, the State of Idaho, without consent, assumed
responsibility over juvenile crimes on our reservation. For
almost 50 years, the state has ignored its responsibility under
Public Law 280 and our youth has suffered as a result.
With no help at the state level and little help at the
federal level, we took matters into our own hands and built a
new justice center, which houses our police department, our
courts, adult and juvenile detention center. We built a
juvenile center for the vision of having it serve as a regional
facility. Congress through the enactment of the Tribal Law and
Order Act approved of this regional detention center aspect. We
must also provide education, substance abuse and mental health
services to juveniles in our custody. The detention center is
often the final opportunity for rehabilitation. Our hope is
that the facility can help our juveniles turn their lives
around instead of becoming career criminals.
Unfortunately, the fiscal year 2013 BIA budget requests
zero funding for juvenile education, and BIA refuses to let us
use correctional dollars for education for our juveniles. There
are 24 juvenile facilities in the BIA system, and none are
receiving funding for education. We urge you to include funding
for juvenile education in fiscal year 2013.
Also, to assist us in improving our juvenile program, we
respectfully make two requests that would help us stretch
existing dollars. First, we seek designation of our juvenile
center as a regional facility. Second, we seek authorization to
use detention funding for educational and mental health
services for juveniles.
I would like to turn to the needs of the Shoshone-Bannock
High School, a tribally controlled BIE school, which relies on
Tribal Grant Support Costs (TGSC) to pay for administrative
costs. The fiscal year 2013 budget request only meets 65
percent of our needs. We ask that we receive funding to meet
100 percent of our needs. Two years ago, the tribe added a 6th-
grade program to the high school. Given that the elementary
school on the reservation ends at 5th grade and the high school
starts at the 7th grade, this left a big gap where our children
had to go to different schools off the reservation for one year
and then come back to the reservation. However, the BIE has
refused our request to use TGSC funding for our new 6th grade
by pointing to riders in the fiscal year 1995 and 1996 Interior
appropriation bill as a moratorium on grade expansion. To
overcome this barrier, we request report language clarifying
that BIE funding can be used for costs of our 6th grade.
I have two last items. We request support in our efforts as
we work with EPA to clean up the Eastern Michaud Flats
Superfund Site located on the reservation due to phosphate
mining. The hazardous waste from the mining is stored in
unlined holding ponds causing serious contamination to the
earth and groundwater. This contamination has affected our
sacred hunting grounds. The EPA wants to just cover it, but
southeast Idaho wants to clean it up.
Lastly, we request consideration of a one-time
appropriation of $50 million to address the growing deferred
road maintenance needed in Indian Country.
At this time I would like to thank you for your time and
your efforts to ensure the needs of Indian people are met.
Thank you.
[The statement of Tino Batt follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Tino.
Affie.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

TRIBAL LAW AND ORDER COMMISSION

WITNESSES

AFFIE ELLIS
TOM GEDE
Ms. Ellis. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Moran, other members of the Committee, including my neighbor,
Representative Lummis from Cheyenne, Wyoming. My name is Affie
Ellis, and I appreciate the opportunity to testify on behalf of
the Indian Law and Order Commission. I serve as a member of the
commission along with the Tom Gede, who will address a few
other matters in just a moment.
Our commission was created by the Tribal Law and Order Act,
which was signed into law in July 2010. The President and
leaders of Congress appointed nine commissioners, who are all
volunteers, during the winter of 2010 through 2011. The
commission has received funding from the U.S. Departments of
Justice and Interior in the late summer of 2011 to carry out
its statutory responsibilities. The commission is charged with
conducting a comprehensive study of law enforcement and
criminal justice in tribal communities and will recommend to
the President and to Congress modifications and improvements to
justice systems at the tribal, federal and state levels. The
Tribal Law and Order Act made clear, however, that the
commission's report would be due within 2 years of enactment.
Thus, our report is due in July of this year.
Commissioner Tom Gede and I are here today to urge Congress
to extend the life of the commission to allow us to complete
our study, our field hearings and our analysis in order to
develop a meaningful and comprehensive report. I was appointed
to the commission to serve by Senate Republican Leader Mitch
McConnell at the recommendation of U.S. Senator John Barrasso.
By way of background, I am a member of the Navajo Nation
and I currently operate a public and government affairs firm
based out of Cheyenne, Wyoming. Prior to that, I served as an
Assistant Attorney General in the Wyoming Attorney General's
Office. I have also spent some time working on Capitol Hill
working for the late U.S. Senator Craig Thomas of Wyoming, and
I also worked at the National Gaming Commission. I currently
serve as an Adjunct Professor at the University of Wyoming
where I teach a class on Indian law and policy. It was an honor
to be selected to serve on this commission, and it is an honor
to appear before you today.
The commission did not receive its funding until August of
2011, more than a year after the enactment of the Tribal Law
and Order Act, and thus one of the two years that Congress
anticipated for our review and study was lost. The commission
organized itself throughout 2011 and it held its first public
hearing in September 2011 at the Tulalip Indian Reservation in
Washington State. The commission has thus far traveled to or
near Indian Country for hearings on a monthly basis since then
and has met with tribal, state and federal officials with deep
experience and knowledge of the problems in Indian Country.
We currently have eight upcoming hearings throughout Indian
Country scheduled to occur through October 2012. This active
and high-paced work is essential for the commission to
accomplish its task but our work is not complete and cannot be
reasonably be completed by July 2012.
The commission respectfully requests that you consider
legislation that extends the life of our commission for an
additional year at no cost and with no additional appropriation
so that we can complete our work.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify.
Commissioner Gede will now testify as to some of the key duties
assigned to the commission.
[The statement of Affie Ellis follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Tom.
Mr. Gede. Thank you, and good morning, Chairman Simpson,
Ranking Member Moran and members of the Committee. My name is
Tom Gede, and I was appointed to the Indian Law and Order
Commission in December 2010 by then-House Minority Leader John
Boehner. I am an attorney in Sacramento, California, and
previously served as a Special Assistant and Deputy Attorney
General in the California Attorney General's Office under
former Congressman, then Attorney General, then again
Congressman Dan Lundgren, and also teach federal Indian law at
University of Pacific-McGeorge School of Law.
In my written testimony, I provided an introduction to all
the members of the Committee of our nine-member commission, one
of whom is our distinguished President Keel here today with us
as well of the nine members of the commission, and as Affie
pointed out, we are facing a very short deadline to complete
this comprehensive study of improvements to public safety for
American Indian and Alaska Native communities at all levels of
the government. The charge Congress gave us was to examine law
enforcement and public safety in Indian Country including the
complex issues of jurisdiction over crimes committed in Indian
Country, tribal jail and federal prison systems, rehabilitation
of offenders, tribal juvenile justice systems, the prevention
of juvenile crime, rehabilitation of Indian youth in custody
and reducing recidivism among Indian youth. The commission is
to provide the President and this Congress with a report of our
recommendations for improvements to the justice system at all
levels. This may include consideration of simplifying
jurisdiction in Indian Country, improving services and programs
focused on preventing juvenile crime on Indian lands,
adjustment to the penal authority of tribal courts, and changes
to the tribal jails and federal prison systems. I join
Commissioner Ellis in respectfully requesting the support of
the Committee and Congress for an extension of one year for the
commission to complete its work.
As you may know, Congress provided that $2 million in
unallocated funds from the Department of Interior and
Department of Justice be used to support the commission, and so
we seek no appropriation but we do need an additional year of
life to the commission in order to get this comprehensive
completed and our report to the Congress and the President
finished. Thank you.
[The statement of Tom Gede follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. I thank all of you for testifying.
If you can simplify the jurisdictional issues in Indian
Country over crimes committed on reservations or by tribal
members or against tribal members and whether it is by tribal
members or non-tribal members, I have been trying to understand
it now for about a year. I got a book on it, and I am confused,
to tell you the truth, so I suspect everyone else is too.
Simplifying that would be a huge step forward. But it was a
year before you got funding to start this actual commission
work, so we will look at seeing what we can do to extend it. I
apologize for calling you Alfie instead of Affie, but I do not
have my glasses on and I grew up in a time when the song was
``What's It All About, Alfie.''
Ms. Ellis. No problem, Mr. Chairman. Thanks.
Mr. Simpson. You bring up many other important issues that
this Committee will address in this budget. Obviously we have
been somewhat focused on health care and trying to address the
health care needs in Indian Country. It is an important subject
to this Committee, and we will do what is necessary to get that
done. We have both a treaty responsibility plus a moral
responsibility to make sure of that. And I have had Members of
Congress say to me, we spend so much money on health care in
Indian Country, way more than we do on veterans, and that is
just not the case. In fact, it is just the opposite. We need a
good educational program within Congress to educate Members to
the amount of money we spent on health care in Indian Country
versus the rest of whatever government does.
I am concerned, as you are, that the President's budget for
educational services would actually build no new schools, and
the need in Indian Country for new schools is truly out there.
We went through some of schools that frankly you should not
send children to, and we have to do something about that. So
this Committee will continue to focus on those issues.
Jim.
Mr. Moran. Just a word on the Tribal Law and Order
Commission. One of the concerns that I am very much hoping can
be addressed by the Commission are crimes committed
particularly against Indian women off reservation that are
committed with basic impunity. Too many of them have been
brought to my attention that have not been prosecuted, and I
would hope that there is a section of your report that
addresses that. Maybe these were atypical incidents. I do not
think so, though, because the statistics were troubling. It was
almost culturally accepted in some areas of the country that
you could commit crimes against Indian women with impunity as
long as it was kind of around the margins of the reservation.
Among many issues that need to be addressed, that is one of the
ones I do hope that you focus on.
Mr. Gede. If I may, Mr. Moran, that is one of the highest
priorities of the commission to examine and grapple with. It is
a very difficult issue and we know that the Congress is looking
at some of the issues in the VAWA reauthorization but we
definitely are making that one of the highest priorities.
Mr. Moran. Good for you. Thank you.
Ms. Ellis. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. I agree with what the ranking member says.
When you look at the rate of crimes against women on
reservations, it is appalling, and I have talked with Secretary
Echo Hawk about how they have made a concentrated effort to try
to put more officers on some reservations to try to reduce the
crime rate, and I understand it has been fairly successful. I
talked with him about doing an oversight hearing, having him
come in and testify about what is going on with these programs
and how successful they have been and trying to bring in some
of the other individuals that are involved. We will continue to
pursue that.
Representative Cole.
Mr. Cole. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank all of you for
being here, and again, I would be remiss not to thank the
chairman and thank him for the great work he has done in this
area and building on the work Chairman Moran and before him
Chairman Dicks did. We really do have a bipartisan and frankly
unanimous commitment on this committee to try and do better
than historically we have done. I think we have made a
difference in the last few years.
I want to focus most of my questions on health care,
although I share the chairman's concern on education and law
enforcement too. I think we all do. But on contract support
services, and Stacy, if I can use your first name?
Ms. Bohlen. Yes.
Mr. Cole. If I can maybe start with you, but anybody else
that wants to can chime in. This Committee tried to make a lot
of progress last year on that front, and we appropriated a lot
of money and were able to hold on to a lot of it through the
conference process, and at that point--I am not being critical
of the Administration, I am trying to get at what our problem
is--we had the Administration come back and say gosh, you guys
are giving us too much money in this area, contract support.
You need to take some of it back, we are going to redirect it
other places. In the course of that, I know the Chairman has
this concern as I did. I said, once you start redirecting this
money, there is no assurance we are going to get to redirect
it. They wanted to redirect it toward dealing with our non-
tribal providers and contract services so that there was a
legitimate point but, again, they had one set of numbers as to
what contract support was, we had a very different view, and
they have since told us what the disparity us and why in their
view, and are trying to work with us on it. But from your
standpoint, you have considerable expertise here. What is the
problem? How do we get at what the right amount to appropriate
is in this particular area? And if you have any kind of idea
what that would be beyond what we have been doing, that would
be very helpful.
Ms. Bohlen. Well, there is a great deal of work that is
done in that area, and if I can comment just briefly on what
you said previously, it is not--Indian health care is not a
place where you can sort of pick a line item over another line
item and have an aggregate outcome. The work that has been done
on contract support costs has been absolutely critical and
necessary, and while Contract Health Services is an absolutely
critical area of need as well, the two cannot really be in
competition with each other as I think you recognize. But there
is an individual at the table who I think can answer this
question better than I because he is the former chair of the
Tribal Self Governance Advisory Committee, and I would like to
defer to President Keel if I may.
Mr. Cole. Sure.
Mr. Keel. I will try. Contract Health Services, if you look
at the Indian Health Service across the board, 331 tribes are
self-governing tribes, and more than that, there are a number
of tribes who have contracts with the federal government. The
tribes in this country are the only government contractors that
do not get their full contract support costs up front. If you
look at Halliburton and all the other government contractors,
they get their administrative costs and contract support costs
up front. It is built into the contract, and they get those in
order to operate those contracts right off the bat. Tribes are
not in that same pool. So the bottom line, tribes are not able
to fulfill those contracts because of a lack of resources, and
they are simply not able to hire the right people, the right
amount and the number of people to fulfill those contracts and
those services to the people that they serve. And so that is
the real problem.
But if you look at the difference in Contract Health, many
of our tribes, many of the clinics and hospitals simply do not
have the staff or the equipment to provide the services to
specialized medicine that is needed and so they simply have to
hire that out and they hire and send that out to other
resources to provide their services. And so there is the
difference.
But actually, Lloyd Miller is here. I might ask him if it
is okay with you, Mr. Chairman, that he might provide just a
30-second overview of that. He will probably charge me for
this.
Mr. Cole. That is why you are limiting him to 30 seconds.
Mr. Simpson. Identify yourself for the record.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Cole, members
of the Committee. My name is Lloyd Miller. I am an attorney. I
represent the National Tribal Contract Support Cost Coalition.
Mr. Moran, good morning, and Ms. McCollum, Ms. Lummis.
The problem last year was that the Indian Health Service
did not disclose its data and this year once again is not
disclosing any data it uses to make the projections it gives to
the Committee. Last year in the supplemental information the
Service provided this Committee, there was a fundamental error
in the numbers. They compared a requirement from one year with
the funding amount of another year. We called that error to the
attention of the Service. The Service did not correct the
numbers to the Committee. The Committee was told there would be
an over-appropriation at the levels you were proposing. The
number was dropped. Now the Service acknowledges there will be
a $50 million to $60 million shortfall because they agree they
made an error.
The Committee was misled by the Administration and it is
compounded by the fact that now in the President's budget, the
President no longer--the Indian Health Service is no longer
telling this Committee how much the contract support
requirement is projected to be in 2013. In 25 years, we have
never seen a President's budget that excluded a projection of
the need. So you are shooting in the dark. I will testify
tomorrow on behalf of the coalition with the data we have
produced from the expertise of a former Indian Health Service
contract support cost expert who left the Service 2 years ago
but we project that the 2013 budget will be about $99 million
short.
Mr. Cole. First of all, thank you, and I would invite you
to work with us because we really did try last year to get the
number.
If I can just make one other point, Mr. Chairman, you have
been very generous with your time. I just wanted to focus on
the urban Indian just a second, Mr. Barnett. Number one, I did
not realize, to tell you the truth, that we had for 2 years not
increased--because the aim has been to try and do more in this
area, and we certainly have two clinics in Oklahoma that do
unbelievably important service for us, particularly in areas
outside tribal jurisdiction. We have a lot of citizens with a
lot of needs but they are in the middle of Oklahoma City where
no tribe has any jurisdiction and very little in the way of--I
know the Chickasaws maintain a presence now in that community.
You put a minimum dollar figure but I would like you just
for a moment to make a statement about what happens to the
people you cannot serve, because the reality is, they flood the
institutions around them anyway. We are going to pay for this
one way or the other. They almost always get better care and
they would prefer to be at an urban facility, but it is not
like these patients if we cannot take care of them in Oklahoma
City or in Tulsa or wherever else in the country are not going
to another hospital, and quite often it is indigent,
uncompensated care.
Mr. Barnett. Thank you very much, Representative Cole. That
is a question that has been proposed in the past when the prior
Administration actually targeted the urban Indian line item for
elimination completely and they asked that same question, why
are the services needed, what happens, you know, when these
clinics are not there. And you steered toward the answer, which
is when these clinics are not there, the patients do not
receive services, and that is for several reasons. First, you
know, the safety net is stretched to its capacity in almost
every state that I know of. The community health centers came
together and supported the urban Indian health programs because
they could not serve the patients if those clinics were not
present. They do not have the resources or the capacity and
they do not have the ability to provide the culturally
competent care that is needed as well as the individuals living
in those areas often come to our programs because they do not
qualify for other programs, either private or public. So when
you remove the Indian Health Service out of the equation, even
though they are in an urban area, they are left with no care
whatsoever or they are left with county care that does not meet
their needs either medically or culturally. That leads them
oftentimes without services, and there is an inherent distrust
between American Indians and government-run services for
obvious reasons, and that does actually trickle over into
county and public health services. So Indian people will at
times flat out refuse to go to a county or state-run health
program, and if there is not an urban Indian health program in
the area, they simply will go without care until they are in
the emergency room and the care becomes much more expensive,
life threatening and, you know, much more difficult to address.
Mr. Cole. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I apologize for not
hearing all the testimony this morning. I have been looking
through it. All politics is local, and I was with MAST this
morning. So, based on some of the discussion that I had with
them and some of the things that you have said and the
questioning, I am just going to build on this a little more.

URBAN INDIAN HEALTH

I represent the St. Paul area. We have a large urban
population in Minneapolis and a significant one in St. Paul,
but they are really invisible. That is because a lot of the
services are not there for them. So it does put a lot of
pressure onto some of our health clinics. I think we do have a
good relationship in the Twin Cities between the Native
American community and Ramsey and Hennepin County. But they are
not being compensated properly for the care that they are
giving. We have 11 Ojibwe nations and Sioux nations plus people
who travel from Wisconsin in for parts of the winter or parts
of the summer, back and forth, and mixed marriages where
children are of both tribes. We really need to figure this out
in a way that is friendly to families for a whole host of
reasons. So I am planning on delving more in depth just in the
Twin Cities to understand what is going on, and anything you
can do to help me in my journey would be appreciated.

INDIAN YOUTH HEALTH

We talked about a lot of things, including schools. You
know, I am a high school teacher. Sixth grade is important, so
we need to fix that for you somehow. Another thing that is
becoming a reoccurring theme that I have heard a lot, including
when I was just in Wisconsin visiting with three tribes there
and then again at MAST, is alcohol and prescription drug abuse.
We are seeing cocaine, heroin and meth on the rise, and that
was a concern in our conversation was with MAST today. It boils
down to what you are working on with law and order, what health
care works on with diagnosis and treatment, and what ultimately
makes successful students because they have parents who are
engaged. Those students are not becoming involved in gateway
drugs, suicidal behavior, domestic violence, on and on.
One of the things that we saw when I was with the
chairman--and it was a fabulous, enlightening trip he put
together--was talking about that juvenile treatment center
there and how far kids come from there? I met tribal members in
Green Bay, Wisconsin, and that is the closest juvenile facility
that they have. That does not support health and it does not
support good outcomes and it does not support families, because
the whole family has to be treated. Where are we in talking
about this? I am a child of an alcoholic. It is a dirty little
family secret, folks, and it needs to come out in the public if
we are going to work on this. So is anybody going to talk about
it here?
Mr. Barnett. If I can just jump in briefly--oh, I am sorry,
President Keel.
Mr. Keel. Go ahead.
Mr. Barnett. I wanted to say two quick things. One of the
really sad things in your testimony is that the Green Bay Urban
Indian Health Program actually closed. The resources were not
there to support it. Our programs get some base funding from
Indian Health Service that they are expected to leverage with
other resources, and unfortunately, when other resources go
away, the base funding is not enough to sustain the program. So
the Green Bay program closed.
As far as the substance abuse treatment programs, what we
are seeing, you know, our programs can offer culturally
competent care that impacts our community, that makes a
difference, that when you look at the completion rate and the
recidivism rate for our programs, it is phenomenal. They have
done things that, you know, are justifiable and have a long-
lasting impact, but what we are seeing is that because it is
residential treatment and because it is, you know, considered a
high cost of care, the funding is dwindling. Well, that care if
culturally competent. That care supports the entire holistic
health of that person including their education, including
their employment, including their primary care, including their
dental care, including all of the things that we know these
people need to be healthy members of our communities, and those
programs are the ones that are being targeted.
You know, our Portland program lost over a million. Our
Seattle program has lost millions of dollars, has turned people
away and is now laying staff off. That is not going to address
the problem that you are bringing to the forefront. It is
actually going to do the opposite. It is going to make it
worse.
Ms. Ellis. Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to add, the Tribal
Law and Order Commission is also looking at juvenile justice
systems in depth. You know, throughout travels so far, I think
we have seen some real bright spots and places that are trying
to tackle the issues head on. I mentioned the Tulalip
Reservation. We looked at some of their juvenile justice
facilities, and you know, they are really taking some steps
forward, but we are also looking at other places where the
system is not quite there and it is really not being helpful to
young Indian kids. So it is a huge focus of our commission and
something that we will discuss, I am guessing, at length in our
report.
Mr. Keel. Thank you for the question. When you talk about
the health and welfare of our children, our youth, education
systems within--you know, treatment facilities within Indian
Country are lacking because of the lack of resources. Even in
our school systems, the BIE schools, there is not enough staff
because of the lack of resources. There is not staff available.
And oftentimes many of these children come from broken homes.
They come from backgrounds of abuse, whether it be alcohol,
drugs, other types of abuse, and they struggle to find a place
to fit in, and many times, and Representative Cole touched on
it, when they cannot get the services in the urban areas, they
do come to our facilities and they show up. The problem is, by
the time they come to our facilities, they are in an acute
situation so that treatment--you know, long-term treatment is
not available to them so we simply put a band-aid on them and
send them home.
The problem with that treatment is that we send them back
to the same old environment. They go back home, and in a few
years they are then the problem. And so it is a cycle that we
simply need to break. We simply do not have the resources to
break that right now.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. Lummis.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you all for being here, and in light of the
lengthy day ahead, I want to first of all thank the
commissioners for their volunteer work. I was once on a
commission similar, and I know that it is a lot of personal
out-of-pocket expense as well as tremendous commitment of time,
and I know Mrs. Ellis is well aware of the issues on the Wind
River Reservation in Wyoming, and I am sure you are seeing
similar problems elsewhere that local reservations are
grappling with, so thank you both for your service there.
Mr. Chairman, I will follow up with you on Mr. Baptiste's
discussion about the 11,000 acres and the survey and first of
all why so much money for a survey, and secondly, why has it
not been done already, and then also I share Mrs. McCollum's
concern about the 6th grade. That does seem to be a strange
lapse in continuity in youth education. So I will just follow
up with you all on that. And again, I want to thank you all for
your testimony this morning and acknowledge gratefully the
attendance of my friend Affie Ellis from Wyoming.
Mr. Simpson. When I was in the 6th grade, I figured I
needed a year off. You get a different answer if you talk to
those kids, huh?
Thank you all for being here today. We appreciate it very
much. The information you have given to us will help us in
crafting the next bill.
Our next panel: Stoney Anketell, Tracy ``Ching'' King, John
Yellow Bird Steele and Troy Weston, Richard Greenwald, Tex Hall
and David Gipp. If you would kind of sit in order? Stoney down
here, Tracy next. John, you are third. Good to see you again.
Richard Greenwald, Tex Hall and then David Gipp. I have to run
upstairs for just a second.
Mr. Cole [presiding]. All right. Thank you for very much.
Stoney, we will start with you, if we may, and we are going to
try to follow the order that we have on the panel. It makes it
a lot easier on the court reporter.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

THE ASSINIBOINE AND SIOUX TRIBES OF THE FORT PECK RESERVATION

WITNESS

STONEY ANKETELL
Mr. Anketell. I was going to say good morning, Chairman
Simpson and members of the Subcommittee. My name is Thomas
``Stoney'' Anketell. I am a member of the Executive Board of
the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of the Fort Peck Reservation.
Thank you for inviting me to testify.
The Fort Peck Reservation is a large land-based reservation
in northeastern Montana that encompasses approximately 2.1
million acres. About 8,000 of our 12,000 tribal members reside
on the reservation. Our greatest need is for economic
development, infrastructure, public safety and health care. I
will address my comments in that order.
In economic development, our unemployment rate on our
reservation is nearly 60 percent. Four in ten families live
below poverty level. In order to generate more economic
development, I ask this Subcommittee to take two specific steps
to help us increase energy exploration on our reservation
which, like the Fort Berthold Reservation, lies within the
Bakken Formation.
First, direct the Department of the Interior to set
drilling permits on Indian reservations at state permit levels
or exempt them altogether. A BLM drilling permit on Indian land
costs $6,500. That is too high. It makes us less competitive.
For the same permit, a Montana drilling permit on fee lands,
$75. So $75 versus $6,500.
Second, increase funding for the BIA's Office of Indian
Energy and Economic Development above the $8.5 million the
Administration requests so that the Department can increase
full-time hires to process mineral leases and other energy
development leases on Indian reservations. BIA regional and
agency staffs do not have adequate expertise in energy
development to issue lease and drilling permits in a timely
manner so our tribe can take advantage of this unique
opportunity. More staffing with better training could help
clear up this backlog.
Infrastructure--the health of our community is tied to the
quality of our drinking water. Since enactment of the Fort Peck
Reservation Rural Water System Act of 2000, we are developing a
rural water system to serve our reservation and surrounding
communities with safe drinking water. EPA has determined that
well water in the area is contaminated by brine plume. This
project is a $200 million project. Through our Indian Self-
Determination Act contracts, we have completed construction of
the raw water intake facility, the water treatment plant and
laid miles of pipeline. Under the federal law, operation and
maintenance funding is the responsibility of the BIA. The BIA
is not doing its job correctly. The BIA is behind schedule in
requesting adequate operation and maintenance funding to ensure
that we have adequate funds to safely operate and maintain the
project. Please see that the BIA has the $1 million in
operation and maintenance funding that we need for fiscal year
2013 operations of our rural water system. The BIA has only
requested $750,000 for fiscal year 2013. We currently receive
$200,000 in recurring operation and maintenance dollars.
Another infrastructure need is adequate funding for the BIA
Road Maintenance Program. Funding for the BIA Road Maintenance
Program has been flat at around $25 million for the last 30
years. It has not gone up. And it has actually been dropping
over the last 5 years. This is wrongheaded. Native Americans
die in motor vehicle crashes at rates two to three times the
national average each year, partly because our roads were not
safely designed and are not adequately maintained. Please find
at least an additional $10 million from the Park Service, Fish
and Wildlife Service, or other non-BIA programs at Interior to
help keep reservation public roads and bridges safe.
Public safety--we greatly appreciate the increases Congress
has recently provided for public safety programs but given the
large shortfall in law enforcement and correction officers,
these increases do not fulfill the United States' basic trust
responsibility in the area of public safety. We support the
Administration's $6.5 million increase requested to fund the
operations of the newly constructed detention facilities. The
Fort Peck tribes received a grant from the Department of
Justice to rebuild our detention facilities, which will be
operational in fiscal year 2013. Please ensure that the BIA and
the Interior Department's Office of Facilities Management and
Construction have the resources needed to maintain detention
facilities after they are built by increasing funding in fiscal
year 2013.
I will end on health care. Our tribes desperately need to
extend our Fort Peck Tribal Dialysis Unit from 10 to 18
stations or to construct a new dialysis on the reservation. We
are at capacity, serving 33 patients six days a week. We have
an additional 73 to 100 pre-renal patients, and this is a
tribal program. We built this thing, we run it ourselves and we
need help. We are not asking for much because we have done it
all on our own, but we need help, because as you know, diabetes
is such a severe problem in Indian Country, and this is the
final phase of diabetes, dialysis. So if we cannot serve them,
they will have to travel great distances for dialysis
treatment. We ask the Subcommittee to direct the IHS to report
to Congress on its efforts to address the need for dialysis
treatment in Indian Country as required under the Indian Health
Care Improvement Act, especially in rural regions such as the
Rocky Mountain region.
Finally, we support and ask the Subcommittee to increase
the Administration's $54 million increase to the Contract
Health Services budget. These funds pay private health
providers for services that tribes nor the IHS can perform in
IHS-funded clinics and hospitals. The IHS is failing our
members by not advocating for adequate health care funding, and
for not promptly referring our members to private providers
because they--IHS--lacks the funds to cover members' copay
requirement. Only when it is life or limb does IHS authorize
the use of CHS funds, oftentimes too late for the patient. I
ask that this Subcommittee direct a study be conducted to
examine how Contract Health Services dollars are expended by
the IHS with an eye towards making recommendations to help save
Native American lives and use CHS dollars more effectively.
Thank you.
[The statement of Stoney Anketell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cole. Thank you very much.
Now Tracy King, Fort Belknap Indian Community.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

FORT BELKNAP INDIAN COMMUNITY

WITNESS

TRACY ``CHING'' KING
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For the record, my name
is Tracy King. I serve as the President of the Assiniboine and
Gros Ventre nations. I apologize for being late, Mr. Chairman.
Just like everybody else, our needs, especially in law
enforcement, I believe that one meeting with the Fort Peck
Nation we are looking at the oil boom in the State of Montana
as well as North Dakota where law enforcement is critical
because of a lot of crimes that are happening in that area with
a big increase of people coming to make some dollars. Also,
with our roads department, we have concerns about road
maintenance because one of the things we are seeing is the
folks will be coming in during the oil boom and our maintenance
budget as short as it is, it is going to be more so once the
movement of machinery. So it is critical that law enforcement
and roads--the State of Montana collects taxes in the name of
our roads so, you know, we have been trying for 20 years to
make an agreement so that we could--it is probably close to a
million dollars that they use us for inventory but at the same
time they cannot agree to give us any money, so it puts a
burden on our budget system.
We look at the roads. On December 7, 2011, I was in a car
wreck, and it took, like, probably over an hour for someone
to--the ambulance crew to pick me up because of a snowstorm,
and so firsthand I know the system not only the roads but the
IHS system where, you know, sitting on a road for an hour
waiting for an ambulance, you know, I totaled my car. A cow was
in the wrong lane and came over on top of me, and I broke my
neck and was severely injured. According to the statistics, I
should have been buried. And so those kind of things we look at
is our roads are in need of repair as well as looking at the
gentleman to my right, looking at health care is something that
is needed.
My CEO was with me but his younger brother, who is probably
in his 50s, died yesterday of diabetes, and so we have an
epidemic of diabetes and cancer on Fort Belknap, so we are in a
crisis with our health. And so we are in desperate need of
services, especially looking--the people that were before me,
any kind of a medical, you know, if there is a heart attack out
south, you know, it is often two or three hours. And so I was
very fortunate that I was able to walk away from a wreck, and
some of the people that had heart attacks or whatnot, the cops
end up being the EMTs and the ambulance because of lack of
services out south.
So with all the issues we have, you know, we are wanting to
build the economy within our reservations, and if we could have
a little dollars into our--I believe that we could economically
survive. Too many times, non-Indians come and become
millionaires off the backs of our people. And so everything is
against us but hopefully, I mean, I do not believe it is--I am
not against the millionaires. I respect what they make. But,
you know, we as Indian people need that chance as well to
become self-sufficient instead of roadblocks that are put in
front of us all the time.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement of Tracy King follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cole. Thank you very much.
John Yellow Bird Steele, Troy Weston, good to see you
again. Thanks for your hospitality. Just for the record,
Chairman Simpson, Ms. McCollum and I had the opportunity to
visit with you last summer, and thanks again. It was helpful
and your hospitality was just unbelievably generous. Thank you.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

OGLALA SIOUX TRIBE

WITNESSES

JOHN YELLOW BIRD STEELE
TROY WESTON
Mr. Steele. Congressman Cole, I thank you and Congresswoman
McCollum for coming down to Pine Ridge and seeing the
conditions firsthand. I am here once again like last year
before your Committee. I got my council person here to address
yourselves, but I would like to address something, Congressmen,
to yourselves.
We got an 1868 treaty, and in 1871, your Committee in their
appropriations bill put language in there that said no more
treaties would be made with Indian tribes hereafter. Our
relationship would be by statutes. But nothing in the prior
treaties could be changed by these statutes. Now, we followed
that, yourselves and ourselves, to today, that language that
was put into your Appropriations Committee. I would request,
Honorable Congressmen, that possibly you consider a request
from myself to put some additional language into your
appropriations bill, and I have got a very big concern. I can
work with your staff in the very near future on this. But
preserving the rights that are going to be taken from Indians
across America in a settlement that Congress approved in the
Cobell litigation, and I have got language here, and you can
develop your own language. This is just an example of what I
would request, and it is nothing in the Cobell litigation
settlement shall waive any Indian tribe's right to self-
government, tribal government rights under treaty or agreement,
special trust relationship with the United States, property
rights or land rights or the rights of any individual Indian
class member which are unrelated to the claims in the
litigation. That is very important. Nothing in said settlement
shall affect the political relationship between the Indian
tribes and its tribal citizens or members. That settlement,
Honorable Congressmen, has the Indian give up all future
claims, not just the claims in the historic accounting error.
We understand that. That is common in lawsuits. But to give up
all claims? Please.
We have got a special relationship with yourselves. We are
not a special-interest group. We are not a minority. Our
relationship goes back to when you first came to our country,
and we want to keep that. Because of the poverty situation,
four of the poorest counties in the whole United States, one,
two, three and seven, are in South Dakota. I would like my
councilman, Mr. Westonon, to continue, please.
[The statement of John Yellow Bird Steele follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cole. Mr. Weston, you are recognized.
Mr. Weston. Thank you very much. Good morning to each and
every one of you, and thank you for giving me this time.
I had this big speech planned out, but our president took
all of our time.
Mr. Cole. You can take the 5 minutes the president had.
Mr. Weston. Let me begin by reiterating what the other
councilman and the president have said. Our health care needs
are to the point where our people die every day because of the
lack of money within Contract Health, because of the priority
systems that do not work at all. The priority system is that
you have to--it is a life, limb and property deal. We have
become a property now. We only get referred out if it is a
priority one, and it does not work because we have to go
travel. The nearest hospital is an hour and a half away by car
driving 65 mile an hour. We bring helicopters and airplanes in
there for life flight services at $22,000 a pop for the
helicopter and then $9,000 on the airplane. And they are
spending how much money to send them out and we take them to
Rapid City and we give them Tylenol, we give them Motrin and
send them home. That is the mode of our health care today.
We do not get--it costs--I have got a figure here real
quick. We have--it costs our Native American people, our tribal
membership, the IHS spends $2,700 per Indian patient. The U.S.
average is $7,200. Now, where is the catch there?
We talk about alcoholism. The Congresswoman alluded to that
earlier. We have White Clay, Nebraska, that sits 2\1/2\ miles
south of Pine Ridge. Four million cans of beer per day is what
they sell, and we are a dry state, or dry reservation, and we
still have to prioritize if we are going to haul somebody that
is drunk or a legitimate wreck or whatever. You know, something
that--there is no legitimacy to this but the bottom line is, at
the end of this fiscal year, the contracts, CHS does not get to
pay for everybody, so they just get put on the back burner and
we do not have that.
I have a lot more time, but I think I am well over limit,
so I just want to say thank you for giving me this time because
we have a lot of issues.
Mr. Cole. Thank you very much.
Mr. Steele. If I may, Congressman?
Mr. Cole. Oh, certainly.
Mr. Steele. This is my Chief of Police, Mr. Richard
Greenwald. I read his testimony and he has nothing in there
about the full judicial responsibility on the 100-mile by 60-
mile area that he has to cover because the Supreme Court's
Hicks versus Nevada where state police can operate on
reservations does not apply to Pine Ridge Reservation, so they
cannot come on to our reservation, and he has full
responsibility for everything in the judiciary area.
Mr. Cole. Chief Greenwald.
Mr. Greenwald. Good morning, sir.
Mr. Cole. Good morning. Good to see you again.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

OGLALA SIOUX TRIBE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY

WITNESS

RICHARD GREENWALD
Mr. Greenwald. Good morning, everybody. Good to see you
again. It was good to have you down at Pine Ridge, and it is
odd that Mr. Gipp is sitting next to me because I graduated at
United Tribes Technical College.
Thank you for having us here today again. We spoke a little
bit about our reservation, Pine Ridge, roughly the size of the
State of Connecticut. We have a population of over 43,000
members and an unemployment rate of over 80 percent.
Overcrowding in our housing--most families, housing areas
are 15 to 20 people living within a household, which causes
chaos and many social and public safety issues for us.
Currently, we are funded at 49 police officers, less than half
of what we need according to the BIA. I brought some charts
here today and stuff just to show you some numbers and some
discrepancies. Sioux Falls and Rapid City are our largest two
cities in the State of South Dakota, Sioux Falls with a
membership of 165,000, and 67,000 in Rapid City. The total
calls for service this year in 2011 shows that we surpassed
both of the big cities surrounding our Indian Country here, so
our--and the other thing is our officers' ratio, you know, 49.
They have 115 in Rapid City and 233 in Sioux Falls. Those are
not counting the county officers or the state highway patrol
that are also there in their area.
Currently, because of our shortages in law enforcement and
122,000 calls for service, imagine 49 police officers trying to
handle those calls for service. It is wearing my officers to
the limit. I have lost probably 10 officers in the last 3 or 4
months either due to stress--we had a standoff with one of my
police officers for 4 hours at gunpoint because his wife left
him, because why? Because public safety took him away from her
for 12-, 16-hour shifts a day, no days, did not get any time to
spend at home. These are realities for my officers. They do not
have backup, you know.
I come to Washington, D.C., and I wanted to grab one
officer from each block and take them back with me, you know,
because there is one on every corner, it seems like, and I want
to take some home with me, you know.
Those are realities for us here on the Pine Ridge. One of
the things that I wanted to say is that if we continue to
ignore the issues that are going on on the reservation, it is
going to get worse. I know I spoke to you about that when you
were down in Pine Ridge. A week later, two officers of our
friendship department in Rapid City who do have friendships
with me--we work a big basketball tournament that is up in
Rapid City together, we walk side by side with rapid City
officers. They lost two police officers to a Native American
that killed both of them, gunned them down in Rapid City. And
the story will go on and on about property crimes, violence
against each other off of the reservation. These are our
memberships from our reservations moving to the cities and
bringing our social unrest to their cities because we are
ignoring the issues that are on reservation.
Our court staff cannot handle this type of call service. I
have three prosecutors and five judges on Pine Ridge, sorely
understaffed. The last time they received any increases to
their funding was in 1979. We gave them last year, with all
these calls, 58,000 cases. There is no way the prosecutors can
handle that caseload. So a lot of these things are falling
through the cracks. When people are not paying for their
misbehaviors, they think it is okay. It becomes a social norm
for them. But when they leave our reservations and go to your
cities, they bring that with them.
Two weeks ago, three weeks ago, there was a shootout in
Rapid City. Five Native Americans robbed a store and shot it
out with the Rapid City Police Department. Last week, another
one of our Native Americans was murdered in Rapid City,
possibly by another Native American. So if we keep ignoring
that stuff--and these stories that I am talking about, if you
look across Indian Country, it is happening to their outside
neighborhoods, Mobridge, South Dakota, Rushville, Nebraska,
Gordon, Nebraska, any place that is surrounding Indian Country
because we have failed to properly handle what is going on in
our backyard. It is ending up in your backyard.
Some good things that I want to talk about is, we have a
highway safety program that we brought to Pine Ridge. It is
called Sacred Cargo, and it was with funding with NHTSA, CDC
and IHS, and I was to go out and educate all the people using
media or local ratio stations in a way that we could get the
message out to our people. We showed that we could reduce the
fatality rates by over 75 percent, the serious crash injuries
by over 70 percent. When I talked to the CDC at some of our
meetings across the state, I asked them to start putting out
numbers whenever I talk to them just about our numbers, I said,
you know, I am sure the IHS is probably saving a few thousand
dollars off of this, and there was a guy from CDC that said all
I do is crunch numbers. He said Rich, your program has saved
the government millions of dollars, not just thousands of
dollars. So if we could show that if we put a little money and
effort into fixing things on our reservation, in return we will
save money in the long run.
So what I am here to say today is that, you know, last 2
years, we spoke about this before, there was $80 million that
came down for Indian Country law enforcement while Pine Ridge
and one other reservation were left out of that funding. We got
zero dollars. I do not know why or what the deal was. But if
you look at the chart below and you look at some of the other
reservations down south as it pertains to--there are variances
from the down south region to our Great Plains region. Look at
the differences. Hundreds of officers in these really small
reservations yet the big land-based reservation that we have
got here in South Dakota and North Dakota and Montana, there is
a huge discrepancy there. We are not able to handle what is
coming and it is getting higher and higher.
So I know our time is getting short here, and I guess for
right now, that is it, and it is really good to see you guys
again and thank you for having us here.
[The statement of Richard Greenwald follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cole. Chief, thank you very much.
Tex.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

MANDAN, HIDATSA AND ARIKARA NATION OF FORT BERTHOLD

WITNESS

TEX HALL
Mr. Hall. Thank you, Chairman Cole, Ranking Member Moran,
and Congresswoman McCollum.
I am Tex Hall, the Chairman of the Mandan, Hidatsa, and
Ankara Tribes on the Fort Berthold Reservation in North Dakota.
I want to make a few comments about my tribe and then one about
the Great Plains because I have been regional chairman for the
Great Plains.
On my tribe on staffing and quarters, we have got a new
clinic and that was through the efforts of Senator Dorgan. And
it went kind of a roundabout way. Instead of going through the
IHS, it went through the Army Corps of Engineers because that
is who flooded us in 1953. But I think that kind of became a
problem because then it was trouble getting staffing. But IHS
did work with us and we were able to get the staffing. But the
third holdup now is the quarters. We need about $12 million for
60 units of quarters. We have put in several million dollars to
take down a property. We are developing lots, water, sewer,
curb, and gutters, streetlights, and we just need the help from
the IHS for this last piece of quarters.
So it is real critical because we are in the Bakken
Formation right here and this is an Oil and Gas Expo
Conference. And as you know, the Bakken is the hottest oil
plain in U.S. right now and we are right smack in the middle. I
call it Ground Zero because there are about 2,500 trucks coming
at you every morning when you get up to try to get on the
roadways. And, you know, so it is definitely a challenge to be
on top of this oil plain. It is pretty hard just to say, oh,
yeah, let's have oil plain right now. You have to be able to
have planned development, energy corridors, infrastructure,
electricity, housing, water, sewer, law enforcement. You have
to have all of that or you are not going to do very well.
And so the second thing I want to talk about on oil and gas
is the BLM's misguided rule called hydrofracking. And this
misguided rule has never taken any tribal consultation
whatsoever, which violates the Presidential Executive Order
13175 where any federal agency that is going to propose a rule
that potentially has an effect either negative or whatever on a
tribe must consult. Well, this rule is about to into effect and
so we met with Michael Nedd, Associate Director, yesterday, and
will meet with our regional director in Dickinson, North
Dakota, this Thursday. And I honestly think if I did not call,
BLM would have never responded. This is going to require
another permit.
We have gone through boxes of permits for BIA in 2007,
boxes, cardboard boxes. Where is this lease? Where is that
lease? Oh, I do not know, got to go. Here, grab it over there.
And you try to find a box and you will try to find the allottee
or you will try to find a travel track and then we went through
the APD, the Application Permit to Drill, and then BLM gets
staffed up and then they lose their staff. So they are sitting
there with a lack of staff in Dickinson, North Dakota. And then
EPA comes in and says you need an Air Quality Permit. I said
where are you going to do that from? Denver? Yeah, yeah. Well,
we can do a good job from Denver. I said no, you cannot. You
cannot manage an office from Denver or Billings or Dickinson,
North Dakota, when the oil plain is in Fort Berthold, North
Dakota. You cannot do it. I will tell you that right now unless
you are a better manager than I.
And so now, on top of that, now there is hydrofracking. It
just seems like this merry-go-round never ends. And this will
require another permit in the middle of the game. And we
already have over 225 active wells on Fort Berthold in these
last 2-1/2, maybe 3 years, and think our economy is really
growing. We passed an environmental code that would fine a
company up to a million dollars if you intentionally dump on
our reservation. That has seemed to slow a lot of that stuff
down. We passed a traffic civil code that gives us the
authority to arrest--I call them--what kind of truckers do you
call them? They will not listen. And it gives us the authority
to finally arrest.
And so things are moving but now we have federal agencies
now putting another obstacle in the middle of what we are
trying to do. So I guess the only thing I could ask is through
the appropriations process--this is how serious I am. This has
to occur now through the appropriations process, especially
when Michael Nedd is sitting across from you saying well, you
know, it is over at OMB. And I said oh, I know what that means;
it means you cannot do anything now. You know, but you could
have talked to us a long time ago. This continues to happen to
tribe after tribe over and over. It is ridiculous. This is
2012. And some of us have economies that are getting to Fortune
500 economies. For goodness sakes, we are getting slowed down
by things like this. We will never have an opportunity like
this. So this is again something I will request from the
committee and is something I asked all three of my own
congressional delegation as well.
And I will just say something briefly on roads. I do not
know if Patty--oh, okay. Patty has got my picture over there.
This will always be a problem for us. We get $2 million in
Indian Reservation roads. The State will not help us fix our
roads and the BIA has no money. We have done an engineering
estimate from Interstate Engineering out of Bismarck, $100
million to fix over 1,100 miles of roads on Fort Berthold. And
this crack here goes out west to Watford City. That is a state
highway. And so really the road now to the left of that goes
right in the ditch. And the road over to the left, well, last
year we were in a flood; this year we are in a drought so we do
not have to worry too much about that mud this year for now
anyway. But we have to water the roads. We are going to have to
lay some magnesium chloride down. And it is not cheap. I do not
know the exact price but it is not cheap. But landowners or
tribal members, cattle producers, horse producers, they are all
complaining about pneumonia, they are all complaining about
their livestock, and they are all saying you guys got to get on
top of it. Again, everybody is looking at the tribe. Nobody
else wants to step forward.
And so we are looking at other avenues, but there has got
to be consideration for oil and gas tribes. You know, if we
could get more money that goes to the State, like I said, the
State does not return $1 in taxes and we split that with the
State of North Dakota. And if we could get some of those
dollars back, that would go a long--I would not even be here
asking for anything like that. If people who should pony up and
ante up would do it, I would not even be here asking for it
because the money is there. It is just not coming back to the
reservation.
And so I think there was just one other thing I wanted to
mention. I will just finish with one comment on the Great
Plains. The Great Plains is 16 tribes, North Dakota, South
Dakota, Nebraska. We have about 200,000 trust acres and about
200,000 members of those 16 tribes. We are the largest allotted
reservation trust lands in the U.S. And we really had to almost
drag or pull the car across the finish line to get consultation
on the Cabell Trust Commission. And we do not know why; it went
everywhere else--Chicago, Los Angeles, wherever else except for
our region which was affected most. And so this has a huge
impact on the Great Plains. And so we are going to try to
continue to work and hopefully you can help us be an advocate
to get the Commission to understand that anything to do with
the trust fix or the fractionation or buying up fractionated
shares, your biggest fractionations in the Great Plains are
those 200,000 acres. It would go a long way towards addressing
the problem instead of scattering all over the country. Focus
on those parts of the country that need it the most.
Thank you very much. I appreciate your time.
[The statement of Tex Hall follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cole. Thank you very much. I may sit in this chair but
the real chairman of the committee has arrived, so I am going
to start with Chairman Simpson.
Mr. Simpson. I do not have any questions.
Mr. Cole. Let me go ahead and quickly--because there are so
many subjects we will not be able to obviously cover them all,
but I do want to get back to this issue which a number of you
raised for the use tax on the whole issue of energy development
on some of these reservations, the permitting process, and the
revenue problems that you have, legitimate governmental
functions that are not flowing back.
And I guess the questions are in terms of permitting, what
do you think we can do to streamline this process? Because this
is like a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. This is what gaming
can be for other tribes. This is an incredible resource here
that could be a game-changer on a number of these reservations.
And, you know, we have seen what the uses were able to do, for
instance, with their energy revenue. It has been a big changer
of life for them and it has improved the quality of life.
I forgot the last witness. I was so taken by your testimony
today. So I apologize. I will hold my question. Thank you very
much. And I apologize very, very much, Mr. Gibb. I am an oil-
and-gas guy, man. I was in this deal. Okay. Thank you very
much. And I apologize. Thank you, Ms. McCollum.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

UNITED TRIBES TECHNICAL COLLEGE

WITNESS

DAVID GIPP
Mr. Gipp. Thank you, Representative Cole and Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member Moran. Thank you, Representative McCollum, for
being the reminder on this. I appreciate that very much.
Ms. McCollum. We have got it covered, oil and gas and
education.
Mr. Gipp. Well, you know, it is very unique that this
subcommittee is hearing all of these witnesses because I am
from United Tribes Technical College originally from the
Standing Rock Sioux, which is in North and South Dakota, but
our institution serves all of these tribes plus about another
70 or so numbers of other tribes around the Nation. And what is
so unique about this panel is that we are going through
tremendous change in this whole region in North and South
Dakota. You look at what is happening in western North Dakota
and northeast Montana. Economic change, health, education,
transportation, certainly all of those things are very crucial
to the development, particularly public safety.
And we note that in the 43 years that we have served as an
institution and as an inter-tribal organization out of the
Bismarck, North Dakota. We occupy an old military fort,
originally called Fort Abraham Lincoln, the second one
actually. The first one is where George Custer rode out to his
great fame and I will not go into the details of that one. We
are at the second one built about 1900. And so we took it over
in 1968, '69, and I would say it is a good example of the
Indians taking over the fort this time for peaceful purposes,
and we continue that mandate today. We have served thousands of
students over the past 43 years.
I will get to my request very briefly and then I would like
to expand a bit on some of the topics that I just mentioned.
First, we are requesting that $7 million is provided through
the Bureau of Indian education to United Tribes Technical
College under its Indian Self-Determination Program or
contract. That would be about a $2.5 million increase over our
fiscal year 2012 level and under Title V of the Tribally
Controlled Colleges and Universities Act.
Second, we are asking that one-time forward funding is
provided for United Tribes Technical College and our colleague
school located on the Navajo Reservation, the Navajo Technical
College where we were left out of forward-funding program that
began in fiscal year 2010. This would be one-time funding and
would be about three-quarters of our appropriation for fiscal
year 2012.
Third, Congressional support for a tribally administered
law enforcement training center, which we have been focusing on
for a number of years in light of what has been happening with
the lack of public safety and issues that relate to our 20-
some-odd tribes that we serve in a three-state region.
And last, we support $73.5 million request for our 27
sister tribal colleges that are funded under Titles I, II, and
III of the Tribally Controlled Colleges and Universities Act.
And those are the four basic things that I would speak to. I
mention our base funding and I will go back a little bit on
that one.
We have administered a program under appropriations
authorized by Congress and through this subcommittee for the
past 35 years under the Indian Self-Determination Act. This
would help us maintain and continue to utilize the over 100-
year-old education facilities and the 50-year-old housing that
we have for our students. Second, it would help us upgrade our
technology capabilities; and third, provide adequate salaries
for our faculty and staff who only receive about a 2.9 percent
increase this past year in terms of cost-of-living. And fourth,
fund programs and curriculum improvements to address many of
the things that are going on in terms of economic development
in our area, particularly when you talk about the Bakken, the
oil formations, the coal, and all of those other minerals that
are affecting our tribes hopefully in a positive way. But the
issue of training an adequately trained American Indians is a
crucial part of that thing. It is not just for the corporate
community; it is also for the worker. And that is what we can
do and will continue to do if we have this additional funding
that I speak to.
I would also point out that our issue of forward funding
will be an important part of us continuing to be able to
address these issues by a one-time extra appropriation of about
three-quarters of our year's funding.
One of the final pieces I point out is that there is a
great need for a Northern Plains Indian law enforcement
academy, something we have been working on for a good 10 years,
at least in terms of concept. We have an MOU with the BIA and
the American Indian Higher Education Consortium to do
supplemental training. But we note--and I have been listening
to our tribal leaders for the past 30 years--talking about the
need for public safety, talking about the issue of attrition,
of police officers that Mr. Greenwald pointed out has happened
just in his area alone, the high pressure and all of those
things, the need for additional training. But the issue of
basic training is so crucial to the Northern Plains region. And
that is what our tribes have been asking and belaboring the
Bureau of Indian Affairs about for all of these years.
It simply has not been forthcoming, mostly because the
current training facility at Artesia, New Mexico, is unable to
really meet the demand. They are equipped to only train a
maximum of 150 people at any one time throughout a given year.
Unfortunately, their attrition rate is also high. We think we
can do the job as well as any by providing the basic training
on our campus if we have the additional assistance to be able
to establish some of those things.
We have, by the way, I only have two copies but I have a
copy of a simulator that we have in our law enforcement
training that has been in use for the past year or so. We think
we can begin to help our tribes begin to address this issue of
public safety. There is a lot of data and statistics that we
can provide to back up what I am talking about, but I just
remind the subcommittee to take a hard look at that because we
think that will be a major investment for assuring that there
are safe communities and that the development we are talking
about, whether we are talking about the safety of our children,
our elders, or newcomers that are in our communities in terms
of economic development are so necessary and crucial.
I will just point out a few other statistics very briefly.
We have an 83 to 90 percent placement rate. We have about a
retention rate that is 80 to 85 percent. We have a K-8
elementary school that serves our families. Here is a picture
of one of our families and an outstanding student here. We
cater to the needs of families and the values of American
Indian families by the way.
I would just point those things out. We are accredited
again from this past 2011 for 10 more years for our 25
different programs at the one- and two-year levels and we have
just added three baccalaureate degree programs, one in criminal
justice by the way. And so I just point those out in terms of
the needs and what we think we can do in a very successful way
as have in the past 43 years.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We appreciate all of your time.
[The statement of David Gipp follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cole. Well, thank you. And again my apologies for
rushing us toward the Q&A and almost missing your testimony.
But let me go back. I will relay the predicate of what I
was going to ask about. I do think we are in a once-in-a-
hundred-year opportunity right in front of us that could be
transformative for some of the poorest areas in the country.
But the problems you touched on--permitting, infrastructure
where we have underinvested for a long time and really need to
invest at a higher level to be able to take advantage of this,
and cost-sharing on a government-to-government basis really
stand in the way of some of these and we could end up
squandering a great opportunity.
So I would ask any of you that care to comment on those
things, number one, what do we need to do specifically on the
permitting? And we are not a legislative committee but we have
the ability to encourage sometimes the BIA and other people
since we control their budgets. Second, on the cost-sharing I
would ask if any of you have sat down with your state
governments? In Oklahoma we had a similar problem. We
eventually have an Indian fuel tax arrangement for a certain
percentage of money from our fuel tax statewide flows back to
Tribal Nations to spend. In exchange, we then charge the state
tax on our facilities. That is the agreement. And it comes
back; it is used for governmental purposes. It is not for a per
capita distribution. We build roads, education, healthcare,
things that governments do with it. Are those things possible
in your area?
And then, finally, in terms of the human dimension to this.
I do worry--I had the opportunity to visit a number of the
reservations in South and North Dakota and it was pointed out,
obviously, these are pockets of very high unemployment. We have
job opportunities beginning to develop here. You know, we may
not always have the most trained people but we need to make
sure that as many of those folks as possible have the
opportunity to get work, not just tribal income but the
opportunity to go work for their families. So what are the
sorts of things that we can do in that regard that might help
some of you that are dealing with high unemployment issues? Why
do we not start with you and anybody else wants to come in,
come in.
Mr. King. Well, thank you, Mr. Cole, Congressman. I think
before I get started I would just like to give you a little
background on my career. You know, I got a degree in petroleum
land management out of Rocky Mountain College in Billings. I
went to work for the BIA for 14 years running the Oil and Gas
Leasing office on the Fort Peck Reservation. Then I started a
career--lost an election actually--and then went for--
Mr. Cole. That is where good careers often start.
Mr. King. Then went to work over at Fort Berthold as a land
consultant to ExxonMobil XTO/Hunt Petroleum. So things that are
working I think I know about; things that do not work I think I
know about. I said the same thing to the Senate. Our attorneys
came up with that.
So, you know, my big frustration really is the fact that
our BIA--it is not set up--let's just start at the very
beginning. The leasing process, without leases there is no
exploration. Fort Peck can take anywhere from a year to three
years before it is approved by the superintendent. That is when
it becomes a legal document, binding document is when the
superintendent signs off on it. And if it takes 3 years on a 5-
year lease, that is basically tying up my land, my allotted
lands for eight years. And so this is grossly unfair. So that
is where we need more expertise and more staffing.
Now, at Fort Berthold, what they did was they started
bringing down from Aberdeen all these realty people and kind of
got them caught up--this was three or four years ago. What Tex
said was absolutely right. There are boxes everywhere. Boxes,
not file cabinets, boxes full of leases that needed to be
approved or if they were not approvable should have been
returned to the companies. And the same thing was going on at
Fort Peck. What happens is sometimes when a company submits a
lease for approval, there is a probate on there. The
superintendent can sign for a probate but if it sits there and
sits there for month after month after month, year after year,
that probate will close. Now the superintendent can no longer
sign that. That lease is no longer approvable. You have to go
back and get all the new errors that have been established
through the administrative law judge and you go back to square
one. And I cannot tell you how frustrating that is to the oil
and gas industry. And the federal employees act sometimes like
it is no big deal. But it is a big deal and we need to make
sure that we have enough staffing and enough expertise to do
what needs to be done to get those leases approved.
And the same is true for the BLM. They are understaffed.
They are not set up for an oil boom. This is a once-in-a-
lifetime deal. We want to be economically independent,
economically sovereign. That is our goal. And so we need to
really staff up, gear up, get ready for this boom. Fort
Berthold is way ahead of us. It is right at our doorstep. In
fact, our tribe drilled the first two Bakken horizontal wells.
We are the ones through our strategic partnerships that paid
for the well, that drilled it, fracked it. It is just
happening. They are fracking one of them as I am sitting here
right now. So we are taking a proactive role in this thing. We
want to be in control of our own destiny, not as a lessor.
Mr. Cole. Well, whether you address this or not--and I am
taking a lot of time because I think this is an important issue
and I am going to ask you guys to be briefer than I was--but
could you sort of give the committee an idea of what the income
flow potential here is at the tribal level and obviously
sometimes this is individual allotment land for individuals as
well. And I would assume you have got sort of checker-boarded
jurisdiction here.
Mr. Hall. It can vary, Mr. Chairman, and we started in '07
at about 50 bucks an acre. Soon went to 100 bucks an area, and
then the BIA decided to do an auction bid sale in November of
'07. I think EOG Resources out of Houston bid 625. And from
then it went to 1,000 and over. And so if there is another
round of leasing, you can bet your dollar the allottee is in a
very strong position. Nobody knew what it was. Actually, the
BIA is supposed to have an appraisal on every trust
transaction, so every lease should have had an appraisal. It
never happened so we are just assuming the auction bid sale
kind of took care of that, you know.
And so the royalty rates will go anywhere from 18 to about
22.5 percent, maybe 25 if it is a tribal drilling company. I
think we started the tribal drilling company and we are
promising the tribe and the allottees, you know, I know a lot
more than 18 to 22.5. And so if you can average about 800 to
1,000 barrels a day on a good Bakken horizontal well, you are
doing quite well. And some of these areas are very mature on
Fort Berthold, especially that partial field up on the
northeastern part. And as it comes across west and then down to
the river, that whole west side is in a very mature Bakken
formation. And so that is kind of like in the Badlands area it
costs a little bit more but you can do what they call a multi-
pad. What is his name from Oklahoma?
Mr. Cole. Mr. Hamm.
Mr. Hall. Yeah, Harold Hamm originally from North Dakota is
going at that. And if you have a super pad that you can drill
off of, that is perfect for the Badlands because we want to
maintain that scenic beauty and it is nothing better to see an
oil well drilling that has got a clean, specked oil pad that is
very minimal, no dust, and it is happening right in the beauty
of the Badlands pumping up and down, nothing better to see
that. So I think that is kind of the best practices that we are
looking at, you know, to continue on. Especially at our
conference coming up, we want to promote companies that are
having the best practices.
And we are closing the closed-loop system where they got
the pits, you know. The pad will have a pit where they got, you
know, material, crude fracking material and they are basically
dump pits. And so they are going to a closed-loop system. They
are covering those up and everything is trucked out. You start
eliminating those things in the Badlands and all that and now
you are talking best practices.
So that is where we are reaching to, Mr. Chairman. We are
reaching to that, you know, from finding a cardboard box for
Stoney's lease to getting the best practices. And you know, I
want to make this one last point and that is the one-stop shop
has never really taken off. And I keep raising this issue and I
am going to raise it again with Secretary Salazar. But the
whole idea was to have a coordinator position at Fort Berthold
to tell BLM in Dickenson and Billings you need to get here to
tell BLM in Denver and EPA in Denver and all these federal
agencies we have got a problem. We have got a probate that is
soon to expire. We have got an active lease. We have got 60
days. You guys get over here right now and let's see what we
can do to get this salvaged, this lease, because there has
already been x-amount of man hours put into this lease,
landowners, allottees, tribes are waiting, oil companies
waiting, we are all waiting on guess who. We are all waiting on
the BIA.
So that is what the one-stop shop was supposed to do. That
was its intention and I cannot believe it when people will say,
well, what is your idea of the one-stop? No, no. We got to get
beyond that what is your idea of the one-stop shop. It is to
coordinate, streamline, and to troubleshoot and get to these
issues quickly and bring everybody to the table.
Mr. Cole. Thank you very much.
Mr. Moran. Ms. McCollum.

OIL BOOM LEASING AND CRIME

Ms. McCollum. Thank you. And I thank my friends to the west
of me from the Great Plains, who did a great job talking about
what is going on there because this is a once-in-a-lifetime
opportunity. You folks were not able to participate in the last
oil boom that went through very much, were you? No. You got
left out then and you do not want to get left out now. So I get
it. My grandfather was from that area. I have got pictures of
my kids, which might surprise Mr. Cole a little bit, standing
in front of oil derricks that have our family name on them.
This is, a sudden storm. Some people saw the oil boom
coming and gathering, but all of a sudden it just hit. And some
of the things that you are seeing are not the fault of the
federal employees in the EPA and the BIA and the BLM. They do
not want to give you bad service. There are just not enough of
them. Right now, the good ones are being snapped up by private
industry so there is a competition going on. We have frozen
federal salaries. We have increased the number of employees
that are needed in order for them to feel successful every
morning when they are getting to work. There must be a way to
use the money that is out there from the leasing to hire the
necessary employees. The revenue is there to pay for the
employees. There has got to be a way that we can figure this
out.
I just wanted to take a second, though, and tie this into
two things. Minnesota Public Radio did a big story about some
of the crime and some of the missed opportunities for local
people to be trained up into some of these good-paying, high-
paying jobs. There are people coming from all across the
country into North Dakota and into Montana and these are not
tribal lands. We want the employment going to tribal lands. I
am wondering how many people are really being employed from the
reservation areas into these jobs. Are people getting a fair
shake at them? If they need training, what we need to do to get
them trained up to have access to these jobs that pay fantastic
money?
The other thing that was coming up was the increase people
are seeing in crime rates, with assault and murder. There is a
bad side to oil booms, too. So if you could, please talk about
that. The problem has been defined about what we need to do
about getting these leases moving, but what are some of the
challenges this committee should be aware that you are facing?
North St. Paul, the city I represented, in three square miles,
had 11,000 people, and eight officers.
Mr. Greenwald. I do not know how the funding cycle was put
together and I am sure it was not anything that you guys had to
do with it. It is probably something in the past, historical
numbers and stuff. But you are right. A lot of these things are
going to bring crime into your area. I mean you are bringing
multimillion dollar machinery, different things. I went up to
Bismarck to visit my son who is also in the United Tribes
College right now going to college, and it costs me almost $300
a night. Before you could get a hotel for $70 a night, and
their hotels are filled with these workers that are there going
back and forth north from there. I mean it is crazy when you go
to North Dakota. It is hard to get a motel; it is hard to do
things anymore.
With that comes crime and it is not going to be just the
reservations that are going to be dealing with that. You are
talking about the cities. I mean people are going to be
breaking into these people's vehicles. You do not know who is
coming to work in your state. You know, who are these guys that
are coming to your reservations that are coming to work? We
already know that one in four of our women are going to be
raped in their lifetime. That is higher than anywhere in this
country. You know, but who are we bringing to our reservations
and how is that going to affect our law enforcement when we are
already so strapped already, you know? So definitely some food
for thought.
I mean we need to prepare for this stuff that is going on,
including these big rigs that are coming through our
reservation. Those roads are going to be torn apart like crazy.
We are already dealing with that on our reservation in Pine
Ridge, you know. So we anticipate that there is going to be
some pipeline vehicles coming through there. They have already
been routed through our reservation, so we are anticipating
that is going to happen more, you know.
Mr. Gipp. To the answer, training a lot of the incoming
workforce are those who have got some training talent or
experience in these kinds of enterprises, so that is good. On
the other hand, we have Native Americans in the tribal
communities who are not yet trained. And so we are beginning to
try to mobilize that effort with at least five or six of our
tribal colleges that are located either right on these
reservation areas, including United Tribes. And one of our
goals is to train about 1,400 workers in, for example, welding.
Now, that is just one of the technologies; it is not all of
them. And so we need more help to make sure that we can
galvanize and train all of those who want to work in this kind
of a field. So that is kind of the effort and what we have
begun to put together.
We are working in our case with the Nakoda College up at
Fort Belknap, Fort Peck Community College, and Cankdeska Cikana
at Spirit Lake as well as ourselves, and also Fort Berthold
Community College could begin that process right now. But it
does take some time to mobilize even if you are a community
college. But we see more of our workforce becoming integrally
involved with this, but we need the support to be able to do
that.
Mr. Cole. Mr. Calvert.
Mr. Calvert. I apologize for coming in late. There are a
lot of things going on here at once.
Just a quick question on the BIA oil and gas exploration
permitting process. Has the BIA ever used outside contractors,
to process permits using fees from applicants to accelerate
permit reviews?
Mr. King. They have used outside contractors for other
things, but not in oil and gas. Go ahead.
Mr. Calvert. I guess the question I have is, can an outside
contractor be brought in--there are a number of people who do
this type of thing--to process applications for permits, make
sure everything is filled out properly, and the forms and
necessary studies have been completed, and then turn that
application over to an officer at the BIA----
Mr. King. Right.
Mr. Calvert [continuing]. To review, to make sure the
paperwork is in correct form, and then merely sign off on that
application, rather than having the bureaucracy get caught up
in this type of thing? Do you think that might help streamline
the process? I would imagine the applicant would happily pay
the outside contractor, which could be picked just as one picks
contractors for environmental impact reports.
Mr. King. I actually broached that subject to the
superintendent last week, just exactly what you are suggesting.
And I think it is a great idea. We need to bring in experts
that can get these leases done and we need to streamline that
process to bring in contractors to do the work like this. The
superintendent's words were do you know how long that is going
to take? You know, so let's not get lost in this thing. Let's
go for it.
Mr. Calvert. I was going to say to Mr. Chairman that this
might be something we ought to look at as a possibility of
moving this permitting process along. It would free up the time
of the agency employees that may be, quite frankly, a little
over their head in some of these issues, with respect to some
of the technical issues on these applications and so forth.
Mr. King. As I said earlier, we have strategic partnerships
in place now that enabled us to drill our own wells. And that
expertise that they got, they fund their own software program
that was better than the Bureau's. I am very familiar with the
BIA's program so it was better than TAMS. They are ideally
suited for just what you are suggesting. That would be the way
to go I think. And then you would not have to train, you know,
federal employees, you know, and bring them up to GS-12 wages
and then have them, you know, forever. Just bring in when the
expert piece is needed.
Mr. Calvert. Sure. This is a mature industry. It has been
around, obviously, for well over 100 years.
Mr. King. Um-hum.
Mr. Calvert. We enter into these contracts; forms are
filled out all the time. An applicant should not be dragged
through a long process that, quite frankly, can be handled in
an expedited manner. We can assist the BIA in putting together
a process to use outside contractors to expedite what should be
a relatively simple process.
Mr. King. And one of the bad effects of letting it sit in
the Bureau for a year, two years, three years--I have seen it
three years--is that where is my money? Where is my money? They
are always coming up to us, you know, the oil company paid it
in. They paid it in a year ago. Where is my money? Where is my
money?
Mr. Calvert. Yeah. And----
Mr. King. And I just cannot tell you, you know, how
important it is that these people do--if what you are
suggesting, Congressman Calvert, if that was implemented, we
could get these leases in and out very rapidly. I even
volunteered to go as a tribal councilman, go back to the
Bureau--keep my seat on the council of course--but that is my
expertise. I could have gotten them caught up.
Mr. Calvert. That might be a little bit of a conflict.
Mr. King. Yeah, they did not go for that. They did not go
for that.
Mr. Cole. Just quickly because we have run a little bit
over here--my fault.
Mr. Anketell. Mr. Chairman, I believe that, you know, all
of us are wanting to be economically efficient but, you know,
even with the tribal, you know, resources that we have, we
could take care of our own destiny, but at the same time we
have to have approval of like what you are talking about, sir.
You have to have the blessings from the BIA. But I think if we
could build up infrastructure, I am always thinking about our
veterans that, you know, coming back from war that we need to
include them in some of the different areas of this economic
plan.
So I think it could be done. It is just sometimes the
superintendent or the area director, they do not know what they
are talking about so they just sit on it so they can pretend
they are smart. Thank you.
Mr. Cole. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. You guys know a lot more about this oil and
gas stuff than I do because we do not have a lot of oil in
Idaho. So I am going to have to learn more about that.
Mr. Anketell. You may find out you have more than you
think.
Mr. Simpson. Yeah, that is right. We can hope. We can hope.
I just did want to say, President Steele, thank you for the
hospitality you showed us while we were out on the reservation.
We enjoyed it very much. It was very educational for, I think,
all the Members that were there and the staff. And Chief
Greenwald, you told us out there what kept you up at night. As
I think you put it--the size of the reservation, the overworked
officers, and the problems that they have in trying to address
the needs. And I said at the time if it keeps you up at night,
it keeps me up at night. We are going to work on this, try to
solve it. So I appreciate you being here today.
Mr. Greenwald. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Cole. Last point before we move to the next panel, it
should never cost $6,500 to get permits on Indian land when
right next door it is $75 on non-Indian land. So that is
something we need to look at, too.
Okay. I am yielding the chair back to where it belongs. We
will move along a lot faster now.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. The final morning panel as we move in
toward afternoon is Mickey Peercy, George Thurman, Charles
Head, Virginia Thomas, and Harold Dustybull. I see three of the
five. Okay.
Ms. Thomas. Harold stepped out for a moment.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. Mickey, you are up first.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

CHOCTAW NATION OF OKLAHOMA

WITNESS

MICKEY PEERCY
Mr. Peercy. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Simpson. You bet.
Mr. Peercy. Hopefully, we will speed our part up so you can
get out and have lunch. I have to tell you a story. I am
probably the only person who remembers seeing him fast dance
with Mary Fallin, Congressman Fallin. Now she is governor.
Anyway, thank you.
I am Mickey Peercy, Executive Director of Health, Choctaw
Nation of Oklahoma. I want to thank you for allowing us to come
today. Also I wanted to thank the committee for coming to
Oklahoma and coming to Choctaw, especially in August when it is
hot. It was hot but we were--yeah, we can do that. We can do
that. But we want to thank you for being there. It was a good
chance for you to kind of see what we have going there.
So my comments today are going to be entirely on health and
I am representing Chief Pyle. He sends his regards.
Appropriations in Indian Country remain severely deficient
for each of the programs that we are going to talk about. It is
really not acceptable. We all know that healthcare in Indian
Country is seen as rationed care. In the testimony today I am
going to focus on programs. I will give you some dollar
figures, probably just try to stay on three or four. But in my
written testimony pretty much speaks to all the programs, as
well as to let you know that we do support the comments and the
stances taken by the National Congress of American Indians on
healthcare and also the National Indian Health Board.
So first of all, we are requesting Joint Venture increase
to $90 million. We know that Joint Venture is one of those
programs in Indian Country that is a win-win for everyone. The
tribe is able to go in with the cooperative agreement within
Indian Health Service, build a facility, and then Congress,
through the Indian Health Service, provides staffing. I think
that can be seen very much right now, Congressmen, with the
Chickasaw Hospital as well as the clinics going in in
Tishomingo and Ardmore. So that is very much a win-win
situation.
Contract Health Service, you have heard discussions on
that. We are asking for an increase of $200 million. I am a
participant on the workgroup with the Indian Health Service, a
tribal rep that is looking at trying to figure out where that
800-pound gorilla is in Contract Health and what that number
is. And GAO has informed IHS to come up with the number and we
are working on that and hopefully that is going to come to
fruition pretty quick.
Contract support cost--I will probably spend the majority
of my time talking about that and I know you had a long
discussion this morning on contract support costs. Contract
support costs do go directly to the tribal nations to support
their health endeavors. Keep in mind if you were ever offered
to get paid $50,000 a year to do a job and then someone just
paid you 66 percent of that, you know, it would not be good.
You have to decide to get out of the program, not starting that
program initially, or come to you and ask for more money. That
is what we are doing. And I think good things were said this
morning in terms of the only contractor in the Nation probably
that does not receive full contract support funding. We are
asking an increase of $100 million over the President's
request.
I want to just point out reported contract support costs
shortfall is nearly $5 million annual just for the Choctaw
Nation. The President, in his '13 budget has requested $5
million increase. That would not even take care of the Choctaw
Nation, not considering the rest of the Nations. So we really
do need to get a handle on contract support costs and be able
to fund that at 100 percent. So we certainly see that as a
focal point for my testimony today and our encouragement for
you to look at that more closely. $5 million is a drop in the
bucket and it is almost an embarrassment. We appreciate the
money but it is certainly going nowhere to take care of the
problem.
And then real quickly--it is not in my written testimony
but I just heard about it this weekend--is the potential
decrease in funding for Office of Environmental Health and
Engineering. We are looking in Indian Health Service at a
potential 20 percent decrease in funding. Keep in mind that is
the line item that takes care of infrastructure in terms of
sanitation facilities, clean water in Indian Country. And if
you do not have clean water, you do not have sewer systems, the
sanitations in, you know, that whole public health concept goes
down the tubes. So I do not know if it where it is coming from,
whether that be the President or I sense that it is the
director of the agency. So we need to look into that, and I
will send you, gentlemen and ladies, a supplement once we
figure out that, but we have to keep that in mind.
Thank you. Thanks for your time.
[The statement of Mickey Peercy follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. George.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

SAC & FOX NATION

WITNESS

GEORGE THURMAN
Mr. Thurman. Chairman Simpson and members of the committee,
I thank you for allowing the Sac & Fox Nation time to come here
for testimony. My name is George Thurman. I am the principal
chief of the Sac & Fox Nation. We are a humble tribe of
approximately 4,000 enrolled tribal members headquartered in
Stroud, Oklahoma. And we are proud of the fact that we have a
tribal member who was named the best athlete of all time, Jim
Thorpe. And like Mickey said, at Sac & Fox we support the
request of the National Indian Health Board and the National
Congress for American Indians that have been put forward from
all tribes.
But I am here to talk about two tribal-specific requests.
First one is $4.8 million for our juvenile detention center. In
1996, the detention center opened its doors and was the first
juvenile facility designed for American Indians and Alaska
natives. It is a 60-bed, full-service, 24-hour facility
providing basic detention services to all. In a recent
appropriations testimony, the Department of Interior Assistant
Secretary of Indian Affairs Larry Echo Hawk requested $6.5
million for staff increases at newly constructed tribal and
bureau detention centers. We take great exception to this
request inasmuch as the Department of Interior Bureau of Indian
Affairs has never provided the full funding that was committed
for the planning, construction, and operation of our juvenile
detention center.
Due to the failure of the full funding commitment by
federal officials not being honored and without the promise of
full funding being realized, the detention center has not been
able to meet the needs of tribes who need our help in guiding
their children toward a successful future in a culturally and
spiritually sensitive environment.
Our second tribal-specific request deals with federal
corporate charters. Also within Assistant Secretary Echo Hawk's
recent appropriations testimony, he states the Department of
Interior is seeking an increase for $43.8 million in funding
for the Strengthening Tribal Nations Initiative, yet the
Department of Interior does not support our federal charters,
which require no increase in federal funding and they directly
address the BIA's initiatives.
We have two charters in accordance with the Indian
Reorganization Act of 1934 and the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act
of 1936. In 1987, the first charter was signed by then-
assistant secretary Ross Swimmer. Years upon years we have
tried to put land in the trust, parcels of land, and I remember
one parcel is over 30 years trying to get it in a trust.
Finally, one day, we said no more. We are going to use our
charter. And after we started using that charter, we have put
24 parcels of land into trust. The only opposition came in a
letter from the BIA South Plains Region stating, ``it is a well
established legal precedent that absent the Secretary's
approval of such conveyance, trust status is not imposed.'' The
transparent allusion that we do not understand the traditional
trusteeship of the United States Government is insulting. The
implications of that single sentence are the cornerstone of the
resistance that has built of a wall of federal supervision and
held back tribal self-sufficiency.
And now the last, we hold firm that secretarial approval
was granted in the signing of the charter. Our second charter
was signed May 22, 2008, by then-assistant secretary Carl
Artman after consulting with him on several occasions. And I am
sad to report to you today we face opposition again. The 2008
charter waits to be scrutinized by the solicitor of the
Department of Interior in advisement to the National Indian
Gaming Commission. While Interior review was neither solicited
nor warranted, the historical resistance of the Office of the
Secretary of Interior is peeking over the shoulders of the
National Indian Gaming Commission.
Meanwhile, at projected $295 million in revenue is awaiting
to revive a deprived economy in central Oklahoma as Assistant
Secretary Echo Hawk fails to recognize the approving actions of
two former assistant secretaries of Indian Affairs. As a leader
of our sovereign nation, I am asking you to direct the
assistant secretary of Indian Affairs to continue to federal
corporate charters from the Sac & Fox Nation.
Full funding of our juvenile detention center and support
of our federal charters would further the economic growth for
our tribe, the community and the State of Oklahoma. The Sac &
Fox Nation is proud to say we are a self-governance tribe.
Given the opportunity to exercise our right of self-governance,
we can make contributions to our local economies and serve the
needs of our people.
Thank you.
[The statement of George Thurman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Charles.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

CHEROKEE NATION

WITNESS

CHARLES HEAD
Mr. Head. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, members. Thank you
for this hearing. I am Charles Head, Secretary of State for the
Cherokee Nation. I am here representing Chief Baker and our
tribal government. And thank you for the opportunity to share
my information with you.
For several decades, Cherokee Nation has administered the
Bureau of Indian Affairs, Indian Health Service Programs, and
other federal programs, and this operation under contracting
and compacting has allowed us to control and to administer
these programs for our people.
Currently, the Cherokee Nation is the largest employer in
northeastern Oklahoma and based on a recent economic
development study, which shows that we have more than a $1
billion impact on northeastern Oklahoma each year. The combined
revenue of the tribes' business operations helps fund the
central government services while offering foundation to expand
and diversify economic development and job opportunity in
Oklahoma. Adequate funding for both Indian Health Service and
BIA is vital to the increase of this progress and keep this
progress going.
One of the most important budgetary issues facing Indian
Country is insufficient funding of contract support costs,
mostly for the Indian Health Service. In Indian Country, every
dollar lost in contract support is one dollar diverted from
direct services for healthcare, education, law enforcement, and
other critical services. Under a self-governance compact with
Indian Health Service and utilizing their contract support
dollars, Cherokee Nation operates a sophisticated network of
eight rural outpatient health clinics and W.W. Hastings Indian
Hospital. Hastings Hospital is a 60-bed facility designed for
30,000 outpatient visits per year, and in 2011, we conducted
330,000 patient visits. Our overall system provided more than
one million patient visits during 2011.
Cherokee Nation utilizes our contract support funds to
support health services. These are fixed costs that a
contractor must incur. When sufficient support cost funding is
not provided, tribes must either reduce funds budgeted for
critical healthcare, education, law enforcement, or other
services under contract to cover the shortfall or divert tribal
dollars to subsidize the federal contracts. For every $1
million that Cherokee Nation must divert from direct patient
care to cover the shortfall, our health system must forgo 5,800
patient visits.
While we appreciate the President's budget for our Indian
Health Services this year showing $115 million increase over
2012, the proposal calls for only a one percent increase in
contract support costs. And as you have heard from other people
today, this will cause more than $100 million shortfall in
2013. Fortunately, we do not have the same shortfall for
contract support for Bureau of Indian Affairs programs.
However, we do also call for the protection of the BIA budget
so that we can at least hold the line so that the government
can help fulfill its trust responsibilities.
Cherokee Nation also joins fellow self-governance tribes in
continuing to request funding increases for fundamental
services provided as tribal party allocations. Of the 566
federally recognized tribes, 235 manage their own affairs under
self-governance agreements with the BIA. Although these funds
account for 42 percent of the federally recognized tribes, they
receive only 15 percent of the funding from the BIA. The fiscal
year 2013 budget being basically level with 2012 appropriation
President's proposal, tribal party allocations must be
protected during the budget process.
The shining example of what happens when tribes administer
their own programs is our Sequoyah Schools. In 1985, the
Cherokee Nation gained control of Sequoyah Schools, a former
under-provided, under-performing BIA boarding school. Now,
Sequoyah creates an academic environment that mirrors college
preparatory schools utilizing an advantage curriculum and data
collection to track student progress and school performance.
Sequoyah meets Adequate Yearly Progress goals and is
flourishing. And in 2011, the school produced five Gates
Millennium Scholars. Just as our students strive to achieve
great success, we should strive to support these students by
hiring capable teachers to provide our children with equitable
education.
In 2012, Congress appropriated $2 million for the STEP
pilot project in the Department of Education budget. Therefore,
we request the protection of the $2 million requested in 2013
for the pilot in hopes that the Subcommittee will work with the
Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health, and Human
Services, Education and Related Agencies to ensure the pilot's
funding.
It is also necessary that appropriations language direct
the Department of Interior and Education to directly provide
ESEA funding to the tribes chosen to participate in the pilot.
Direct funding without being submitted through the state would
more closely resemble self-governance funding model for the BIA
and the Indian Health Service. This system has proven efficient
and effective and strengthens tribal self-determination.
In conclusion, Cherokee Nation is committed to provided
federal services and direct local-level programs including job
creation, education, health, and law enforcement services.
However, the Federal Government's current fiscal situation
should and does not negate its trust responsibility to Cherokee
Nation and Indian Country.
Thank you.
[The statement of Charles Head follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Virginia.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

NATIONAL JOHNSON-O'MALLEY ASSOCIATION

WITNESSES

VIRGINIA THOMAS
HAROLD DUSTYBULL
Ms. Thomas. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the committee.
Thank you for your time. My name is Virginia Thomas. I am a
member of the Muscogee Creek Nation. I feel like I am in
Oklahoma rural right here. I am here with Harold Dustybull from
the Blackfeet Nation so we can kind of hit him on this side
between us. And we are here representing the National Johnson
O'Malley Association. I serve as the president and Harold
serves as the vice president of our association. And we thank
you for allowing us this time.
We represent all the JOM programs nationwide. Well, not all
of them because we do not have the accountability of all of
them and we will get to that. But we have been entrusted to
speak on their behalf.
I have heard earlier and I really am touched by it, you
know, all that happened this morning, all the things that are
happening, it comes down to the education of our children.
Period. That is where it starts from. If you are talking about
people to get into colleges, to have the jobs that they need to
have developed right now, it starts with our children. And our
children are in the K through 12. We serve public schools. We
are not involved in the bureau of schools. This is just the
public schools. We serve close to 90 percent of the students in
our programs in the public schools, both urban and rural and
tribal schools that we have. It is with our program that we
deal with.
We fully understand how this committee has saved us over
the years, have really worked with us to see what we can do for
our programs and for the children that we serve. We are
grateful for that. We are grateful to be back in the budget
again after eight years of not being there, but we are back in
and we are really grateful for that. And we understand how
important this committee has played in the past to making the
assurances of the trust responsibility is there for us.
So at this time, I am going to let Harold speak on the main
points of recovery.
Mr. Dustybull. Thank you. Thank you for this opportunity.
And first of all, I want to say ditto to all the former
testimonies. I live on an Indian reservation so I know the
impacts and the true reality that is faced there.
We have four major concerns in the JOM program. The first
one is we oppose combining JOM with Title VII. And the reasons
are JOM served Indian children who are enrolled members of
federally recognized tribes. Title VII serves students who fill
out a 506 form and declare themselves Indians. JOM falls under
the Snyder Act and the United States trust responsibility which
was established by treaties. Title VII falls under the
Department of Ed. JOM and Title VII have different regulations.
They are different programs for different purposes. JOM is
administered by Indian tribes. Title VII is administered by
state agencies.
And our second request is we request that JOM be restored
to the 24 million. This is the level that it was at in 1994
when the BIA and the Bureau of Education froze our student
account. Now, I truly believe that this funding is still within
the Bureau of Indian Education. It just has been moved out when
they were trying to eliminate the program at that time, and
that is why they froze our account. We request a new student
account, a current student account. The last one was made in
1994. That was 13 years ago. You know, the census takes a count
every 10 years because of population changes and so it is here,
too.
We urge the Department of the Interior to reinstate the JOM
position in the Bureau of Indian Education in the central
office. As of to date and after many requests, we still have
not been able to meet with the Bureau of Indian Education
officials and that is probably because we do not have any
representation there. We are not seen there.
And last and most importantly is that JOM does an excellent
job on Indian reservations but you folks never hear of it
because our chain to you is cut off at the Bureau of Indian
Education. We need that position there. We need that new
account. We need that 24 million back to move back into the
program. And those are our concerns. But most importantly, we
do not want to be combined with Title VII. We are different.
Thank you.
[The statement of Virginia Thomas and Harold Dustybull
follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair.

TRIBAL HEALTHCARE CLINICS

Getting back to healthcare for a second, let's discuss what
you are seeing with your hospitals, and with your resources. I
was just with a tribe in Wisconsin, in Green Bay, the other
night. They have so many people coming to their hospital right
now that are tribally enrolled but they are not tribal members.
They are getting to the point where they are going to have to
start turning them away. In the other areas of Wisconsin
nearby, there were not clinics. There were not hospitals. There
is nothing out there. So, I asked the folks from Oneida--they
were building on some more space, ``Do you have the work-
through with the Bureau of Indian Affairs for the staffing?''
They kind of do, but it is really not at the level that is
meeting everybody's needs, and they would like to do some more
expansions. However, they do not know if they can get more
funding for the full-time equivalents to get people out there.
We have heard this a little bit in our travels last summer.
Can you elaborate with some specifics from your own
experiences? We saw some fabulous places in Oklahoma where good
things were happening, but I know there are still waiting lists
in Oklahoma.
Mr. Peercy. And again you all came down to our facility in
Talihina, which was a joint venture also. But what we are
seeing--and we are a little lucky and unlucky; we are down in,
you know, rural southeast Oklahoma so you really got to want to
get to our place to get there to the hospital. But we have the
eight clinics that I think you saw one of the clinics----
Ms. McCollum. Um-hum.
Mr. Peercy [continuing]. Also in McAlester. The problem is
our numbers are increasing, you know, every month. We are
opening new charts. And, you know, when we talk about excluding
folks, with the federal money that we get, we sign on with the
open-door policy that anybody that is a tribal member of any
tribe that walks in the door that those folks will be taken
care of. And the problems that folks are running into--because
we have 200,000 tribal members and they are all across the
Nation a lot of them--and they are getting denied services at
other facilities because they are just focusing in on their own
tribal members. And if you receive federal money, you know, you
are not supposed to be able to do that. But if it got to the
point with us, we would probably do the same. You know, we
would take care of our tribal members and then if somebody from
Alaska is living in Talihina, Oklahoma, they can come to our
facility. But with the economy the way it is, with people
losing insurance the way they are even though they are not
supposed to, our numbers are increasing. And so we are looking
at things like expanding hours, you know, but with that is
expanding cost.
Ms. McCollum. Right.
Mr. Peercy. And so we are fortunate enough that the tribe
does supplement our health system to a small degree, but
keeping in mind some tribal nations cannot. And you know, where
does it end and where is the obligation the government has to
fully fund? So I guess to answer your question, yeah, what you
are seeing out there is true. The numbers are increasing; the
dollars are staying fairly flat. We are trying to be
innovative. Those tribal systems that can supplement do and
those that cannot, do not.
Charles.
Mr. Head. Well, like everyone else, we are maxed out and if
using our dollars from our businesses to supplement, if we were
to take a significant sequestration hit or budget cut, you
know, we would have to make decisions on how to focus our
tribal dollars and where to put those. We would probably focus
on healthcare, law enforcement, and education. That leaves a
whole range of programs all across the board where we are
providing important services to hundreds of thousands of people
each year that we are going to have to think about cutting. It
is not going to be a very nice process.
Do you agree with that, Mickey?
Mr. Peercy. Yeah. Because really the folks do not have any
place else to go. You know, and if you cut services, you got to
start selecting what services you cut. And politically, it is
certainly not a good thing that you do that but you also, the
humanity of it of those folks who are chronically ill, they
have to go somewhere and there is nowhere else in the system.
Mr. Head. I believe that Congressman Cole--excuse me.
Ms. McCollum. We have run over and I appreciate the
indulgence.
If I understood correctly--and I might not have--the Oneida
said that they lose money by caring for non-tribally enrolled
individuals. Even though there is federal money coming in, that
does not make them whole. By closing off and not taking other
patients, they could make their operation more business
effective and do some of the things that they want to do with
enhanced diabetes care for their own tribal members. Would you
agree with that?
Mr. Peercy. I would think that is true what they are
saying. We have a fairly small population. If you get x number
of dollars and you say--just like having a panel if you are a
physician. You have got x number of patients you see and you
focus on those folks, but then where do the other folks who are
of another tribe go to? You know, they end up in the urban
center or at somebody else's center and they have to drive many
miles. But, you know, to close off the open-door policy and
just treat your tribal members is something that everyone is
looking at right now. Hopefully, we will never get to that
point but they are in other places because I get calls from
California, from Oregon, from up north in Bemidji that says
they will not see me. Or they say they will give me an
appointment but it is going to be a year and a half, which is
basically a form of excluding you from service.
Ms. McCollum. Bemidji, Minnesota?
Mr. Peercy. Um-hum, Bemidji area.
Ms. McCollum. Straight down. Okay.
Mr. Peercy. Bemidji area.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Cole.
Mr. Cole. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will try to be brief
but I think these are such important issues. I want to address
this question to Charles and to Mickey. And it is sort of two
questions I think just to help the committee.
One, I know both of these tribes supplement what the
Federal Government provides for healthcare so if you could give
us some sort of idea the order of magnitude how many tribal
dollars are on top of federal dollars, either percentage or
whatever.
And the second one, these are both very large tribes, you
know, both well over 200,000 members. They are two of the
largest tribes in the country. From your standpoint on not
contract services but contract support, how many dollars are
you sort of out because you are not whole on the contracts?
Because that is an issue that we have really struggled with on
this committee.
Mr. Peercy. I think with our contract support cost
shortfall is $5.5 million. And so that is what it is.
Mr. Cole. By your request for this year's $5 million
addition, is that correct?
Mr. Peercy. Yeah. So we are $500,000 off if it all came to
Choctaw, which would be fine if you want to send it all down
but the other----
Mr. Cole. I will let you and Charles argue that out.
Mr. Peercy. Well, we might work a deal. But----
Mr. Head. Or we could take two-and-a-half each.
Mr. Peercy. There you go, two-and-a-half apiece.
Mr. Cole. It would have to be a three-way deal here, some
Chickasaw.
Mr. Peercy. So you see the problem. So ours is $5.5 million
and for our contract that would make us whole at about $18
million. And I know OMB has got a circular out and they are
trying to talk about flat rates for contract support cost and
we definitely are against that because you are going to end up
at a 15 percent, which would cost us a lot in shortfall. So we
still like to negotiate and use the rules that we play under.
Secondly, we got about $78 million from the Indian Health
Service to the Title V contract. The tribe puts in for this
contract alone $7 million. And then for what I mentioned
earlier, the OEH program, we get $1 million. So $8 million
total from the Tribal Nation.
Mr. Cole. All right. Charles.
Mr. Head. Our contract support shortfall is over $5 million
also. And another area of need is contract health dollars. We
just passed a bill taking 5 percent of our gaming revenues and
putting it into contract health on top of what we get. I do not
have the figures in front of me for the rest of our health
programs, but we supplement a considerable amount of money each
year for patient care, for dental and eyeglasses, as well as
contract health.
Mr. Peercy. And to add to that, Charles, I forgot about the
EDH. That is another $2.5 million. And as Charles and I talk
about contract health, them putting more money in contract
health, it still does not get out of category one, priority
one. That does not do anything other than, you know, it does
not pay for anything that would be elective. You know, I know
some areas to use contract health dollars to pay for
orthodontics and transportation to the orthodontist. And, you
know, we do not get anywhere like that. We do not get out of
the CHS category one even spending $14 million a year. Seven is
from the feds and seven is from the tribal CHS.
Mr. Cole. And to our folks from JOM just again for the
record and I know you do not have an exact student count
because we have not done the census as you pointed out, do you
happen to know what the overall budget for BIA schools and how
many Native American kids we have there are and then how many
Native American kids we have in the public school system that
we are trying to cover with a very limited, you know, JOM
budget?
Mr. Dustybull. Well, as far as the BIA schools, they serve
about 6 percent of the Indian students nationwide and the JOM
serves 93 percent of the students nationwide.
Ms. Thomas. I would like to give an example here because
you can realize how important this is. We have not had a count.
My tribe, the Muscogee Nation, we were counted at 10,919
students in '94. That is how much I get. I serve over 17,000.
How can I turn away--as they said earlier, you cannot say oh,
no, you are not in my tribe because we serve--we have 39 tribes
in Oklahoma alone and we serve all of these. We have Alaska
natives that come in and we do not say oh, no, we are not going
to serve you. We have to take them in. So we have this count.
I am truly blessed to be from the Muscogee Nation. I am
truly blessed that my Chief Tiger and my council members
believe in education and they subsidize what we cannot make for
the other ones. And here, we are giving our students $60 per
student to use. That is just one-time supplies almost. How can
you meet the rest of their needs? I mean we are not trying to
say we want to make our students better than anybody else. We
are just trying to bring them up to the norm. You know, if they
do not have these tennis shoes, they do not have the school
supplies, how can they be successful? You know, you just heard
how many students in one tribe gets gate scholarships. All of
our tribes, you know, we encourage this. That happens. We try
to make them go along but we do not have the money either. And
then you look at smaller tribes who do not have gaming, who do
not have other commercial ventures that can, you know,
subsidize these programs where you are looking at little rural
tribes that that is all they have got. That is what we are here
for. We are here fighting for the small as well as the large.
So our counts are much needed and we have to show that
there has been growth because I know when we first started
coming to Congress years and years ago--I know I do not look
it, but I have been here a long time--see, see, see. But the
problem is is that they do not understand that that count is
frozen. You see that count and you think oh, that program just
stays all the same this whole time, but we do not. We have
never been able to show you the count. We have never been able
to get it passed into the BIA--BIE now. You know, we were told
flat out to our faces that it was too much trouble to do a
count.
Mr. Cole. You know, Mr. Chairman, maybe we could solve our
Medicare and Social Security problem if we just said we froze a
number of people on it right now and there is never going to be
anymore no matter what. We are not counting and then we will
balance this budget in short order.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Thank all of you for being here
today, for your testimony. It will be very helpful to us as we
try to put together the budget for the next year. I appreciate
the information. Thank you.
And the committee will stand adjourned for 34 minutes.
[Recess.]
Mr. Simpson. Dr. Robert Martin, President of the Institute
of American Indian Arts, Ervin Chavez and Faye BlueEyes,
President and Director of Finance and Facilities, Nancy
Martine-Alonzo, President of the Board of Trustees, Ramah
Navajo School Board, and Edward Begay, Chairperson of the
Navajo Agricultural Products Industry Board of Directors. Same
procedure as we had this morning, and we will have again
tomorrow morning. Five minutes for your opening statements, and
then questions from the members of the committee. And we will
have some drifting in and out, I suspect, during the hearing
because there are a lot of weird things going on in Congress
right now. So, Dr. Martin.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

INSTITUTE OF AMERICAN INDIAN ARTS

WITNESS

ROBERT MARTIN
Mr. Martin. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee. It is a pleasure for me to be here to speak on
behalf of the Institute of American Indian Arts. We are located
in Santa Fe, New Mexico, and we are chartered by the United
States Congress to empower creativity and leadership in Native
arts and cultures, and we do that through our academic
programs. And, of course, we have all of the studio arts. We
also have new media arts, creative writing, museum studies, and
indigenous liberal studies. And we also operate a museum that
has the largest collection of contemporary Native art in the
world, a magnificent collection, and we are also a 1994
Landgren Institution, so we operate the Center for Lifelong
Education that does outreach and training for tribes.
Mr. Simpson. I planned on being out there to have a look at
the place this September.
Mr. Martin. We are looking forward to the visit, Mr.
Chairman. From 2000 to now we finally have a permanent campus,
so when you come, you are going to see a beautiful 140 acres
and mountain views, vistas. You are also going to see 10
buildings, four of which were just constructed in the last
several years, so we have got additional square footage that we
are operating and maintaining, beautiful campus. Our student
body is really, though, you know, the most important thing that
we have going for us. And we have 400 students, and student
enrollment is more than doubled in the last five years, and we
have 84 tribes represented in our student body, and it is
continuing to grow.
Also, this year is 2012, and we have been in existence 50
years. We are celebrating our 50th anniversary, and we are
going to have a number of celebrations where we really
highlight our contributions to contemporary Native art, and
also the contributions of our more than 4,000 alumni. And many
of them you have probably heard of, Dan Dominga, T.C. Cannon,
Tony Abeyta, just to name a few. So we are looking forward to
that celebration, and hopefully you will be a part of that when
you come out.
I am here to ask you to support the President's request for
fiscal year 2013 for Institute of American Indian Arts, and
that is at $9.369 million, and we are asking you to support
that. That is about an $850,000 increase over what we are
receiving this year, but for the last 2 years we have been at
more or less flat line funding. And as a result, you know, we
have had challenges with additional square footage, and
maintaining that. We have added, as I said, new buildings, and
that is 60,000 square feet of additional space that we have to
operate and maintain, so we have had increased custodial
expenses, security. Utility costs have gone up. And as we add
new students, we have had to add new faculty, so that has been
a real challenge for us as well.
So the increase would permit us to reinstate a summer
school that we had to cancel the last year. That would allow
our students to expedite their graduation, and would also allow
our new students to come in that need remedial work, or get a
head start on their college educations. You know, with Native
Americans, we have the lowest participation rates in higher
education, the highest retention rate, so this would really
help our students. We would also add to our counseling
programs. We had to cut back in that as well, and we know
student support is so important to success of our students.
Also capital improvements, it would permit that as well.
Our buildings now are 13 years old. When we built the first
couple of buildings, they cut corners, and the HVAC system is
totally inadequate, especially for studio arts. We are not able
to permit oil based painting instruction in our classrooms
because the ventilation is just not good enough. And then we
have students and professors coming in and say we are doing a
disservice to our students, so we have got to address that
issue.
It would also allow for some technology enhancements for
your databases in finance, human resources, student
advancement. They are not integrated and talking with one
another, so that would allow us to upgrade our technology then.
And then we would also like to give our faculty and stuff a
modest two percent increase in their pay. It has been two years
since they have had any increase at all.
So, in conclusion, we are hoping you will support the
President's request, and we take it very seriously. For the
last 5 years we have more than matched our federal
appropriation with funding from individuals, corporations,
foundations, and other Federal sources, as well as the State of
New Mexico. They have been very supportive. So, again, thank
you for the opportunity to speak to you today, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, and I invite you to visit our campus
in Santa Fe, New Mexico. Thank you.
[The statement of Robert Martin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Dr. Martin. We look forward to
coming out. And I am going to be in New Mexico and Arizona in
September, so we will stop and say hi and let you take us on a
tour of the place.
Mr. Martin. We are looking forward to that.
Mr. Simpson. You bet.
Mr. Martin. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Ervin Chavez.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

DZILTH-NA-O-DITH-HLE COMMUNITY GRANT (DCG) SCHOOL BOARD

WITNESSES

ERVIN CHAVEZ
FAYE BLUEEYES
Mr. Chavez. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and members of the
subcommittee. My name is Ervin Chavez, School Board President
of Dzilth-Na-O-Dith-Hle Community Grant School, a tribally
controlled grant school located in New Mexico.
Mr. Simpson. Could you pronounce the name of the school for
me?
Mr. Chavez. Dzilth-Na-O-Dith-Hle.
Mr. Simpson. Okay.
Mr. Chavez. Okay. It is a tribally controlled grant school
in New Mexico, part of the Navajo Reservation. With me is Faye
BlueEyes, Director of Finance, who will be presenting our
testimony on behalf of the Board. We will focus on three areas
of concerns regarding fiscal year 2013 funding requests for the
Bureau of Indian Education. One is facility operation and
maintenance, tribally controlled support costs, and the
proposed cuts to Indian School Equalization Program funding
formula.
Ms. BlueEyes. And yes, my eyes are blue, and it is Navajo
blue.
Mr. Simpson. Okay.
Ms. BlueEyes. Facilities operation and maintenance funding
has been chronically and significantly underfunded for a number
of years. BIE reported in the fiscal year budget justification
that 63 of 181 BIE schools are rated in poor condition, the
same number as in fiscal year 2012. According to an objective
report, Facility Condition Index For fiscal year 2011, there
were 150 projects with deferred maintenance needs, totaling
$304.4 million. Our school, which is among the poorest rated
facilities, is not able to provide a safe, healthy learning
environment for our students, based on the limited funds we
get. And some of our health and safety problems include closure
of the restrooms servicing our junior high classrooms because
of leaking sewer lines, and water lines are so corroded and
filled with sediment that we are having to bring in bottled
water for our students, an additional cost that most public
school do not face.
For the health and safety of our students and staff, we
urge that Congress provide the NCAI recommended $76 million for
facilities and $109.8 million in facilities operation funding.
Tribal grant support costs, which is light and contract support
for school, the BIE requests a two million dollar increase in
order to provide a TGS rate of 65 percent of the administrative
cost need for the 125 tribally operated schools. The TGS for
this school year is only 63.7 percent. Our school, which should
be getting around $700,000, is instead receiving only $445,000.
Thus we have had to consolidate internal controls, streamline
checks and balances, and scale back significantly on our
management staff due to litigation brought by tribes to correct
BIA and IHS failures to fully fund CSC and all other BIA
program areas, except education.
Funding increases for those support costs have been
tremendous. From fiscal year 2009 to 2012, the non-school BIE-
BIA-CSC account has grown by an astounding $73.9 million, which
raised the percentage of CSC need pay from 75 percent to nearly
100 percent. In contrast, for school programs, the tribal grant
Support funding during the same period increased by a mere $2.8
million, with the TGS rate rising from 61 percent to 63.7
during that period.
Congress needs to fix this problem and fully fund tribal
grant support at $72.3 million for the indirect cost
requirements of current tribally controlled schools, and
provide two million in startup funds for newly converting
schools. We ask that Congress restore the 4.4 million to Indian
School Equalization Program funds account that the BIA proposes
to cut. Although BIE says the reduction reflects a one percent
decline in student population, please recognize that schools
still have costs that are not directly tied to the number of
students enrolled.
Although not appropriations related, we want you to support
the Native Class Act, S. 1262 and H.R. 3568, which addresses
many of our concerns, while also recognizing and supporting the
role of tribes to direct the education of their students. More
importantly, we ask that you oppose any attempts to transfer
the BIE from the Department of Interior, Indian Affairs, to the
Department of Education. Such a transfer would seriously
undermine the separate and distinct trust responsibility that
the United States has with American Indians regarding
education.
In conclusion, it is widely acknowledged that investments
in education have a direct economic impact, as well as benefits
to the individual. Studies have also shown that reductions in
education expenditures have negatively impacted employment
rates. With our Native students coming from some of the hardest
hit areas in these times of economic downturn, we ask Congress
to provide the levels of education funding that will enable us
to provide a quality education and safe and secure environments
for our students. We thank you for any assistance you can
provide. Thank you.
[The statement of Faye BlueEyes follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Nancy.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

RAMAH NAVAJO SCHOOL BOARD, INC.

WITNESS

NANCY MARTINE-ALONZO
Ms. Martine-Alonzo. Mr. Chairman and members of the
subcommittee, on behalf of the Board of Trustees for the Ramah
Navajo School Board, that is located in Cibola County in Pine
Hill, New Mexico, we come here to address three major areas of
need that we have.
The first is appropriating 2.1 million for a new BIE early
childhood education center at our school and reservation in
Pine Hill, New Mexico. Second is to appropriate 3.63 million
for a Ramah Navajo community elder center, and then three is to
appropriate 2,925,000 for replacement construction for a new
central administration for the Ramah Navajo School Board, and
our organization was founded in 1970.
I think some of you are familiar that we had come here and
got direct appropriate from Congress to establish our K-12
school. And it has been in existence now 42 years, and we have
graduated over 800 Native American students from the Ramah
community, and we are proud to say that a lot of our students
have gone on to college, and we have doctors, pharmacists, and
lawyers. You know, we are just starting at the beginning level
with many other various professionals, but we are grateful to
Congress for the partnership and the help they have given us
year after year over the 42 years.
And today we are here, and the background for the
appropriation request, for the first one, the early childhood
education center, is because we have four preschool programs,
and this includes a Head Start, a family and child education,
early intervention program, and a child care center, and the
four programs are currently housed in portable buildings that
are separated. And we would like to consolidate it under one
building so they can share dining facilities, they can share a
playground, they can share other support system and network for
them. And this will accommodate a little over 200 students that
are in this category.
The second appropriation request is for the Ramah Navajo
Community elder center. While we are able to provide a lot of
the medical services through the Pine Hill Health, our
reservation is located geographically in rural, you know,
isolated, scattered housing. And it is very labor intensive for
our nurses or our doctors to do homebound care, and so it would
really accommodate the services provided, and streamline some
of those services if we can build a community elderly center
right within close proximity to the health facilities. That way
we can take care of the illnesses or other medical attention,
short term, long term, or other personal kinds of needs that
our elders have.
And the population we are talking about, the ages, there
are 50 years to 64 years, we have close to 1,000. And then
those that are 65 and older, we have 500. So that is about
1,500 population. Our reservation population is around 4,000,
so it is over, like, over a third of our population. You know
how all the baby boomers, we are all coming to that age, and
there is a growing need for that.
And then the third request is appropriation for a new
central administration. And the buildings we have were
established way back in the early 1970s, so they are about 35
years old. And just due to the wear and tear of the building,
they have some challenges. And we have environmental health
hazard, just because of the old age of the building. We have
rodents and different kinds of snakes and other lizards that
get into the building. And, you know, it always poses the
potential for hanta virus. And we know how the infestation of
that plays out, and so we know that that is a challenge we are
having to deal with.
And then we need to update the automatic sprinklers, you
know, to prevent fires. We are among a lot of vegetation and
trees. We are very potential to fire. If something should
happen in our area, we are unable to address it quickly enough.
It would really pose a threat to our buildings, and especially
to this building. We also have frequent power outages and
hazards. Because we are at 8,000 feet, we have a lot of rain, a
lot of electrical storms, a lot of snow that impede, you know,
the wiring in some of our buildings. And we put in a new
infrastructure for our finance and business, where we have
computers and service systems that require 24/7 maintenance and
operation. And with the kind of wiring that needs to be updated
and improved, you know, that is also a need. And then, of
course, just the technology needs that we have to try to get
our building up to par in all these areas.
And so we are very grateful for the financial assistance,
the support system, that Congress has given us in the years
prior to this, and then we look forward to the same assistance
this year, and we are so grateful for everything that you have
provided. And this is respectfully submitted by myself, Nancy
Alonzo, as president of the Board of Trustees. Thank you so
much.
[The statement of Nancy Martine-Alonzo follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Edward.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

NAVAJO AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS INDUSTRY (NAPI) BOARD OF DIRECTORS

WITNESS

EDWARD T. BEGAY
Mr. Begay. Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee. I am here on behalf
of Navajo Agricultural Product Industry. It is established by
Navajo National Council as an entity that are doing farming
110,630 acres of land. We are up to 72,000 acres of land that
we cultivating.
Under this is an organization called Navajo Indian
Irrigation Project, which is United States government's
program, supposed to be manned by Bureau of Indian Affairs,
Navajo Region. BOI, BIA supposed to oversee this, under the
statute that was signed into law, 1962. And in there, the
Navajo Nation was promised, I will just use NIIP, as 110,630
acres irrigable land, commitment of Federal government to
shoulder operation and maintenance to do this development.
However, the NIIP was to be completed the same timeline as
San Juan-Chama Diversion project as a companion, which the
Navajo Nation agreed to relinquish some of the water rights
that has been diverted into the Rio Grande River, and that was
done decades ago, while the Navajo portion is still lacking, 40
years after that was agreed to.
So now I will refer to the chart here. Despite commitments,
funding for NIIP has been very erratic. The President's budget
fiscal year 2013 request is woefully inadequate, $3.381
million. In addition to the initial budget, NIIP has eight
percent Federal overhead for the project, which Bureau of
Reclamation and Bureau of Indian Affairs overhead consumes 58
percent. Yes, 58 percent of the funding. So we get very little
of none at all.
Mr. Moran. BIA's overhead? No, Bureau of Reclamation you
said?
Mr. Begay. Yeah, combined, in all the----
Mr. Moran. Combined?
Mr. Begay. Yeah. See, the----
Mr. Moran. So you get less than half the total money that
was allocated?
Mr. Begay. That is right.
Mr. Moran. Excuse me for the interruption.
Mr. Begay. That is okay.
Mr. Moran. I just wanted to clarify that.
Mr. Begay. Yes.
Mr. Moran. That is the point you wanted clarified.
Mr. Begay. That is right. Yes. So Bureau of Indian Affairs
and Bureau of Reclamation readily admits the inadequate funding
for operation and maintenance, creating deferred maintenance
year after year. Now, to do this adequately, in the initial
budgeting process and all that, it is either the Bureau of
Indian Affairs or Bureau of Reclamation failed to do its
responsibility in budgeting. All the Federal budgets that I am
aware of have a base budget, okay? NIIP has a zero base budget.
And they should be the one justifying that, but no. Ed T.
Begay, on behalf of NAPI, is here to emphasize that there is a
failing of the fulfillment of the obligation, Federal
government. As the chart shows, somebody is not turning to the
farm.
So that is the reason why, on the backs of the Navajos, the
Federal employees are getting the pension, sick leave pay, and
retirement pay, while the end product, they got nothing to show
for at this point. So I am here to just emphasize that NAPI is
fulfilling its job as to right now. I said 72,000 acres being
farmed. Yes, we got a turnaround, making the profit, but the
profits that we make, we get it back and plow back into the
business.
So I am asking the subcommittee to assist in accomplishing
the fulfillment of the United States government. So I am asking
a restoration of $35 million annually to do the job that was
agreed upon in 1962. And I think this is the body that would
really help us. I go to OMB, I go to BIA, and they just said,
go over there, and they said, go to the Hill. I think this is
the Hill, right? And I thank you very much for your attention.
The detailed testament is received by your staff, for further
analytical stuff and so forth. I do appreciate the time, and
you have a good week.
[The statement of Edward T. Begay follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Moran.
Mr. Moran. Well, I am going to say this probably only once,
Mr. Chairman, but I say it to everyone in the room here. If you
do not get what you think you deserve, and have every right to
expect, it is not the fault of any of the members sitting at
the table right now. People assume that Democrats are easier to
get money out of than Republicans, but in the case of Chairman
Simpson and Mr. Cole, they are in there fighting, but they are
fighting within an environment that is going to be
extraordinarily difficult this year. Anything that is put into
Indian programs is going to have to come out of something else.
And so I just want to make sure you all understand how
extraordinarily difficult this budget process, this
appropriations process is going to be. But you should also know
that you just happen to be speaking to four allies right now
who will do everything they can to put as much as we can into
funding Indian programs. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Cole.
Mr. Cole. I just want to associate myself with Mr. Moran's
remarks. This is a tough budget cycle, and, you know, we have
got a large deficit. We have got, obviously, a lot of
differences, but this committee has worked through those
things, really, the last several years under both Democratic
and Republican leadership. And so it is pretty committed, and I
think we actually led certainly the Senate, and, with all due
respect, the administration in many areas last year, and I know
we will do our best to do that again this year. But, again, it
is going to be a tough year. But thank you for coming. I have
to tell you, that is the most beautiful set of squash blossoms.
My eyes have been on those ever since I walked in the room. If
my wife was here, she would say, get them somehow. That is just
a beautiful array.
Mr. Simpson. So that is what the tribal wars were about for
years?
Mr. Cole. Well, back then we actually brought the women
back with the squash.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. In Minnesota we have the pipe stolen, so
nobody wore it around.
I have had the opportunity to be down in Santa Fe and see
the fabulous facility there. Anything we can do so that our
kids are engaged year round in school, it reinforces what they
are learning. Learning about culture, you are reading. Learning
about art, you are learning math. It is all so interrelated for
success, so I am going to look at this some more.

EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION

Now let's talk about early childhood for a second. Your
school is in a trailer? How is Head Start allowing you to stay
open? In a trailer, you do not have the right bathroom
facilities for that age group. I was just at a reservation
where they got cited and were threatened to be shut down for
having a plunger on the site in one of the restrooms, because
this tribe has sewer challenges. So tell me about your Head
Start. I have been to Laguna. Now, a lot of their facility is
paid for, so that is one of the reasons why they have what they
have. But what is your enrollment list, and are you fearful of
losing your Head Start program? We need to figure out a way in
this committee to get the education folks, our colleagues, to
pay a little more attention about what is going on with Head
Start and some of these issues, because they are just so
interconnected.
Ms. Martine-Alonzo. Thank you for the question, and request
for clarification. I am happy to respond. Our early childhood
programs are in portable buildings, and they are disconnected.
They are not all, you know, in one complex. They have been
acquired over the years, the different programs, and so that is
how they are situated. And we contract the different programs.
Head Start is direct with Federal headquarters, and so we work
closely with them to be in compliance. We are in good
compliance on every level because we have been able to try to
keep everything adequately as much as we can. But we feel that,
in the long term, we need to have more coordination among the
early childhood programs because we know that that is where it
is the most important place to put the investment, is at the
early years. Those are the formative years, and those are the
place that you need that good seamless coordination, you know,
with the programs, because these serve the zero to age 12
category. And you are talking to somebody that is very
passionate about education.
Ms. McCollum. Um-hum.
Ms. Martine-Alonzo. I retired from State government a year
ago after 37 years as an educator and a principal, so I hear
your concern. And I know that we try very hard to be in
compliance, but we need our programs to be improved in that
ways.
Ms. McCollum. So, one more question to you, and then I will
switch to the secondary topic. All your teachers are in
compliance, correct? With Head Start, you are not worried about
that? You have native speakers in the Head Start program?
Ms. Martine-Alonzo. Yes, we do. We do. It has taken us a
while to really find qualified certified people because the
reason the Ramah Navajo School Board established their own
education system is we truly believe in educating children to
be bicultural, bi-literate, and bilingual, knowing both their
native language and culture, read and write, as well as to be
able to know the English and get the education, be able to be
successful in both worlds. And that is what we strive for, so
we make sure we provide that.

AGENCY CONTROL OF INDIAN EDUCATION

Ms. McCollum. And, Mr. Chairman, if I could ask Ms.
BlueEyes, you made it very clear that you did want the
Department of Education taking over your schools. We heard you
loud and clear. Should some of the programming in the
Department of Education be coming over into BIA? Part of it is
that programming is very fragmented, but you are doing a
holistic approach in your schools. Esther Martinez Johnson
O'Malley and a lot of Indian Education Programs are handled
through State education. Do you want us to leave the status quo
as is? What are your suggestions?
Ms. BlueEyes. Our school does not get some of those
fundings, but we do get the Title VII through the Department of
Ed as a flow through, and it goes to the BIA, then it comes
down to our school. I think we like the way things are set up,
because then the BIA is the one that we pretty much deal. And
we also fear, if we were under the Department of Ed, we are
going to be lost, because they are a huge program. But the
concern that we do see is our BIA, BIE operated schools, like,
we do not qualify for Race To The Top funds, so we are left out
many times on certain fundings for public school. BIA funded is
left out. So we would like to be included for those types of
opportunities.
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Chairman, we did get that fixed
legislatively with the Race To The Top, but there is still not
enough money. That we could not fix. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you all for being here today. It is very
interesting. We look forward to using the information that you
have given us as we try to develop our budget for the coming
fiscal year. I will tell everyone that we have some votes going
on right now. We have a 15 minute vote, and then three five
minute votes, so the next panel we will call as soon as we get
back from this recess, which will be probably 30 minutes.
Mr. Cole. At least.
Mr. Simpson. In that neighborhood.
Mr. Cole. Probably longer than that, Mike.
Mr. Simpson. Thirty to 35. But I would encourage members,
as soon as the last vote is over, to hurry back, and we will
start on the next panel, because we still have three panels
that we need to do today. So I apologize for the delay, but
that is kind of the way it goes. They make us vote here.
Committee will be in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Simpson. We apologize for that brief delay. The next
panel is Irene Cuch, Ben Shelly, Lorenzo Curley, and Richard
Trujillo. Is that close? So you see once again we are an hour
behind. Yeah, that is right. Thank you all for being here
today. Irene, you are up first. Can you see the red light?
Ms. Cuch. There.
Mr. Simpson. There you go.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

UTE TRIBE OF THE UINTAH AND OURAY RESERVATION

WITNESS

IRENE CUCH
Ms. Cuch. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, and members of the
subcommittee. My name is Irene Cuch. I am the Chairwoman of the
Ute Indian Tribe. Our reservation is located in the State of
Utah. Thank you for the opportunity to testify. In my
testimony, I am going to focus on appropriations needed for
energy and law enforcement.
We need Congress to begin taking Indian energy seriously.
Excuse me. The Bureau of Indian Affairs, BIA, is filled with
staff that can process a lease for agricultural grazing, but
the BIA lacks the staff and expertise needed to oversee energy
permits. Excuse me again. On our reservation there are two or
three BIA staff involved in processing oil and gas permits. It
can take a year or longer for a permit to be approved. The
tribe knows these issues all too well. Production of oil and
gas began on our reservation in the 1940s. Over the past 70
years the tribe has become a major oil and gas producer. We
have about 7,000 wells that produce 45,000 barrels of oil a
day. We also produce about 900 million cubic feet of gas per
day.
Despite our progress, the tribe's ability to benefit from
these energy resources is directly limited by the agencies who
oversee permitting. Just ask the oil and gas companies who
operate on our reservation. These companies say that the
permitting process is the single biggest risk factor in
conducting business on the reservation. The lack of BIA staff
and expertise has a real impact on the tribe. Tribal earnings
from energy development are not spent on luxuries or sit in
some investment account. We use those revenues as primary
source of funding for our tribal government and the services we
provide to our members.
We also need the Federal agencies to work more efficiently.
Funding is needed to increase Indian energy development offices
that would bring all of the agencies together under one roof to
streamline processing. Former Senator Dorgan called these one
stop shops. There are three one stop shops already in Indian
country. Senator Dorgan reported that the one at Fort Dorthal
helped to increase oil and gas permit approvals by four times.
On our reservation we need 10 times as many permits approved.
Currently only 48 application for permits to drill APDs are
approved each year. The tribe and its business partners
estimate that 450 APDs will be needed each year as the tribe
expands operations. We believe that a one stop shop is the best
way to get Federal agencies working together to manage the high
level of permitting needed on our reservation.
We also need funding to protect our rights once a permit is
issued. Without explanation, the President's Fiscal Year 2012
budget eliminated funding for lease compliance and surveys
performed by the BIA Western Regional Office. This funding is
needed to address title boundary, trespass issues, and should
be restored.
Finally, increase appropriations are needed for Federal law
enforcement responsibilities. Our reservation is the second
largest in the United States, but the Federal government,
excuse me, only funds eight police officers. At the most, that
is three officers per shift. With only three officers on duty,
calls for police assistance are not answered in a timely
manner. Our officers are forced to work alone, and police cars
travel over 500 miles per shift.
To make matters worse, our BIA funded jail was recently
condemned and closed. Currently the BIA only pays to house 10
criminals at local non-Indian jails. This means that the
criminals who are caught and convicted are released back into
the public instead of being held. The situation is serious that
the tribe is using its own money to construct a new detention
facility.
We are doing our part by funding three additional police
officers, building our own detention facility. Congress needs
to do its part, fulfill its Federal trust responsibilities, and
provide at least 20 more police officers and the staff needed
for our new detention facility. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify today. Nothing is more important to the tribe than
keeping our members safe and developing energy resources that
will provide for long term economic security of our members,
our children, and grandchildren. I will be happy to answer any
questions that you may have. Thank you.
[The statement of Irene Cuch follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you very much.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

NAVAJO NATION

WITNESS

BEN SHELLY
Mr. Shelly. Mr. Chairman, members of the subcommittee, it
is an honor to testify today regarding the Navajo Nation 2013
budget priorities, and discuss our plan to develop a
sustainable economy. Our priorities include infrastructure,
development, public safety, and education. We continue to be
concerned that our plan for economic development will be
stopped by Federal regulation.
Economic and infrastructure development supports job
creation, as we all know. Projects like the Navajo Agricultural
Products Industry fulfill our goals of economic development and
job creation. The NAPI farm is supported by water brought by
the Navajo Indian Irrigation Projects. The Federal Government
promised to fund the NIIP as part of settling water rights in
New Mexico. The President's 2013 budget again reduced funding
for the NIIP. This level of funding is unsustainable for
operation and new construction. The Navajo Nation asked the
committee to restore full funding to these long overdue
projects to a close.
Another essential infrastructure project is the Navajo-
Gallup Water Supply Projects. This prioritized project for the
administration will bring much needed water to Navajo and bring
thousands of jobs to the Navajo Nation. We support the
President's budget requests and urge the committee to retain
the full funding level.
Health care facility construction projects are also
essential for community infrastructure. Hospital facility
construction is underfunded. The Navajo Nation has five
priority hospitals due for replacement, Winslow-Dilkon,
Kayenta, Pueblo Pintado, our Gallup Indian Medical Center, and
Bodaway-Gap. These projects bring health care viable, as well
as jobs to rural community. We applaud the President's request
for IHS funding, but the majority of increase went to funding
for staffing joint venture, not for long overdue priority
hospital projects and for needed water and sanitation fund.
In addition to infrastructure, another priority of the
Navajo Nation is public safety. Our court and law enforcement
program needs full funding to make our community safe and
prosper. The Interior budget is inadequate to put Navajo Nation
on the same level as other rural community. The Navajo Nation
has fewer officer per person than other comparable rural
community. At time there is only one law enforcement officer to
cover up to 5,000 square miles. The President's 2013 budget is
also inadequate for facility replacement of jails and employee
housing.
Another priority of the Navajo Nation is supporting
education. The Interior budget for fiscal year 2013 eliminates
facilities and school and construction program. The Navajo
Nation has many schools that need replacement. Further, this
past fiscal year many students did not receive their
scholarship funding due to delay in appropriation. The Navajo
Nation urge Congress to fund the BIA higher education program
as it does for other BIA programs, such as K-12 school and
tribal college.
Additionally, Congress should support a building study to
determine the true facility need for the college and the Navajo
Technical College. The Navajo Nation has renewable resource, as
well as large resource of non-renewable resource, like large
reserve of coal, oil, and natural gas. The Navajo Nation
support full funding for development and technical assistance
to help us develop our resources.
Unfortunately, the Navajo Nation face many regulatory
burdens placed on us and our energy development by the EPA
negative view toward further coal development. The Navajo
Nation is trying to create sustainable economy that will reduce
our dependence on the Federal government. We urge support on
projects and program that build infrastructure in creating jobs
and clear the path for Indian energy independence innovation by
reducing regulatory burden on us. And I also would like to add
on too I was asked by Darema to ask them for funding. They are
a member of the Navajo Nation, even though they have a grant.
They use grant money. Again, they are the citizen of the Navajo
Nation, so my support for what they ask for is right along with
them. So, again, thank you very much for listening to me.
[The statement of Ben Shelly follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

NAVAJO HOPI LAND COMMISSION, NAVAJO NATION

WITNESS

LORENZO CURLEY
Mr. Curley. Chairman Simpson, Ranking Member Moran, and
members of the subcommittee, my name is Lorenzo Curley. I am a
member of the Navajo Nation Council, also the chair of the
Navajo Nation, Navajo Hopi Land Commission, and I represent the
Nahata Dziil chapter of the new lands, which was created
primarily as a relocation site for those families that were
moved off their former lands.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify in what is
perhaps the most difficult chapter in modern Federal tribal
relations, the Navajo Hopi land dispute, which has resulted in
the relocation of nearly 15,000 Navajos, and a building freeze
which has prevented development on western Navajo lands for
over 45 years. Although the legal dispute between and among the
Navajo Nation, Hopi Tribe, and United States are largely
resolved, there still remains a large and ongoing toll on
Navajo families affected by the land dispute.
As a representative of the Nahata Dziil chapter, I know
personally the pain and sense of disorientation which comes
from being forced off ancestral lands. Virtually every day my
constituents approach me to talk about hardship that they have
suffered because of the relocation law and the construction
freezes, including lots of young people whose families have
relocated, but who cannot themselves build homes on relocation
lands, making them effectively homeless and landless. The
impact of the land dispute and building freeze will be with the
Navajo Nation for many generations.
The Federal agency which oversees the relocation process is
the Office of Navajo Hopi Indian Relocation, also known as
ONHIR. ONHIR has had a very difficult job that has taken far
longer and cost far more than originally anticipated. However,
this is not the fault of the Navajo Nation, which opposed the
relocation program, but must now live with the awful
consequences.
ONHIR has two primary missions, relocation of Navajo
families, and supporting relocatees through important economic
development programs. In this regard, we would ask the ONHIR
budget be doubled to $18 million in order to accelerate the
conclusion of the relocation process for those many families
who have relocated, but have not yet received their benefits,
and to provide critical support for programs within the
relocation communities, such as my own chapter, Nahata Dziil.
I also urge the subcommittee to increase funding for
housing and other improvements in the former Bennett freeze
area of the Navajo Nation with $10 million from the BIA Trust
Natural Resources Account and $10 million from the BIA Housing
Improvement Funds, Department of Interior.
As the administration noted in 2011, the building freeze
was the product of a longstanding land dispute between the
Navajo and the Hopi relocation boundaries. More than 12,000
Navajos living in the area were subjected to a 41-year freeze
on development. During this era, the Navajo people were
prohibited from building new schools, homes, health facilities,
construction of water, roads, and electricity projects, and
other community and economic development ventures. As a result,
the Bennett freeze area is locked into the poverty if 1966,
when the freeze was imposed. It was only in the 111th Congress
that the freeze legislation was finally repealed.
The President's fiscal year 2013 budget indicates that some
funds will be allocated for the former Bennett freeze area from
the Natural Resource Sublicate Activity to address
rehabilitation, but provide no amount. I urge the subcommittee
to make a bold statement by supporting substantial funding to
rehabilitate the area.
Although the Navajo Hopi land dispute and the Bennett
freeze are painful issues, I thank the committee for this
opportunity to provide testimony on a path forward to ensure
that many Navajo families who have suffered under these Federal
actions can have hope for a better life. I thank you for your
attention. Thank you very much.
[The statement of Lorenzo Curley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Richard Trujillo.
Mr. Trujillo. Trujillo.
Mr. Simpson. Trujillo.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

HOPI TRIBAL COURT

WITNESS

RICHARD TRUJILLO
Mr. Trujillo. Trujillo, if you do it. Yeah, that is the
Spanish teacher in me. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this
opportunity to speak, and members of the committee, staff. I am
the Chief Judge of the Hopis, and it is an honor to have this
position. I am a retired Superior Court Judge from Maricopa
County. You know, that is the county where we have a sheriff
that is the meanest sheriff in the world, and the people wear
pink underwear, et cetera.
One thing that is not mentioned with the national cuts with
respect to the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office, and it really
has nothing to do with the gentleman who attracts the camera
every place he goes, it is the professionals who have been
there for years. We have got a lot of very good law enforcement
people running the jail system.
As I was on a criminal assignment for five years, and
sentenced people to jail for substantial periods of time, and
oftentimes, as conditions of probation, they would receive up
to one year in the County Jail as a condition of probation. The
jail would offer programs for people who had problems with
alcohol, even programs for sex offenders, basic adult
education. And oftentimes that gave the inmate an opportunity
to work their way out of jail earlier than the one year
probation term.
In December of 2010 I met a gentleman by the name of Leroy
Shingoitewa, and he is the Chairman of the Hopi Tribe, and he
invited me to have lunch with him and have dinner. We did, and
he says, I would like you to be the Chief Judge for Hopi. And I
am a fourth generation Arizonan. I know where Hopi is located,
but I had never visited. I said, okay. He said, come up and
visit and see how you like it, and then maybe you can help us
with some of our problems.
Well, that invitation I am extending to you, Mr. Simpson,
and Ms. McCollum, on behalf of the tribe. Come and visit Hopi.
I can tell you that in the course of my year there, and now
into my second year, during the summer, you see busloads of
people come in to visit. And I have been at the various hotels,
La Posada in Winslow, the cultural center on Hopi at the Legacy
and Tuba City, and you hear German being spoken, and Italian,
and busloads of people from Germany and from France.
And when they describe Hopi, they say mystical, land of
enchantment. Not to borrow from New Mexico, but they describe
the area, and they are enchanted by this culture, this people
that live up on mesas that extend, you know, the breadth of 100
miles. And I am hearing the comments of my neighbor here,
suggesting that Hopi Navajo land has created a lot of hard
feelings, and I am sure that is all accurate. But nonetheless,
we in law enforcement, and I consider myself in the Justice
Department of Hopi, patrol from Tuba City to King's Canyon. It
is about a distance of about 100 miles. We have our chief of
police present, Jamie, was it? Yeah. And his staff responds to
a call, and sometimes it takes an hour, an hour and a half to
get to the location of where the call is coming from.
And if you have looked at the written materials we have
submitted, you will see that in 2011 there were almost 7,500
calls. Almost 3,000 of those calls had to do with intoxication.
Jamie tells me that there are times that by the time the police
officer arrives, the intoxicated person has moved on, or passed
out, and sometimes the families do not want the person
arrested, sometimes they do. And Jamie's police force is 23.
And I heard this morning the young officer, I think from North
Dakota, who talked about the need to double the number of
officers on that reservation, for a lot of good reasons, and I
am sure you hear that endlessly when you have these hearings.
The message I received when I was hired by the chairman,
and the vice-chairman Honanie, was we need to do something
about, you know, law and order. We need to address law and
order, and, Judge Trujillo, we want you to implement the new
Federal Tribal Law and Order Act. And the chairman said, are
you familiar with it? I said, well, vaguely. He said, well, I
want you to become an expert on it, meet with the U.S.
Attorney's Office, and implement the Law and Order Act on Hopi.
We now have rewritten the code. The council has not passed on
it, but the law and order committee of the council has, and
that has taken every bit of a year, and we are now at the stage
where if the council passes on it, the law may be effective in
2012. Maybe July 1, maybe August 1, maybe September 1.
As I understand the Law and Order Act, I do not mean to use
political terms here, but it is another unfunded mandate.
Because Law and Order is going to require people to go to jail
for longer periods of time, and maybe that will turn things
around, in terms of people's attitudes and their conduct.
I was there about three months and decided to convene
meetings of various community leaders. And at one time I told
Judge Leslie, who had been a Hopi Judge there for 26, 27 years,
I said, Judge Leslie, why do we not convene all the leadership
of the villages, we have 12 villages, and let us talk about
this whole area of intoxication in Law and Order. It was an
interesting experience because we had, I believe, six
governors. That is the term they give to the elected person who
heads up the village. We had six governors present. Probably
70, 80 people were present, and one of the governors stood up
and said, what do you call this committee? I says, well, we
really have not given it a name, but we call it the Hopi
Justice Committee. We are trying to bring about some
significant change in our community.
He looked at me, and he said, you are the Chief Judge? I
said, yes, sir. He says, well, justice on Hopi is a joke, and
the jail is a revolving door, and you Judges, I do not know
what you are doing about the problem, but you are not helping
the villages. Well, that is another aspect of my learning
experience of Hopi.
I had mentioned that when I was a Superior Court Judge I
would sentence people, and the Italian Stallion sheriff that we
have would house them and make sure that, you know, they move
on into the prison system. But on Hopi, the Judges meet every
Wednesday, and the prosecutor meets with Jamie and the people
who are running the detention facility, and we determined how
many people to release, because we are at capacity. And
capacity is anywhere from 70 to 100. And this weekend we know
there are going to be another 10 to 15 people arrested, and the
violent offenders we want to make sure are locked up and not
released.
So it is kind of like, who is running the show here, in
terms of Hopi justice? And I do not think it takes the students
very long, and we have a whole group of Hopi students present.
And I guess I am really speaking for them, because it is their
community that we want to talk about, you know, public safety
for them. It is the BIA that runs the jail. It is the BIA that
runs the detention facility, and it is a two headed monster, I
learned. They have different supervisors. And I do not know at
what level you can reach someone who speaks for both detention
and the police, but you have to deal with the various
supervisors.
And, for the most part, there does not seem to be any
urgency about doing anything about it, from the BIA's
perspective. That is my view. The good news is Dorothy Fulton.
There is a lady named Dorothy Fulton who I met recently,
representing BIA, and she does seem to be interested in
bringing about significant change on Hopi.
I have mentioned the Law and Order Act, July 29, 2010.
Another significant date in Hopi justice is 1981. In 1981, and
I do not know who the Secretary of Interior was, but I suppose
there was rejoicing among BIA people because there was a new
building that was constructed on Hopi, and it was a
rehabilitation facility. And I suppose the people at that time,
if this committee was constituted at that time were talking
about, we need to set up a rehab program to deal with
alcoholism. Well, that facility is now our jail. It has been
converted to a jail, and it is inadequate, obviously not
sufficient words to describe the condition of the jail. Just
this past weekend I hear from our chief of police that the
electronic doors failed and two prisoners walked out.
We have had a reconstruction effort, meaning they had to
really redesign and reconstruct this building to meet
specifications. And in 2004 it was learned that the condition
of the facility was such that we could not house our juveniles.
So the juveniles had to be transported, if they were going to
be detained, to Colorado, or McKinley County in New Mexico.
I come on the scene, and I learn that there is a negotiated
contract with Navajo County. The county seat is Holbrook, that
is about an hour and a half away, and that agreement has been
in place for about 18 months, but the BIA has not approved it
yet, and eventually, in 2011, in April or May, it was approved,
so that was almost two years later it was approved. We now
house our juveniles in Holbrook, an hour and a half away.
The stress to families, the inability to provide support to
children, is obvious. We need the facility that this written
proposal speaks of. And I know you have been listening to the
presenters all day, asking for millions and millions and
millions of dollars. You know, I asked the chairman before I
left, I says, Chairman, what do you expect to accomplish by
sending me to represent you? He said, well, you know, just hope
for the best.
So I am here on a plea, asking that this committee visit
this land of enchantment, this group of mystical people, and
they are. You know, you have got bad apples, but for the most
part you have got a wonderful community and a great culture. At
one of the Justice Committee meetings, one of the ladies spoke
up and said, you know, alcohol is destroying our culture, and
jail is not the answer. Well, that is one view, in terms of
punishment.
The chairman, and some of the leadership currently, believe
that the Law and Order Act is going to make a difference, and
that we need to prepare. And by preparation, meaning we need to
develop the jail facility that can provide services. And if we
sentence to three years, where are they going to go? Are we
going to come to you and say, we need you to talk to the Bureau
of Prisons and try to find some facility for us? That is not
going to work. At least, based upon what I have seen so far, it
is not going to work. So we need to house them there, and
hopefully rehabilitate these people before they return to
society. And under the Law and Order Act, as you are, I am
sure, well aware, we can stack three times, so conceivably 6
year sentences, 9 year sentences.
My final remark has to do with the violence that occurs,
and the need for officers to concentrate more on those cases.
And Jamie and I have talked about this, but some of the cases
that I am aware of, the violence against women, and the need
for appropriate punishment for those that violate, is something
that Law and Order can bring about.
The U.S. Attorney's Office is not the answer. U.S.
Attorney's Office position is if you do not have a rape kit, if
you do not have hard evidence, if it is just he said, she said,
we are not going to prosecute. So the only place justice is
going to occur is at the Tribal Court. Thank you.
[The statement of Richard Trujillo follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Ms. McCollum.

EDUCATION CONCERNS

Ms. McCollum. Mr. Chair, members, the one thing that I had
noted to ask you about was education. Is there anything more
you would like to add about education?
Ms. Cuch. Education? Yeah.
Ms. McCollum. If you would like to----
Mr. Simpson. Are you asking her?
Ms. McCollum. Yes.
Ms. Cuch. Are you asking about education?
Ms. McCollum. I am sorry. Yes.
Ms. Cuch. My testimony did not focus on education.
Ms. McCollum. Yes, I know. But I am asking----
Ms. Cuch. You are asking----
Ms. McCollum [continuing]. If there is anything anyone
would like to add on education, because I know when you come
here you only have five minutes----
Ms. Cuch. Yeah.
Ms. McCollum [continuing]. You cannot talk about----
Ms. Cuch. Yeah.
Ms. McCollum [continuing]. Everything.
Ms. Cuch. Okay. Education, what comes to my mind is the
Johnson-O'Malley Program, and that is funded through the Bureau
of Indian Affairs, and that helps the students that are
attending local public schools.
Ms. McCollum. Right.
Ms. Cuch. And it is supposed to provide, well, they call it
the unique problems of Indian students. It has to do with
addressing their learning, and it has to do with their culture,
and providing the counseling to the Indian students that are
attending public schools. I know from time to time that is
sometimes stricken from the BIA budget, but I think it needs to
be put in there permanently. It should be a permanent program
in the BIA. And it is called the Johnson-O'Malley Program. That
comes to my mind. And I have worked with Indian students
attending public schools, and yes, they do have problems, and
they are at times maybe two or three grades behind their non-
Indian peers. So that counseling, and also tutoring, is needed
to help our Indian students to move up. So that would be my
comment, to keep it in there. Let it be a permanent fixture in
the BIA budget----
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Ms. Cuch [continuing]. For the education.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Cole.
Mr. Cole. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Ms. Cuch, I have a
question for you, and then for President Shelly as well. You
talked at length, obviously, about the problems you have with
energy permitting, and recently the Department of Interior and
BIA announced a new policy for surface and renewable energy
policies, whereby they would allow the tribes to license
development. You would sort of get your procedures approved by
the BIA, and hope that that would expedite energy. And I know
there is at least some thought at the BIA about doing the same
thing, in other words, turning over to Utes on the land after a
regulatory regime had been agreed to. You would administer that
there. So would that help, and do you feel comfortable that is
an appropriate solution for the problems you have?
Ms. Cuch. My answer to that is yes, it would help, because
there is a lot of red tape. BIA, like I mentioned, is not
funded adequately. And unless they have more funding to hire
more people to process the APDs, yes, that would help. But,
again, as far as my comment on one stop shop, put everything
together, all the Federal agencies, that would help too, rather
than going to each one.
Mr. Cole. And the Chairman just reminded me of something.
In report language, at least, we asked the BIA to look at this
for sub-surface mineral rights on coal, and oil, and natural
gas, and try to assess tribes who carry. And Mr. Shelly, you
mentioned the problems you were having with coal, and we all
know there is a lot of opposition to coal sometimes. You
mentioned the EPA in particular. Do you have any reason to
believe that that opposition is just, well, are they opposed,
or are they just not equipped to handle this, or are they
putting roadblocks in your way, in terms of development of coal
resources, in your opinion?
Mr. Shelly. What I think is that the green energy, the
environmental, and the EPA is the one that is driving this, the
green energy probably driving this whole thing. And new rules
and laws, like BARK and others are popping up, and it is really
shutting down a lot of our uses of coal. And these are things
that have to go through tribal consultation, and working
together with each other on these to alleviate some of those
regulatory burdens that we get.
Mr. Cole. Do you----
Mr. Shelly. And I think that is one way of doing it. Now, I
would like to add one more thing.
Mr. Cole. Please do.
Mr. Shelly. On the permitting, the BIA----
Mr. Cole. EPA?
Mr. Shelly [continuing]. We--yeah. And what we did is we
did the MOU with Lawrence Livermore to do a study on oil and
resource on our nation, and to do a blueprint and a roadmap for
developers to come in. And we would like to handle the
permitting ourself, and that is what I want, not to get BIA
involved so much. Because once they get involved, it takes too
long, you know? So if we do it ourself, since we are going to
have the blueprint and the roadmap, the developers would know
what they want. And whatever they want, they come in to deal
with us, we will negotiate with them right away on it because
you do not have to do any----
Mr. Cole. Last question. Is the permitting process, in your
opinion, or to your understanding, faster off of non-Indian
lands? In other words, you see private developers basically
bypassing opportunities in Indian country because they can
permit faster, cheaper in lands just outside your reservation,
as opposed to coming on the reservation?
Mr. Shelly. It is faster out of the reservation than it
does in the reservation, so that is what I mean. I think Navajo
Nation should permit with developers within our nation, instead
of going through another agency, because it takes longer that
way. So what we are saying is, we will have the blueprint and
the roadmap. We will exactly know what we have with a national
resource, or whatever it is. Developer comes in, we deal with
them, we permit them where they want to set up their business.
Mr. Cole. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. I thank all the panelists for being
here today, and look forward to working with you as we develop
this upcoming budget. The next panel is Chairman Randy King,
Jimmie Mitchell, Director of Natural Resources, Energy
``Ribs'', or Eugene ``Ribs'' Whitebird----
Ms. McCollum. He is full of energy, though.
Mr. Simpson. Yeah, full of energy. Tom Maulson, and Jim
Zorn. Where did Ribs go?
Ms. McCollum. He was out there.
Mr. Simpson. You saw him out in the hall?
Ms. McCollum. I saw him out in the hall earlier. There he
is. You can sit down here by me, Ribs.
Mr. Whitebird. Okay.
Mr. Simpson. Randy, you are first.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

SHINNECOCK INDIAN NATION

WITNESS

RANDY KING
Mr. King. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and members of the
subcommittee. I am Randy King, Chairman of the Shinnecock
Indian Nation Board of Trustees. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify today concerning our need for new tribes funding.
We are located in Suffolk County, New York, at the eastern
end of Long Island. We have lived there as a self-governing
nation exercising jurisdiction over our lands since time
immemorial. Despite this history, we only recently were
reaffirmed as a federally-recognized tribe on October 1, 2010,
having spent over 3 decades in the interior petition process.
Over many decades we preserved our community using revenues
from our annual powwow, limited New York State and federal
grants, and private foundations. While these funds provided
some resources, they fell far short of the monies needed to
maintain a proper tribal government and to meet the most basic
needs of the our tribal members.
Today, the nation numbers over 1,400 enrolled members with
approximately 662 tribe members residing on the reservation.
The services we provide as a tribal government are funded
primarily with non-federal dollars and limited federal funding.
These services include community center, a cemetery, health
center, family preservation education center, and environmental
protection programs.
Through our acknowledgement the Bureau of Indian Affairs
concluded that we existed as a tribe well before the arrival of
non-Indians on our shores. However, our nation and our members
have not been able to access most federal services and benefits
for decades. It is our understanding that tribes recognized
after 1997 simply have not had access to the same level of
funding as those recognized before then. This resulted from a
policy change at the BIA on new tribes funding that set annual
base funding levels based on population. We are significantly
underfunded compared to other tribes under BIA jurisdiction
prior to '97.
All we are asking for is a level playing field to allow
those tribes recognized after '97, the tribes that need federal
support the most, to obtain our fair share of federal funding
to meet our tribal government responsibilities. As a nation, we
are moving forward on pursuing economic development initiatives
to increase our self-sufficiency, however, in the meantime we
do not have the necessary monies to support our tribal
government operations, capacity building, and infrastructure.
We are grateful that the Bureau of Indian Affairs has made
the fiscal year 2013 budget new tribes funding request on our
behalf. We ask that the Congress appropriate these monies and
also review and consider the extent to which post '97 new
tribes like ours are underfunded. We know that the Congress is
facing severe budget constraints, but we have been living with
minimal federal support for many decades.
Thank you for the opportunity to hear me today, and I will
answer any questions you have.
[The statement of Randy King follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Jimmie Mitchell.
Mr. Mitchell. Yes. With all due respect, out of the culture
of our nation I would like my elders to go and speak before me
out of respect for them, if it is all right.
Mr. Simpson. Who wants to speak? Ribs?
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012

LEECH LAKE BAND OF OJIBWE

WITNESS

EUGENE ``RIBS'' WHITEBIRD
Mr. Whitebird. Thank you, Chairman Simpson, Ranking Member
Moran, Representative McCollum, and other members of the
committee to allow me to testify today. My name is Ribs
Whitebird. I am a member of the Leech Lake Tribal Council. Our
reservation is located in northern Minnesota.
I would like to recognize the delegation from Leech Lake
here today with me, including Jackie Ward, the superintendent
of the Bug O Nay Ge Shig High School, please stand.
Like last year, today my testimony focuses solely on the
band's need to replace its high school facility at the Bug O
Nay Ge Shig High School. The school is administered and funded
by the BIE. We estimate the cost to replace the high school is
about $25 million. My hope is that I can come back next year to
give a verbal report on the replacement of the school.
Under our treaty of 1855, the Leech Lake Reservation was
established. The bank gave up millions of acres of our
homelands. In return the U.S. was supposed to provide for the
band's welfare, which included providing kids decent and safe
schools.
Further, the U.S. Congress passed the Nelson Act of 1889, a
Dawes Act for Minnesota and other federal law specific to
Minnesota will take more of our land. Logging companies wanted
our valuable white pine, and homesteaders wanted our land for
farming. In return proceeds from land and timber sales were
supposed to be used for our schools. The U.S. has never met
these obligations.
The schools are standard Indian children in grades K
through 12. The students commute to the school, which is from
14 communities within a 70-mile radius. The school has won many
awards for its academic achievement and its native language
programs. The elementary and middle school facilities are in
satisfactory condition, but the high school needs to be
replaced.
The current facility is a metal pole barn. One-third of the
facility was destroyed in a gas explosion in 1992. The facility
has severe structural and mechanical deficiencies and lacks
proper insulation. The facility does not meet safety, fire, and
security standards.
Also, the facility has electrical problems and lacks an
alarm system. Further, the building lacks a communication
intercom system, telecom technology, and safe zones, which puts
everyone at risk during emergencies. Also, the facility
jeopardizes the health of the students and faculty due to poor
indoor air quality from mold, fungus, and a faulty HVAC system.
The facility suffers from rodents, roof leaks, sagging
roofs, roof holes, uneven floors, poor lighting, severe sewer
problems, lack of handicap access, and lack of classroom and
other space. These are just a few of the numerous deficiencies.
I have a set of folders here. Due to unsafe and undesirable
conditions of the high school, many students leave after middle
school to attend other schools. Students are embarrassed about
the condition of the high school, resulting in negative image
of the school in the community and a lower enrollment rate.
The school is on the BIA list of schools in need of
replacement. The BIA has acknowledged that the school has
exceeded its life expectancy by decades. The BIA categories the
high school facilities as being in poor condition. The BIA's
fiscal year 2013 budget proposes eliminating funding for
replacing BIE school facilities and focusing instead solely on
facilities' improvements and repair. This is unacceptable.
We urge the committee to provide funding to replace school
facilities. You can only put so many Band-aids on something.
Our school is one big Band-aid, and no amount of improvements
or repairs will address the serious deficiencies in the
facility. Why keep throwing money at temporary fixtures? The
BIA just needs to build a new high school. Our kids deserve
this.
This change in BIA school construction policy to eliminate
funding to replace facilities and instead focus on improvement
and repairs was done without any government-to-government
consultation. There must be consultation. BIA should not be
allowed to make these decisions without talking or listening to
our point of view. The high school is among more than 63
schools funded by the BIE that are in poor condition. The BIE
construction backlog is at least $1.3 billion. There needs to
be some funding to address the backlog.
We appreciate that times are tough financially, but our
kids should not be the ones supposed to shoulder the burden.
The Administration's fiscal year 2013 budget request is
extremely disappointing. The Administration proposes only $52.9
million for BIE school construction. This is a huge cut from
past levels. You cannot do much with that. To address the
backlog we need adequate funding over a sustained period of
time.
In conclusion, the fact is that the high school is not safe
and should not be a place where our kids go to school. As I
said last year, I doubt that anyone sitting at this table would
allow their children to attend school in this type of facility
that our children go to school in. We respectfully request the
committee's assistance in replacing our high school facility.
Thank you.
[The statement of Eugene ``Ribs'' Whitebird follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Jimmie, you are next.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

LITTLE RIVER BAND OF OTTAWA INDIANS

WITNESS

JIMMIE MITCHELL
Mr. Mitchell. Yeah. My name is Jimmie Mitchell, and first
of all, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Is the mic on?
Mr. Mitchell. Yeah, it is. I will move it a little closer
here.
Mr. Simpson. Okay.
Mr. Mitchell. I am here as a tribal member for the Little
River Band of Ottawa Indians, as well as representative for the
Chippewa Ottawa Resource Authority. It is a five-tribe resource
management authority that exercises management, over not only
our commercial fishing rights but also in conjunction with the
Inland Treaty Right which was just recently established.
And today as I speak I think back to the history that we
have in Michigan. It was exactly to this date 176 years ago
that 29 of our chiefs came to Washington, DC, to negotiate a
treaty, which became the treaty of 1836. During that treaty the
Ceded Territory in Michigan was established, which is roughly
13.8 million acres of Michigan. It is within the northern lower
peninsula of Michigan as well as the eastern portion of the
peninsula of Michigan.
In living that we have the ability to have co-management
within that area, but unfortunately, without the funds to do so
it really limits our ability to exercise that treaty to its
fullest extent, and with the current conditions that the
environment is in, the depletion of resources, not only within
the natural resources, but within the state and Federal
Government's abilities to adequately manage those, much of that
burden has fallen back on the tribes to try to fill in that
niche to help not only ensure that the species are not further
degraded from the condition that they are now but also to be
able to have the restoration reclamation enhancement abilities
to make sure that the sustainability is there as well as
looking at other species that we need to bring back in to help
our cultural needs within our communities to be realized again.
Many of those things are missing and have really caused a
detriment within the communities, and it is wonderful to see
some of those identifiers coming back, to be able to look up in
the sky and see the eagle again, for instance. You know, that
was really, to us as Indian people, a severe detriment to us,
and the reasons why, you know, with it being as part of our
culture.
In 2004, the tribes were challenged with our right again by
the State of Michigan. They felt that the right did not exist
any longer, and so we went into a lengthy negotiation process,
and during that process not only did we fight to preserve our
rights to hunt, fish, and gather, but we also fought for co-
management, which we were able to achieve.
And so with that looking at the responsibilities, again, we
have within the consent decree, there are mechanisms within
there that if we do not manage it appropriately, that there is
mechanisms that will come into place that limit our ability to
have access to fish, called regression models, and so the
tribes are really forced to continue the management aspects,
again, that the state and the Federal Government can uphold.
And so with that, you know, I want to thank the support
that we have had from this, from you as being the supreme
protector of our environment. We would not be able to do what
we do without having that support, and, again, I think in
looking at the collaborative efforts that we have with the
tribes, looking at our responsibilities, not just, again, as
part of our culture but also with all peoples within our areas,
these things are important to everyone.
One of the things that we have been doing back home at
Little River, we have been working on our sturgeon restoration
program. We have a remnant population of sturgeon that were
just about extinct, and so we developed a sturgeon-rearing
facility that actually uses water from the big river, and it
has been successfully running for 8 years, and we have
introduced probably, I am going to guess close to 600 sturgeon
back into the system that most likely would not have made it.
We went as far as we have created a DVD that I would like
to share with the committee here just to have an idea of the
kind of collaboration and efforts, again, we did not do that by
ourselves. We used Fish and Wildlife monies. We used forester
cooperation as well, and so it is really a collection of
sovereigns coming together to help these things, help the
environment, help our cultures.
And so with that I just wanted to, again, thank you for the
support. The President's budget does have a base funding
established finally for our consent decree for the inland
portion of it, and we would like to respectfully ask your
consideration in this process, and I am here to answer any
questions you may have about that.
[The statement of Jimmie Mitchell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Mr. Mitchell. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Appreciate it. Tom is next.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

LAC DU FLAMBEAU BAND OF CHIPPEWA INDIANS IN WISCONSIN

WITNESS

TOM MAULSON
Mr. Maulson. I just want to let you know that my Indian
name is Wind Coming, otherwise in a Christian way Tom Maulson,
and I am the President of the Lac du Flambeau Band in Lake
Superior Chippewa Indians with my relatives that is with us
here.
You know, Mr. Chairman, I want to sort of give you a book
here, and my colleague to my right will definitely--this is a
good story. You know, sitting here a good part of the
afternoon, and I know you people are busy people, we, too, have
some priorities coming from Indian Country. And I sat back
there and listened to the Holocaust that is still going on in
Indian Country, you know, here, not only in, you know, in my
reservation or across this country. We need a lot of help. We
have many priorities. Same as the other tribes out there.
Protection of our natural resources, education, welfare, and
these things are just, you know, funded at their base funding.
We need more support, Mr. Chairman, in many other issues out
there.
And I have got my natural resources program right here, and
I will turn it over to him when I get to about that point right
there. We have got a lot of issues there to represent to EPA at
the national level.
I have been, you know, cross country dealing with, you
know, about what mining has done to my colleagues back home in
the northern part of Wisconsin and what they have done to the
Oklahoma tribes, and I can just go on and on.
But I think there can be some resolutions instead of coming
back every year like Rib said over there. He talks about, you
know, I remember him when I was sitting here, he talked about
that school again, knowing that money just goes so far. We know
that. I think we are quality people today, educated, and we
know the system today.
And all we ask is maybe another opportunity that this
committee can take a look at setting us as Indians off to one
side because you all have the fiduciary responsibility to me as
a tribal president of my nation of what that treaty rights, you
know, the bearing that we have on each other. Maybe we need to
take a look at all those fundings, instead of putting us into
the melting pot of America today, there is more people that
come in every year than Indians across this country. We need to
maybe put those type of dollars off to one side so we can have
new schools, we can have better prosperity for our natural
resources, and we can have healthcare and all these, you know,
type of things that we are trying back home.
I think, you know, Martin Luther said he had a dream. We
have visions. We want to be free. We want to make sure that we
can make our own decisions, where tribal presidents can put
their own initials down for certification, may be whatever
level. We are starting to get that qualification back home.
In education we are just playing catch up today. You know,
our young people are still having tough times, you know,
understanding what we call the Tamuccachoma Inn, where that
white language or those white process and what our kids have to
go through. We still have somewhat of the old boarding schools
back home, and I think, you know, and we have the quality of
what we want as Indian people, and you can help us. You can put
that money aside. You can work on these things and make it a
lot easier and safer and more wealth for our people, because
sometimes we are bitter poor. We are happy people.
But I hope that this year's subcommittee can take a look at
all the things that are owed to Indian people, and I say it in
a good way. You owe us all that. You people that sit there as
our leaders. You owe us that.
I am going to turn it over to the Natural Resource Program
for Larry to expound on in a minute.
[The statement of Tom Maulson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Would you state your name for the record?
Mr. Wawronowicz. Larry Wawronowicz. I am the Natural
Resources Director for the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake
Superior Chippewa Indians. I do not know how much more I could
say that the chairman could say so eloquently, but the clean
air, water, and land is very, very important to Lac du Flambeau
tribal members in order to be able to exercise their treaty
rights on and off the reservation.
And our testimony that is being presented today in written
and oral form really, you know, concentrates on funding for
environmental programs like EPA Program GAP, $28 million
increase. We really strongly support and hopefully that you do
to see that we could get that money into the EPA GAP Programs
that increases our environmental capabilities.
Great Lakes Restoration Initiative is very, very important
to the tribes along with the Circle of Flight. In order to be
able to document some of the things that we are able to do with
Circle of Flight and the Great Lakes Restoration Initiative
dollars, we put together a brochure for all the tribes in the
Great Lakes region in Minnesota, Michigan, and Wisconsin.
So basically we are asking you to take a look at that. You
are appropriating the money. We are putting it to good use in a
good way and in a quick way. We are able to take the money from
the EPA, put it through the Bureau of Indian Affairs, through a
638 contract, and get it at the Indian Country to work and make
a difference really fast.
The other things that are important here are conservation
law enforcement, our tribal management development program,
there is a pretty good increase in the Bureau budget for Lac du
Flambeau. I think it comes down to $60,000, but in Indian
Country $60,000 goes a long way. It is going to take our tribal
management development program from $181,000 annual budget to
$241,000. So that is pretty good.
But when you consider it in terms of how much healthcare
costs, for example, it is costing us $23,000 per individual
that has a family life insurance policy on the reservation. So
$61,000 will pay for approximately three health insurance
policies. So it is a little bit that goes a long way.
Conservation law enforcement. Last year the Bureau of
Indian Affairs went ahead and put conservation law in for $1
million. Congress did not support it. This year they went in
there and put conservation law enforcement in there again for
half a million dollars, and we hope that, you know, can go some
place. We could use it for training for our conservation law,
but, you know, $500,000 for 556 federally-recognized tribes is
not going to go too far. It is costing us about $100,000 per
law enforcement officer to, you know, be certified, be kept
certified, be trained to make sure that they are a public
servant and protect the safety of our community.
Tribal education, so important to us. I mean, here I am
speaking on behalf of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior
Chippewa Indians. I am Polish decent. I am not Ojibwe. We need
students to be able to take this job and tell their story in
their way and their language. So, you know, when I see, you
know, possible cuts in Pell Grants or higher education, it gets
a little difficult for us to try to recruit people into our
natural resource program in order for them to be able to
protect those resources for present and future generations and
to be able to supply the opportunity for future tribal members
to hunt, fish, and gather in the Ceded Territories of
Wisconsin.
I am over, but I really just want to say that we support,
you know, we really appreciate your support in the past. Your
continued support is very, very important in order for us to be
able to have clean air, water, and land.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Jim.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

GREAT LAKES INDIAN FISH AND WILDLIFE COMMISSION

WITNESS

JIM ZORN
Mr. Zorn. We can make up time. Do not worry.
Jim Zorn, Executive Administrator, Great Lakes Indian Fish
and Wildlife Commission, and on behalf of our 11 tribal
nations, the 38,000 members, their families, and their
communities, our program affects about 60,000 square miles of
treaty ceded territory in Wisconsin, Michigan, and Minnesota,
and we have been at it for about 30 years now, and that is what
the book is about, Mr. Simpson. Our 25th anniversary we put
together a treaty symposium that really creates the historical
record of what these rights are to the tribes, what these
rights mean to their communities, as well as the benefits that
come not only to tribal communities but surrounding
communities.
So I know the committee is deeply understanding of those,
so I will cut to the chase. GLIFWC here today would like to
address the rights protection line item in the BIA budget. Mr.
Cole said before that this committee, subcommittee has provided
leadership to the Administration. In fiscal year 2010 you did
that, fiscal year 2011 you did that in rights protection, and
finally the Administration heard and in the fiscal year 2013
proposal we have more money going to rights protection and
supporting the tribes' treaty commissions. It is a great thing.
We support that, and I know the tribes in the Great Lakes
Region support the notion that 34 percent of that line item
certainly should come to the Great Lakes Region. It is a good
way to spend the money, and we helped document those results in
that book and elsewhere as Larry pointed out.
And even with that, with all the funding we can leverage
and with our base budget, for example, this year about 5.6
million we got, I was able to leverage about 2.4 million other
funding sources to bring us up to about 8 million, including
DOJ COPS and other funding that one would not think so. So that
base is so important we can really do a lot with it.
And even with all that we are still only at 75 percent of
need in terms of funding. So we still have unmet needs, but,
you know, we are very happy.
So thank you for what you have done.
Secondly, contract support. Two simple words. Thank you
very, very, very much. I cannot tell you what that has meant to
GLIFWC. We can put more program dollars out there because we
had no contract support shortfall last year, and we had a
little bit extra to apply to some of our direct contract
support costs, so I could even get more benefit and keep an
extra conservation officer on that I could not have otherwise
done.
So thank you for your leadership on that.
Finally, EPA Great Lakes Restoration. We support the
Administration's proposal of $300 million. We would suggest, as
President Maulson said, some sort of tribal set aside. We
suggest, you know, $25 million, some amount that the tribes
could get. GLIFWC need is about $1.2 million, and we strongly
support whether it is through interagency agreement or it is
through some other mechanism using the Indian Self-
Determination Act as a funding mechanism, whether it is self-
determination or self-governance because it gets money out the
door faster in a way the tribes know how to use it.
And the results, I think speak for themselves. You know, we
have our member tribes, and now they are harvesting 25 percent
of the wild rice from restored rice beds. We have fish
consumption advisories. We are preventing invasive species
spread and introduction.
So the context we have here I think in these treaty
commissions is good government, accountable, transparent,
efficient programs, on-the-ground results, and in that I just
want to bring out one thing. This is a picture of one of our
conservation officers, full garb, on an Iowa National Guard
Black Hawk helicopter. Nine of our officers were involved in a
multiple-agency effort that discovered and eradicated and
arrested six individuals, including five Mexican nationals,
illegal in this country, about 10,000 pot plants in Chequamegon
National Forest. This is where our tribal members hunt, fish,
and gather. This where my staff goes out and works and the
staff of the DNR and the Forest Service go out and work.
We help protect that area, so why are we involved as
conservation officers? I need to know out there. Our staff
picks up people going through the woods on our trail cams that
we put out there for the fur bears that we are monitoring. We
see people in masks, with camo faces, and so our presence there
helps the general public. It is just one example.
So with that fiscal year 2010 restoration this is exactly
the type of things we can put on the ground that gets out there
and gets things done.
The partnership, state, federal, international level, bi-
national with Canada, the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement
that hopefully will be modified this year to provide not only
good protection and restoration but get tribes to the table
more often.
And so with Great Lakes Restoration I want to point out it
is called the GLRI, but do not forget protection. Tribes need
to be proactive to protect those areas that are still pristine
that have not caught on fire. What do we have to do? Wait
around for the river to catch on fire before we get involved to
prevent that? So, please, I know the committee is very
concerned about not putting people out there. You want dirt
shovels turned, but in Indian Country the protection is the
project that they need. So if we could work through that, we
would greatly appreciate it.
With that thank you very much. We really appreciate the
opportunity to be here.
[The statement of Jim Zorn follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Chair, Mr. Whitebird, could I have the
photographs that you have underneath your speech?
Mr. Whitebird. I think we got some for you.

SCHOOL CONDITIONS

Ms. McCollum. Mr. Chair, you are from a northern climate.
Imagine a pole barn. We go in Minnesota from over 100 degrees
in the summer with heat and humidity to well below freezing,
well below.
Mr. Simpson. But I do not live in Minnesota.
Ms. McCollum. I know, but this is the high school we
welcome our youth into, a pole barn. The reason why it has
problems with rodents and that is not because they do not have
excellent staff and people. They are working night and day to
eliminate it, but it is a pole barn. It is a pole barn, and you
cannot fix a pole barn. When the Secretary was here, he was
talking about delaying the construction and doing a moratorium
to conduct the inventory. The inventory on this school is done.
It is done, and it is just beyond belief. You know how
passionate I am about schools in other areas, and although this
is not in my district, it is in my home state. I have to look
these children in the eye in my community and say, you are
worth a pole barn? You are worth a pole barn that cannot be
repaired anymore.
So, Ribs, thank you for being here, and I know that you
speak passionately about this because you care about children
and having safe schools all over this country.
Mr. Chairman, with this one, enough is enough.

ASIAN CARP

I would like to turn now to Lake Superior for a little bit.
The chairman has been talking about how we need to have a
holistic approach about invasive species. The asian carp is
coming, and we need a better approach than the one that is
currently out there in Minnesota to shut one of the locks and
dams. That is not going to do it.
You talked about the cooperation that we have. Could you
elaborate a little more about how you work with state DNRs,
U.S. Fish and Wildlife, and how we are getting a big bang for
our buck out of here? Circle of Flight is a model program and
it was my honor when you came to me and asked me to help work
with others to keep the funding in place. Could you talk a
little bit more about what you are doing with that funding?
Mr. Maulson. Look at this. These are that many Indians
right here today. We have got all these tribes walking on the
Capitol Building, talking to their legislators, and the reason
why I get so really, you know, not upset, we had 1-year
colleagues come and make a speech to us, and the gentleman was
a 30-year, how do you want to call him, he is a surgeon and
become a politician, and these same group of Native People I
asked a question about drug abuse on our reservations, these
here OxyContins that are being sold. And he knew nothing, and
that is scary to me as a leader to you all. You know, this is
what I have got to, you know, he said just come and see me and
educate me.
Well, we are trying to figure out how to do that, so we got
organizations, Indian Health Board that we are going to put
together something where we can educate you all. I mean, I do
not have to educate you people. You guys, we have been here,
done this, you know. Otherwise you would not be here.
But the scary part is these other people that have to raise
their hands to the destiny of Indian people, that is why I
asked that we take a look at, you know, set asides for Indian
Country completely out of the melting pot of America today,
because, you know, we are paying off the backs of Indians for a
multitude of other ethnic groups almost 12 million illegal
Spanish people here from Mexico and all these other people that
are coming in, and you forgot about Indians. I do not say you
forgot here, otherwise we would not be here again.
But as a tribal leader I sort of when I come here I sort of
feel like I am begging for something that is owed to us, that
is obligated by, you know, this organization to us because we
are doing the work for you. Our great organization of the Great
Lakes Fish and Wildlife Commission and other collaborating
people that we are working with, especially state people, and
they are starting to recognize us as you asked that question,
that DNR is working very closely with the Great Lakes Fish and
Wildlife Commission and also with the tribes in Wisconsin to
make sure that we have a better protection.
You see the officers sitting in the helicopter. My son is a
chief game warden. He is getting the best education for every
one of those because they are out there by themselves
sometimes. They are out there with people with automatic
weapons, you know, trying to take down the drug lords and
everybody else, something that keeps coming to Indian Country,
selling us all this here type of stuff.
That is why I think we come here and ask your help. You
know, far greater, and I do not know how you guys do what you
are doing. I commend you for it to try to give us the best you
have, Mr. Chairman, and it just, sometimes we look at it, it is
not enough. I do not know why.
So, I guess, you know, if you could ever put a budget
together and say, hey, this is for Indians, and we are not
going to put them in with all the other ethnic groups in
America today because, you know, they have a special interest
here, which we do. Obama gives me 15 minutes. I tried to ask
for more but the staff would not let me. But it is good
dialogue, and I think, you know, that is where, and I
appreciate you asking the questions, giving that respect to us
as tribal leaders because we do have a lot of problems back
home with sexual abuse, we have got, we just got through
getting more law enforcement. We cannot even indict the people
that we catch with drugs in our courts because you heard one of
the judges say, he said or she said, and they just sort of let
them go.
It is really tough, and I, too, would encourage you guys,
come and take a look at what we got. We did it because we
pulled ourselves up by the bootstraps. We used our money
wisely, the little bit of dollars that we got here. We used it
wisely. We built an organization that is, you know, the top of
the line. People are looking at the Great Lakes Fish and
Wildlife Commission. We have got a brand new building. We are
trying to do the things America wants, and we are doing it
basically a lot ourselves with what I call ingenuity.
So if we could get more help, Mr. Simpson, we would
definitely appreciate it, because you guys do one heck of a job
with the little bit that you got to do with, you know. The
dollars that you get. Hopefully, maybe the war will get over
with and maybe the monies will come back home and start to
build our communities again.
Mr. Zorn. Do you want a couple particular examples just
after the record? Okay. For example, Great Lakes Restoration
Initiative, Fish and Wildlife Service, kicked over $500,000 to
the BIA to get out to tribes for the state and interstate
aquatic invasive species plans.
We are involved on the Asian carp everywhere from up the
Mississippi to what Chicago is doing down at the Chicago River
and what they are talking about doing there. So we really take
a comprehensive view, and this is where the GRA money is so
important because you have to be so many places at once. The
staff and I had this conversation about this initiative
proliferation. I wish we could clone ourselves. You can only be
so many places at once, and what we are hearing from the
cities, from the states, and others is the value of the tribal
perspective at these tables, it brings a vision, it brings a
clout, it brings some responsibility, it brings some help.
And so those are a couple of examples that we have that if
you want more, we can document some of this stuff. But it does
work, and people are trying to piece together what funding they
have to get the best amount for the dollars that we have.
Mr. Wawronowicz. Mr. Chairman, can I respond?
Mr. Simpson. Sure.
Mr. Wawronowicz. Circle Flight dollars. We are able to
utilize, we have this, what we call the Paul Marsh in the
northern part of the State of Wisconsin. Part of it on the
reservation, part of it is off the reservation. We were able to
utilize, you know, some of the Circle of Flight dollars to help
supply water control structures and other infrastructure
development on the state side of the Paul Marsh through a
cooperative agreement, and also they were able to provide some
dollars through Ducks Unlimited.
So there was, you know, tribal, state, Federal Government,
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service was involved, as well as private
sector. So it, you know, gave us a lot of leverage by utilizing
the Circle of Flight dollars to make some big improvements
within the Paul Marsh area of northern Wisconsin.
Mr. Mitchell. Mr. Chairman, if you do not mind, in
understanding, you know, the proximity that the tribes that are
representing this region are really looking at and what is very
concerning to us is to understand that we have the
responsibility to ensure that 20 percent of the world's fresh
water supply that is available to all peoples is protected and
reserved, and I will share a story real quickly, because I
understand we are running late, that was shared to me by Frank
Ettawageshik, who was a tribal chairperson of the Little
Traverse Band of Odawa Indians.
And he was flying over Lake Michigan one day, and he looked
down from way up in the sky, and he saw a little tiny ship, and
he realized, well, that was one of those iron freighters that
was going across the lake, probably down to Gary, Indiana, or
some place to drop its load off, and he realized that, you
know, that ship is probably over 1,000 feet long, and if you
took that ship, and you picked it up by one end, and you stuck
it into Lake Michigan, at its deepest place you would still
have a significant portion of that boat sticking out of the
water.
To understand that, when you look at the Great Lakes and
understand how important they are, but they are really just a
sheen of water. They are not this inexhaustible resource that
everybody touts them out to be, and if we are going to
understand what it means to our communities as the Lac du
Flambeau community as well as the human community, I think
having that tribal voice at that table and understanding the
significance to all peoples and how important those waters are
to protect and to ensure their survivability and sustainability
into the next seven generations.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. I appreciate you all being here
today. I can tell you, President Maulson, that we do not look
at it as you all coming here and begging for something. What we
view this as is the opportunity for us to learn about what the
needs are in Indian Country and listen to you all and what your
priorities are as we try to put together a budget with limited
resources and try to address those high priority items for the
tribes.
And I will be the first to admit it would be nice if we had
some more money, and I suspect that school was not built last
year after your testimony because you are back testifying
again, and I suspect you will be back every year until we get
it built.
Mr. Whitebird. Whenever I am called upon, I will be back.
Mr. Simpson. I appreciate it, Ribs, but thank you all for
coming here because it is important to us, and you have brought
up a new issue that frankly I did not know was an issue, but it
is something that we need to look at in terms of treatment of
tribes that were what, post 1997, and----
Mr. King. We are just looking for a fair share. I mean, we
see it as a macro-economic situation where, you know, we are
supportive of the tribes, you know, that have gathered here
today, you know, for the bigger part of the budget, you know,
such as, you know, Johnson-O'Malley, you know, when we had our
first consultation with the National Office of the BIA, they
said, you know, the Johnson-O'Malley Act, it probably will not
be funded by the time you guys are eligible and get your stuff
going.
On a micro-economic side we are just looking, you know, it
is $160,000 to run our government, you know, to pay the
payroll, the fringe, the start-up costs, and that is what we
are looking for on the micro-economic, you know, side of it.
Mr. Simpson. Yeah. I appreciate it. Thank you all.
Next, our final panel today is Colley Billie. Is that
right? Kitcki Carroll. Is that even close? Kitcki.
Mr. Carroll. Kitcki.
Mr. Simpson. Kitcki. Okay. Kitcki Carroll, and Bill Harris.
Chairman Billie, you are first.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

MICCOSUKEE TRIBE OF INDIANS OF FLORIDA

WITNESS

COLLEY BILLIE
Mr. Billie. Thank you, Mr. Simpson. My name is Colley
Billie. I am the Chairman of the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of
Florida. Thank you for providing me the opportunity to testify
today.
The Everglades have been the home of Miccosukee people for
hundreds of years, and our commitment to its restoration is
unwavering. We have the most at stake because protecting our
home and our traditional way of life depends on this.
My testimony focuses on the following two priorities. One
is stopping the massive environmental skyway bridging of the
Tamiami Trail adjacent to tribal lands, and number two,
ensuring that EPA, the Department of Interior, and of course,
prioritize improving water quality in the Everglades.
To give you an idea of the Everglades, I brought here today
a satellite map. If you look over to my left, I want to show
you where our tribal lands are. All this area is our tribal
land, and also the Everglades National Park is south of our
tribal lands. They are in this area way down to here, all the
way down into Florida Bay.
Tamiami Trail goes through our reservation on the south
side, and that takes you from Miami all the way up to Naples,
from the east coast to west coast, and the national park and
the Corps are constructing one mile of bridging on the Tamiami
Trail and where they propose another 5.5 miles of bridging, and
that is in this area.
This is a close-up map of the bridging itself over here.
This is the Tamiami Trail, a closer view of this section.
Miami and Broward are in this area, Palm Beach is up there.
So all on the west coast. You have got Miami, Broward, Palm
Beach, and the Keys are way down in this area.
Sugar, orange, and cattle farms are located to the north of
us. They are up on the north side. If you look at the top, you
are going to see a part of Lake Okeechobee. These are farming
areas, generate high levels of phosphates and other pollutants.
I am sorry. Here are areas designated to be storm water
treatment areas to treat the polluted waters from these farms
and urban areas by which it seems the Federal Government and
the State of Florida have abandoned after investing over $200
million. That would be these areas in pink.
Lake Okeechobee, where water from the historic River of
Grass started before man reengineered it, and that would be at
the very top.
Over 100 years ago the water flowed from Lake Okeechobee to
Florida Bay. It would flow from north all the way down in the
south and come out in the Florida Bay in this area. Florida Bay
is the fishing capital for sports fishing.
Also, we have here various canals and levies developed in
the Everglades over the past 100 years by the Corps. Some of
these canals dump highly-polluted water directly onto our
reservation. These canals that I am talking about are here. You
got two canals here, you got Miami River over here, you got L-
28, L-29, and I believe this is L-67 over here. No. This is L-
28. This is the L-28 interceptor, and this is the other L-28.
This is the L-29. If you look over to my right, this is a
close-up picture of this interceptor that dumps polluted water
right into the middle of our reservation. That would be this
picture right here.
As you can see, there is nothing to catch all this water
being dumped into our reservation. It just flows directly into
the reservation, and if you look closely at the picture such as
this one, you should be seeing sour grass. Instead what you see
is cattails. Cattail growth is an indication that there is a
lot of phosphors in the water. It should not be like this.
In here is one of our tree islands, which you can see from
an aerial picture right there, the surrounding area should be
surrounded by sour grass, but because sour grass cannot grow in
such a polluted water, it has given way to cattails, and this
is the tree island which we took, Assistant Secretary, Mr.
Larry EchoHawk, to one of our tree islands before.
As you can see, we live in the heart of the Everglades.
This committee has appropriated more than $1.3 billion on
Department of Interior Everglades Project over the past decade.
Full Everglades restoration is projected to cost at least $13.5
billion. Given these tight fiscal times, taxpayer dollars
should be used wisely and effectively. We see a disjoined
approach on projects by federal agencies resulting in decisions
that harm the Miccosukee people.
One of the projects is the bridging. If you look over to my
left, you are going to see the bridging picture here, and that
will be this one in the corner. These are the pilings. It is
under construction, and on this side of the canal you see a
levy that runs on the north side.
The tribe strongly opposes this. One mile of this bridging
currently under construction was funded in the National Park
Service portion of the fiscal year 2009, Omnibus. The cost of
this one-mile bridge is at least $81 million. Another 5.5 miles
have been authorized but not funded in the National Park
portion of the fiscal year 2012, Omnibus.
It was also contained in the fiscal year 2012, House
Interior Appropriations Bill. The estimated cost of this
additional bridging is at least $310 million. These skyway
bridges are destroying our traditional ways of life and tribal
sensitive and archaeological resources. They also are
negatively impacting the water levels on our lands. These
bridges are a waste of taxpayer dollars. National Park Services
claims that this bridging is needed to improve water flow into
Everglades National Park.
However, if the park used existing water delivery
structures like the flood gates, clean out clogged, existing
culverts under the trail as well areas and install additional
culverts, the park could achieve equally-effective water flow
at a fraction of the cost of bridging.
One of the pictures in here show a culvert that is existing
on the Tamiami Trail, and that picture is right here. This is
an existing culvert that should be cleaned out and the swell
could be built, and it would allow water to flow. Right now it
is clogged up. That is why water does not flow under that
culvert.
Culverts are found throughout the Everglades. Studies have
shown that culverts work. If culverts work everywhere else in
the Everglades, it makes no sense to get rid of the culverts on
a 10.7 stretch of the Tamiami Trail and instead construct a
$310 million skyway environmental bridge.
There are no plans to remove the massive levy that runs
parallel to the Tamiami Trail where the bridge is. Again, I
pointed out where the picture shows the levy, which is right
here. This is the bridge. You have got a levy here that would
have water flowing under the proposed bridge that is being
constructed.
The tribe's second priority is the need to improve water
quality. Science shows that ten parts per billion is needed to
protect the Everglades. On Miccosukee lands the canals and pump
stations dump water onto our land that is oftentimes 100 parts
per billion of phosphates. Our land is being used as a defecto
storm water treatment area.
Improving water quality to meet the appropriate limits was
a focus in House Interior Appropriations Bill from fiscal year
2001, through fiscal year 2008, including developing storm
water treatment areas. There are no immediate actions planned
to improve water quality in the Everglades, even if bridging is
constructed. Everglades National Park does not want dirty water
to flow into it.
We strongly support language in the fiscal year 2004,
committee report stating, ``The committee believes that future
federal funding for Everglades restoration should be tied to
specific progress to improve water quality.''
The President's fiscal year 2013, budget requests $8
million for road improvement on the trail and does not request
funding for further bridging. Our hope is that there will be no
funding for further bridging of the trail in the fiscal year
2013, Interior Appropriations Bill and future bills.
It is difficult to tell if the fiscal year 2013, budget
requests funding to improve water quality, which we would
strongly support.
In closing, we respectfully request that the committee
consider the tribe's perspective as it develops its provision
relating to the Everglades, and also, I wanted to invite Mr.
Simpson and Ms. McCollum to our reservation out there in South
Florida, out to the Miccosukee Reservation, which you see to my
left. It is always part of our tradition to invite our friends
and those people that we work closely with.
So in conclusion, I would like to leave that door open and
say I hope you can one day come down and visit with us.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Mr. Billie. Thank you.
[The statement of Colley Billie follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. I appreciate it very much.
Kitcki.
Mr. Carroll. Kitcki. You are doing fine. You are doing
fine.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

UNITED SOUTH AND EASTERN TRIBES, INC.

WITNESS

KITCKI CARROLL
Mr. Carroll. Chairman Simpson, Representative McCollum, my
name is Kitcki Carroll. I am the grandson, seven generations
removed, from the great Cheyenne Peace Chief Black Kettle. I
currently serve as the Executive Director for United South and
Eastern Tribes, otherwise known as USET, and I thank you for
this opportunity to testify on the President's fiscal year 2013
budget and budget priorities of USET.
As you know from the earliest days of the United States,
the founders recognized the importance of America's
relationship with the sovereign native nations and native
peoples of this land, incorporating important references to
those relationships into the Constitution.
Notwithstanding this recognition over the years federal
actions have resulted in loss of vast and rich native
territories, resources, and culture. Out of those injustices
and from other legal sources, there has arisen a federal trust
obligation to support native governments and native peoples.
That trust obligation as reflect in the Indian programs in
the federal budget is fundamentally different from ordinary
discretionary spending. In fact, we feel strongly that any
funding should not even be considered in the process that
allows for discretion. The trust obligation is sacred and must
be honored in such a manner. In the budget deliberations that
difference should make a difference.
From fiscal year 2002 through fiscal year 2008, despite
annual increases, after taking into account the affect of
inflation, most federal domestic programs, including Indian
programs, saw a purchase power decrease for approximately 14
percent. Recent gains have not offset this loss.
I have included a chart in my testimony that depicts the
percentage of the federal budget dedicated to funding the BIA.
As you can see as a percentage, the overall budget, the BIA
budget has declined from .115 percent in fiscal year 1995 to
.075 percent in fiscal year 2011, approximately a one-third
decline as a percentage of the overall budget.
The President's fiscal year 2013 budget proposes an
increase of 2.6 percent in the Indian Health Service budget,
which is $116 million over the fiscal year 2012 enacted level.
Although USET recognizes that in these difficult budgetary
times any increase should be celebrated, I must note that the
general rate of inflation in 2011 was over 3 percent. The
medical rate of inflation was even higher.
Meanwhile, the President has proposed a modest $4 million
cut in the budget of the BIA, but in light of inflation this
must be understood to be potentially a 3 percent cut in
purchase power. Overall both agencies lose purchase power from
fiscal year 2012, even if some individual programs receive
funding in excess of the inflation rate.
Of course, the Budget Control Act of 2011 provides for a 7
to 10 percent across-the-board cut for nearly all domestic
programs starting in January 2013. When you add the effects of
sequestration to inflation, Indian programs, which have always
been inadequately funded, could be effectively cut by as much
as 11 to 14 percent. This would be devastating to native
communities across the lands.
Federal budget problems should not be addressed on the back
of native peoples. Indian Country deserves much better. At a
minimum, federal Indian programs should be held harmless from
any reductions coming from sequestration or similar feature
cuts just as other low-income programs are held harmless in the
Budget Control Act of 2011.
While USET believes that all Indian programs are vital to
creating strong tribal governments and healthy tribal
communities, the USET priority programs and the BIA are tribal
priority allocations, TPA, tribal courts, scholarships,
contract support costs, and cultural resources. USET also
firmly believes that the IHS budget should be held harmless in
terms of budget reductions, including across-the-board
rescissions and sequestration. Healthcare is not something that
can be reduced, delayed, or withheld without real damage to
people.
Congress and the public have rightfully supported
maintaining healthcare funding for members of the military and
veterans, and USET believes the same should be true of the
Indian Healthcare System.
I would like to note that there is no request for funding
for built-in costs such as population growth, inflation, except
for contract health services or pay increases in the fiscal
year 2013 proposal. While substantial increases in contract
support cost appropriations in prior fiscal years have reduced
shortfalls significantly, underfunding of contract support
costs continue to impose major hardships on tribal healthcare
providers and patients around the nation, including USET's
member tribes.
There are several changes to federal law that would create
jobs and promote Indian Country economic development. Foremost,
USET would like to see passage of the Carcieri Fix, which the
President includes once again in this budget. The Carcieri
Decision has created a host of legal, practical,
jurisdictional, and financial problems for Indian Country.
In addition, there are many other actions that Congress
could take, including repealing the essential government
functions test, advancing Indian energy and leasing
legislation, and establishing truly bold tribal tax rezones
among others that would serve to create jobs and promote
economic development in Indian Country. While the current
economic environment calls for drastic funding cuts, it must
equally call for systemic structural changes that foster and
promote independence and self-sufficiency via greater economic
opportunities in Indian Country.
I recognize that in challenging times all Americans must be
called upon to sacrifice for the common good. However, when it
comes to sacrificing for the good of all Americans, the
historic record demonstrates that nobody has sacrificed more
than the Native Americans. Indian Country stands ready and
eager to work in partnership on a government-to-government
basis to further strengthen our communities and country.
Thank you for this opportunity to provide our testimony on
how the budget concerns of the United States rather than being
addressed on the back of many tribes could be addressed by
freeing Indian tribes to realize their maximum economic
potential.
Thank you.
[The statement of Kitcki Carroll follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Mr. Harris.
----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012.

CATAWBA INDIAN NATION

WITNESSES

BILL HARRIS
Mr. Harris. Thank you. On behalf of the Catawba Indian
Nation, a federally-recognized tribe located in South Carolina,
I thank you for this opportunity to testify before the House
Interior Appropriations Subcommittee. My name is William
Harris. I am the newly elected Chief of the Catawba Indian
Nation. Although I am newly elected, I am aware of the support
that this subcommittee has offered my tribe in addressing
budget and audit issues with the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Your
support means a great deal to the Catawba people, and on behalf
you have our heartfelt thank you.
I am here today to urge this subcommittee and, indeed, the
full House Appropriations Committee, to invest federal dollars
in programs that support economic development for smaller
tribes and programs that support economic development for
smaller tribes that have limited resources like Catawba.
Our Settlement Act specifically refers to the policy of the
United States to promote tribal self-determination and economic
self-sufficiency, and it is about fulfilling this promise of
support for economic self-sufficiency that I appear before you
today. The limitations in our Settlement Act significantly
inhibit our ability to achieve economic self-sufficiency. As is
the case with many Native American tribes, the Catawba Nation
struggles with poverty and its related issues. In the 2000
census, the Catawba Nation had a per capita income of just
$11,096. The estimated current unemployment rate among the
Catawba is more than double that of the State of South
Carolina, which has very high unemployment itself. The tribe
currently has no operating economic development ventures.
In our case, the Catawba Indian Nation is one of a handful
of federally-recognized tribes that does not enjoy the full
range of sovereign powers possessed by most federally-
recognized Indian nations. Under the terms of our Settlement
Act we possess second class tribal sovereignty. For example,
state government has enormous civil and criminal jurisdiction
on our lands, far in excess of commonly accorded to states over
other tribes.
Additionally, in the area of gaming, we are not authorized
to establish gaming operations pursuant to the Indian Gaming
Regulatory Act. Instead, we are limited to two bingo halls,
neither of which has been in operation since the state adopted
a lottery that ended up consuming most of the gaming dollars
within in the State of South Carolina. We are allowed certain
electronic play devices on our reservation, if the state
authorizes them. Since the State of South Carolina authorizes
casino cruise ships, we believe that we can have the similar
games on our reservation. However, the state is opposing us and
now, at great cost, we are seeking to vindicate our rights in
the courts.
Programs that have helped us in the past, funding for the
Energy and Mineral Development Program for the Office of Indian
Energy and Economic Development. The Catawba Nation has found
this program to be extremely helpful. We have used it to fund a
feasibility study for a one megawatt photovoltaic system, as
well as to fund analysis, testing, and surveys related to
energy efficiency and renewable energy for four administrative
buildings on the reservation. These two projects have laid the
ground work for more ambitious proposals by the tribe to
develop an energy strategy plan that will establish a Catawba
vision of energy production and consumption on the reservation.
This plan will be integrated with the tribe's other efforts,
like economic development, job creation, and reinforcement of
cultural values.
It is programs like this that enable smaller tribes, like
Catawba, who have limited or no economic development, to take
control of their futures and to have a hope that the next
generation of Catawbas will have a more prosperous life than
this generation. I urge the subcommittee to support this and
similar programs of use to smaller, less-economically developed
tribes.
There are other areas where the tribe needs funding
support. In addition to energy development, the Catawbas are
looking to establish a convenience store that would allow
tribal members quick access to groceries and supplies without
the undue burden of traveling 15 miles roundtrip on country
roads. The tribe also supports the extension of Dave Lyle
Boulevard, which would provide a critical connection between
York and Lancaster counties, creating an outer loop of I-45
which is south of Charlotte, North Carolina. Approximately 1\1/
2\ miles of this road would cross the Catawba Indian Nation.
The tribe is also maintaining a transportation program to get
tribal members to work centers, and we have a summer program
for tribal youth. Within this program we are training them in
life and job skills.
Finally, the Catawba Nation seeks to continue a job
training and placement program to assist Indian people to
acquire the job skills necessary for full-time, satisfactory
employment. Within that framework, the program provides
testing, vocational counseling, or guidance to assist program
participants in making career choices relating personal assets
to personal options and availability of the jobs in the labor
market. This also includes vocational counseling and employment
service on reservations and other home areas in communities
near reservations, in and off the reservation area.
Let me give you a brief history of the Catawbas. Since time
immemorial the Catawbas have lived in the Piedmont generally
and along and upon the Catawba River. In ancient times, the
Catawba lived off the land and the river, hunting for game,
fishing for shad and eel and other fresh water species, and
farming corn, beans, and squash. The tradition of pottery
making among the Catawba, unchanged since recorded history,
links the lives of modern Catawba to our ancestors and
symbolizes our connection to the earth and to the land and the
river we love. No less today, the sovereignty of the nation, of
the Catawba Indian Nation and our survival as a distinct people
from the land is tied to our lands and the river. Like our
pottery, the Catawba people have been created from the earth.
We have been shaped and fired over time and have survived many
hardships to provide a living testament to our ancestors and to
this place we call home.
The Catawba world was transformed by contact with European
explorers and the colonists. The first of these encounters with
the Europeans was Spanish, with Hernando de Soto in 1540. Our
next experience was Juan Pardo in 1566. The Europeans brought
guns, but they also brought disease, and small pox was one of
the diseases they brought, and it continually with the contact
of small pox, it decimated the tribe. It decimated all the
tries in the south. In 1760, the Catawbas entered into a Treaty
of Pine Hill with the British authorities, which established a
15-square-mile reservation in South Carolina. Although the
Catawbas honor that treaty, South Carolina white settlers did
not. Catawba was continuously encroached upon and by 1826, only
a small number of tribal members remained, and we were all only
occupying one square mile.
Notably, during the Revolutionary War the Catawba Indian
Nation stood with the American colonists in their struggle for
independence from the dictatorial mandates of King George III.
Catawba scouts accompanied then General George Washington on
many of his campaigns. Ever since, the Catawbas have answered
the call of country, living up to their half of the tribe's
government-to-government relationship with the United States,
and we continue to do so today.
Regrettably, in 1959, the Congress enacted the Catawba
Tribe of South Carolina Division of Assets Act, which
terminated the tribe's federal recognition and liquidated the
tribe's 3,000 acre reservation.
Along a long struggle, and only after the tribe threatened
to invoke its treaty rights to 225 square miles of South
Carolina, did Congress act in 1993, by passing the Catawba
Indian Tribe of South Carolina Land Claims Settlement Act of
1993, which restored the tribal trust relationship between the
Catawba Nation and the United States. This law has had the
effect of settling treaty-based Catawba land claims on highly-
favorable terms to the State of South Carolina.
In conclusion, I would like thank you for this opportunity
to talk about the needs of the Catawba Nation. Your support of
our people and, indeed, for all the native people is greatly
appreciated and truly in the best interest and tradition of the
government-to-government relationships.
I thank you.
[The statement of Bill Harris follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Where are you located?
Mr. Harris. In South Carolina.
Mr. Simpson. I mean, where in South Carolina?
Mr. Harris. If you were to----
Mr. Simpson. If I was in Columbia, where would I be?
Mr. Harris. If you were in Columbia, you would go
northwest.
Mr. Simpson. Northwest. Okay.
Mr. Harris. You are approximately 66 miles northwest of
Columbia, and you are 26 miles southwest of Charlotte, North
Carolina.
Mr. Simpson. Okay.
Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, and I thank you for your
testimony. It is very interesting. I learned that there is, to
use your term, a second-class recognition of sovereignty. I do
not know how you could have sovereignty second class, but I
will learn some more.
Mr. Harris. I would be more than happy to provide you with
information.

MICCOSUKEE TRIBE AND EVERGLADES RESTORATION

Ms. McCollum. Mr. Chair, some of the challenges that we
heard from the Miccosukee involve the Park Service, they
involve the Army Corps of Engineers, and they involve us
because we have a very direct fiduciary responsibility from
this committee to work with Miccosukee for education and for
health.
I am concerned about this issue, and I had a conversation
with the Park Service. I have not had a conversation with the
Army Corps of Engineers, because there are two issues. There is
the bridge issue. They are interconnected, sir, and I do
realize that, but there is a bridge issue, and then there is
also the flow of all the polluted water.
Do you have that map, that big map? Could you point out for
the chairman and I the canal that comes down that speeds water
right into the reservation? You have got the bridge holding
water back, but you also have the Army Corps canal.
Mr. Billie. Yeah. That will be the L-28 intercepted canal.
This is the one that dumps all the pollution into the
reservation, and that is the picture she is pointing to.
Ms. McCollum. That water is sped up and brought in really,
really fast. It does not even have a chance to do any
filtration before it comes into the reservation land. It goes
right into the reservation.
Mr. Billie. This canal cuts through the farming area and
where sugarcane is raised as well and orange crops. So all the
fertilizer and all the waste that cattle produces washes into
the canal, and everything is carried into the Glades through
that canal. It is dumped right into the middle of our
reservation, and as you can see, we are located in the heart of
the Everglades. So----
Ms. McCollum. Thank you. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife, the
State of Florida, and others are purchasing and trying to build
up a buffer as it comes into the Everglades. They are working
on it, but it is happening slowly.
Mr. Chairman, we have the Everglades park where we
definitely want to see improved water quality in the
Everglades, and I know that is the goal of the Park Service. We
also have a sovereign nation which is impacted. I do recognize
that bridging is there, but I am focusing on the Army Corps and
the canal right now, which puts this water down really fast.
The Army Corps is in charge of building things and moving
water fast, but it is impacting two issues which we have direct
jurisdiction over. I do not know what the Army Corps' long-term
plans for this canal are, or how old it is. However, I would be
very curious as to what the Army Corps role should be. Maybe
they should not be calling all the shots in what affects the
Park Service and affects a tribal sovereignty here. We know
that there is a lot of pollution going on. I do not want to get
into the minute details of what is going on with Everglade
restoration, but I think what the Miccosukee have asked us here
is, as money is spent on this, we should consider how is the
water healing itself. If this is about restoring the
Everglades, before more money is appropriated we need to see
what happens.
And the last thing I would say, Mr. Chair, is no one is
taking credit for the language that is in the Omnibus Bill. No
one. That language, to use a term that I heard a very famous,
very wise man say one time, got parachuted in. It is amazing,
you know, how we love to take credit for something.
Mr. Simpson. I do not think it was parachuted. I think it
was in our bill, was it not?
Ms. McCollum. I tried to figure out how it got put in, who
offered it, and why it got offered. Maybe we can talk later.
Maybe I have not been asking the right people the right
questions, or maybe people have not wanted to give me the right
answers. I am just very concerned that we need to have a big
picture plan here. This should not be about pitting the Park
Service against the tribe as water flows in the Everglades to
be improved. From the conversations I have had they both, I
believe, are on the same track to restoring the Everglades.
Right now, however, especially with this canal coming down, the
tribe's land is being used as a holding pond. You and I know
that is why cattails grow, and we have the before and after
pictures.
So we will leave the bridge aside. Regarding this canal, I
really think that the Army Corps should be telling the Park
Service as well as the Department of Interior and the tribes
what their plan is to slow the water down to treat it before it
gets dumped into the Everglades and gets literally dumped into
an Indian reservation.
So that is my commentary. I am just laying it out there
that I am interested in this.
Mr. Simpson. I know.
Ms. McCollum. But the pythons are there, so I do not know
if I want----
Mr. Simpson. I am not going until they kill all the
pythons.
Mr. Billie. We will make sure that the pythons will not get
you.
Ms. McCollum. Python free.
Mr. Simpson. They can swallow us. I am scared of pythons.
Anyway, I appreciate it.
Ms. McCollum. And the Seminole are impacted by this, too,
are they not? You represent all of USET. There is a little bit
of the Seminole that are up at----
Mr. Billie. The Seminoles are located north of us. Their
reservation is right here.
Ms. McCollum. So they are impacted by some of this as well?
Mr. Billie. Right.
Ms. McCollum. Okay.
Mr. Simpson. I appreciate you all being here. I actually
have to get to the Senate since we are an hour and a half
behind in our presentation, but I appreciate you all being here
with your testimony, and we will certainly take into
consideration your views as we write the 2013 appropriation
bill.
Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

TESTIMONY OF INTERESTED INDIVIDUALS AND ORGANIZATIONS

PUBLIC WITNESSES--AMERICAN INDIANS AND ALASKA NATIVES

Mr. Simpson. The hearing will come to order. Good morning
and welcome to the third of three public witness hearings
specifically for the American Indian and Alaska Native
programs. Despite a somewhat abbreviated hearing schedule this
year, I am proud that the subcommittee is able to hold hearings
on these very important programs. They have been and will
continue to be a funding priority for this subcommittee.
The chair will call each panel of witnesses to the table
one panel at a time. Each witness will be provided with five
minutes to present their testimony. We will be using a timer to
track the progress of each witness. When the button turns
yellow, the witness will have one minute remaining to conclude
his or her remarks. Members will be provided an opportunity to
ask questions of our witnesses, but in the interest of time,
the chair requests that we keep things moving in order to
conclude our morning testimony at a reasonable hour.
I am happy to yield to the gentleman from Washington if you
have an opening statement.
Mr. Dicks. Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to welcome all the
witnesses from the Pacific Northwest and I appreciate the fact
that, as chairman, that you continue to hold this hearing. Our
committee has had such a bipartisan record in support of tribal
programs for which I appreciate your leadership and Mr. Cole
and others. So thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Mr. Cole, do you have anything?
Mr. Cole. No.
Mr. Simpson. Our first panel of witnesses is Fawn Sharp,
David Bean, Joseph Pavel, Billy Frank, and Clifford Cultee.
Come on up and have a seat.
Mr. Cole. Fawn, can you keep these guys under control? It
is a major assignment.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Fawn, you are first. The floor is
yours.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

QUINAULT INDIAN NATION

WITNESS

FAWN SHARP
Ms. Sharp. Thank you. On behalf of the Quinault Indian
Nation, we truly thank the committee for this opportunity to
provide testimony, and we would also like to extend words
cannot even express the amount of gratitude we have for the
commitment of Congressman Norm Dicks. Norm, you have been a
stalwart champion for tribes, not only in the Northwest but
throughout Indian Country. And for that, I will be truly
grateful. And you always have a place to fish at Quinault.
Mr. Dicks. Good, thank you.
Ms. Sharp. So with that I want to speak first to the
Quinault specific priorities and then I want to spend a little
time talking about a comprehensive fiscal strategy that we like
to recommend to the committee.
First, the Quinault Indian Nation is requesting $8.714
million for our Blueback Restoration project. This has been an
undertaking that the Quinault Nation has worked on quite
diligently for the last five years. Our prized blueback salmon
declined to maybe a thousand a run a year. At historic levels,
we had millions of blueback running through the Quinault River.
This restoration effort is a cutting-edge, innovative way of
engineering to restore some pretty sacred areas for our prized
blueback historical spawning habitat. In the upper Quinault
through widespread logging, rip-rapping of the banks, nearly
two-and-a-half miles of precious spawning habitat was wiped out
but we are now slowly recovering that effort and the Quinault
Nation is leading that effort along with many state and local
partners as well as federal agencies. So we would like to
continue that project. We call it a legacy plan. It is a 40-
year plan that will take a number of years to fully restore
that watershed.
The second priority and request we have is for $4.64
million for substance abuse and a comprehensive drug strategy.
Last year, I mentioned that our drug strategy has expanded into
national security issues. We have 30 miles of international
border along the Pacific Ocean. We have had many of our tribal
members who have a crabbing fleet off the coast. They have
noticed small boats coming in and out of our waterway systems,
Raft River. We have 2,000 miles of logging roads and 22 points
of entry from the ocean to Highway 101, an interstate highway.
We have had low-flying helicopters visible dropping things
within our lanes and territories. We do understand that the
Senate Committee on Homeland Security is reaching out to the
GAO to look at the extent of international drug trafficking in
Indian Country, and we believe that the Quinault Nation has
been targeted as a haven for many of these drug activities.
The third priority that we would like to mention is $2.21
million for the McBride Road and an emergency evacuation route.
There is only one entrance into our primary village of Taholah
and one exit. We are located below sea level and right in the
middle of a tsunami zone, so we have many of our residents that
are at risk. We have had a number of studies in our area that
lands are subject to liquefaction if there were ever a large
seismic event. Our village could potentially just sink into the
ground. There are examples of that happening in Alaska and
other parts of the world where there have been large seismic
activities and the ground is basically like a sandpit. And with
a large shake, we could lose an entire village. So we have had
that study complete and finished so we do need to really focus
on some emergency evacuation options for our community.
I would like to spend this last minute really focusing on
what I talked about at the outset and that is we are advocating
Congress to consider a comprehensive fiscal strategy to look at
tribal treasuries. We know that with the sequestration, cuts
are going to run deep; they are going to run widespread into
Indian Country 2013. We fully expect major cuts. We expect
those cuts to run even deeper in 2014, and we would like to
point out that federal appropriations and grants are just one
revenue stream into our national treasuries. For us to be
successful, we need to look at a comprehensive tribal economy
that includes insulating our borders from state and local
taxation that looks at incentivizing private sector investment
into Indian Country. We have utilized the Low-Income Housing
Tax Credits to build houses. We have sold those tax credits to
private investors not costing a dollar from the Federal
Government but they have been able to defer tax revenue. We
could increase our national budget by about 25 percent if we
could sell the low Indian employment tax credit.
So those are just some ideas that we believe that this
Congress has a duty knowing that those cuts are going to be
deep to assist us in looking at a comprehensive fiscal
strategy. Until we do that, we are going to just be dealing
with symptoms. We need to elevate these issues to look at a
comprehensive fiscal strategy to make sure that we have the
funding for basic needs.
With that, on behalf of the Quinault Indian Nation, I thank
you for your time.
[The statement of Fawn Sharp follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Fawn. I appreciate it.
Next is David Bean.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

PUYALLUP TRIBE

WITNESS

DAVID BEAN
Mr. Bean. Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Good morning.
Mr. Bean. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. We thank you for the opportunity to be here today to
offer this testimony. My name is David Bean. I am a member of
the Tribal Council for the Puyallup Tribe of Indians. I am here
in place of my chairman, Herman Dillon, Sr., whose health has
not allowed him to be here today.
We appreciate the increased funding for the operation of
Indian programs within the Bureau of Indian Affairs in Indian
Health Services. However, years of inadequate funding and the
effects of inflation have impacted the tribe's ability to fully
exercise self-determination and self-governance. As
negotiations proceed with fiscal year 2013 budget and
appropriation, we urge you to continue efforts to ensure that
there is adequate funding for Indian programs.
The Puyallup Tribe's first priority is ensuring the safety
and security of our community; thus we greatly appreciate the
emphasis that the subcommittee has put on funding tribal law
enforcement programs. This year, we specifically support $6.3
million requested increase for operation of new detention
facilities expected to be operational in 2013. The Puyallup
Tribe has one of these facilities. While we are disappointed
that the Puyallup facility is not listed on the BIA Budget
Justification as one of these facilities that will be
operational in 2013, we have met with BIA staff and they assure
us that they are planning to fund the Puyallup detention
facility. We have no reason to doubt this.
Over the past few years, the Puyallup Tribe has been
working closely with the BIA Office of Justice Services to
identify the operating staffing costs associated with this
facility. We ask the committee's support for language directing
the BIA to provide funding to all of the facilities that will
come on line in 2013 and report back to Congress the status of
these efforts.
The lifeblood for the Puyallup Tribe is our natural
resources, including our fish, shellfish, and wildlife. I am a
fisherman and I personally know how important these resources
are to the culture and the economy of my people. Not only does
the harvest of these resources provide the means for many
people to support their families but equally as important is
that this activity is the direct tie to our ancestors. For
generations, my people have relied on these exact same
resources to support their communities. Our ancestors believed
that when they entered into our treaties more than 150 years
ago that it was these resources that would sustain and ensure
the survival of our people in the future.
And they were right. Thus, proper management and protection
of these resources is a priority for the Puyallup Tribe. In
this regard we fully support the funding in the BIA budget for
Northwest Fisheries Commission, the Timber, Fish, and Wildlife
Program, Pacific Coastal Salmon Recovery Program, and the Fish
Hatchery Maintenance and Operation Program.
One area of concern is the need to support tribal efforts
to enhance the treaty protected off-reservation wildlife
management. The Puyallup Wildlife Management Program is the
lead agency in management activities to benefit the South
Rainier Elk Herd. The South Rainier Elk Herd is a primary stock
of elk harvested by the Puyallup Tribe. The tribe has not only
established more reliable methods for population monitoring but
has also been proactive in initiating habitat enhancement
projects, research, and land acquisition to ensure sustainable
populations of elk for future generations. We would urge the
Congress to consider increasing funding for off-reservation
treaty hunting resources.
Puyallup believes that improving the educational
opportunities for our children is critical for our future.
Thus, we are very disappointed in the BIE's proposal to cut
funding for tribal and BIE schools. We operate pre-K through 12
Chief Leschi Schools. Our student enrollment is 910 students,
and this number increases annually. We believe that BIE's
assertion that BIE tribal school enrollment is decreasing;
moreover, even if our enrollment was decreasing, the cost of
educating the children already enrolled in our school is
increasing. Specifically, the salary costs, the transportation
costs, and the related administrative costs are also
increasing. So it is simply not feasible for the BIE to
recommend any cut to the BIE school program.
Finally, the inadequate funding of the Indian Health
Service is the most substantial impediment to improving the
health status of Indian people. The Puyallup Tribe has operated
its healthcare program since 1976 through an Indian Self-
Determination Act contract. The Puyallup Tribe Health Authority
operates a comprehensive Ambulatory Care Program providing
health services to 9,000 in Pierce County, including 1,700
members of the Puyallup Tribe.
There are no Indian Health Service hospitals in the
Portland area, so all specialty care and hospital care is paid
from our contract healthcare allocation. This places a
particular strain on the tribe's contract healthcare program,
which the tribe subsidized with a $2.8 million contribution.
Thus, we fully support the requested increase for contract
healthcare, as well as other programs within IHS budget
request.
I remain open to any questions you may have.
[The statement of David Bean follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. I appreciate that very much.
Next is Joseph Pavel.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

SKOKOMISH TRIBE

WITNESS

JOSEPH PAVEL
Mr. Pavel. I am Joseph Pavel with the Skokomish Tribe.
Thank you, committee, for hearing our testimony this morning. I
would like to especially recognize Congressman Dicks for his
distinguished service to Washington State, the United States,
the Tribes. We certainly appreciate that. I know that----
Mr. Simpson. Can you talk him into running again?
Mr. Pavel. You know, I would not feel right doing that. I
respect his decision.
Mr. Dicks. Thank you.
Mr. Pavel. You know. I have been before this committee
before. I think one of the items we stress is the law and order
and judicial system needs in Indian Country, the Skokomish
Tribe, a small tribe in western Washington, a Public Law 280
tribe at one time, going through the steps to have retrocession
from the Public Law 280. We struggle to find resources to
establish and maintain a law enforcement and a judicial system.
We initiated our program in '95 with I think a domestic
violence grant and we hired two half-time people, one was an
advocate and another guy to sort of patrol the neighborhoods on
foot, eventually bought him a blue shirt, bought him a badge
and bought him an old beat-up pickup. Since then, we have been
able to, through various grants and funding sources, the
program has fluctuated but we pretty much are able to maintain
a staff of six for our area of patrol and that is bare minimum
through creative staffing and scheduling to maintain 24/7
services. We have two Fish and Wildlife officers that have to
patrol a tremendous area, our entire seated area and all of the
canal and the Olympic Mountains. And so these are, you know,
vital needs, certainly law enforcement officers on the ground.
But as much as that, you know, people that are in the
judicial system, we utilize the services of an intertribal
court system, Northwest Intertribal Court System in there, we
support their requests. A few years ago we were able to get a
one-time add-on through BIA identifying this need and we used
that to hire a probation officer. You know, the backlog in our
system, people get in the system, they need some help to just
guide them through the steps. So that was a successful program
to try to get rid of some of the backlog of cases in our
courtroom. Many of these cases will derive from a single
violation that is then compounded by failures to appear, et
cetera, do not pay fines, and so on. A probation officer can
monitor these folks and be on them and remind them and help
them get through the system and get out of the system. So that
was successful.
The one-time BIA funding, we continued that position with
our own, you know, with some input of our own tribal fundings.
But we would like to continue to see that approach that we need
to help people that are in the system, not just arrest them and
throw them in jail but we would like to be able to get in and
be successful negotiating the system and maybe learn something
and get out of it and become, you know, an approved citizen and
an asset and resource to our community.
We have also entered into an agreement with the University
of Washington to provide a public defender, help these people
there. You know, we are not required to do this but these are
some of the things we are doing, you know, because we recognize
the need of our people not only to, you know, make the
community feel safe to be able to track and apprehend and
punish violators, but also when they are, you know, we know
these are our people, our community and we know these
violations are often just symptomatic of, you know, some of the
larger and deeper issues. I think substance abuse is a huge
issue. We would certainly support the programs for treatment
and those sort of resources, those mental health counseling
resources.
Those are all, you know, I think law and order and health,
education. You know, we do not have a tribal school. I think
that is maybe something that gets missed, you know, where we do
not have an actual Indian school but we still have Indian kids.
They are still in the education system. We try to work closely
with the local education system. We have a state school
district on our reservation that is about 30 to 40 percent
tribal members in there, and we work with them, have used the
Pathway Program that just expired. A Pathway grant was very
successful four-year program of being able to put mentor tutors
in the schools to work with our children, after-school
programs. So we do have an education program even though we do
not have a tribal school. And I would just like to remind the
committee that there are those needs for our Indian students
who are not in an Indian school.
[The statement of Joseph Pavel follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Joseph.
Next is Billy Dean.
Mr. Frank. Frank.
Mr. Simpson. Frank Dean. Did I say----
Mr. Frank. Billy Frank.
Mr. Simpson. Billy Frank--Billy Dean, yeah.
Mr. Dicks. He is the dean.
Mr. Simpson. That is what I was thinking.
It is good to see you again, Billy.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

NORTHWEST INDIAN FISHERIES COMMISSION

WITNESSES

BILLY FRANK
MICHAEL GRAYUM
ED JOHNSTONE
Mr. Frank. Thank you, Chairman.
I am Billy Frank, Chairman, Northwest Indian Fisheries
Commission. I have been here plenty of times. And, you know, I
would like to just recognize our Congressman Norm Dicks. You
know, we have worked together for the last 40 years and the
State of Washington, all of our tribes including tribes, the
whole Nation are going to miss Congressman Norm Dicks. And we
wish him well. You know, we are behind his decision to get out
and have a happy time here, you know. He has been down this
road. He has been our guy that has led us, the leader that has
led us through the environment and putting initiatives together
and continuing them going, you know, and so we thank him. And
we thank you, Chairman, for allowing me to say that.
It is a privilege for me to be among our tribal leaders
here throughout the day here. And, you know, their strong
support gives our organization focus and direction and helps
make us successful in protecting and enhancing our treaty
rights to meet the many natural resource management
responsibilities required of the tribes. We are here today to
communicate our fiscal year 2013 funding requests for the
Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Environmental Protection
Agency. We make these requests at a time when our treaties and
reserved rights are in grave risk. They are at risk because of
diminishing salmon populations which threatens to eliminate our
right to harvest. All of this is due to our inability to
restore salmon habitat faster than it is being destroyed.
The tribe ceded millions of acres of land to the United
States through treaties in which they reserved the right to
fish, hunt, and gather in their traditional areas. These treaty
rights are constitutionally protected and are the supreme law
of the land. Our treaty rights guarantee the right to harvest
fish, not just the right to fish. Now, I have with me my
executive director Michael Grayum, Northwest Indian Fisheries
Commission; and then I have our treasurer Ed Johnstone. And so
I would like to have Michael just take a minute and walk you
through the budget.
Michael.
Mr. Simpson. Just go around and introduce yourself for the
record.
Mr. Grayum. Michael Grayum, Executive Director of the
Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Congressman Dicks, for everything you have done.
I will just quickly highlight our requests. The Commission
and its member tribes' primary interest is in the BIA's Rights
Protection Implementation Account. That is the account that
funds our base Fisheries Management programs. And we greatly
appreciate the fact that the President's budget contains an
increase of 3.669 million over the fiscal year 2012 enacted
amount, and we appreciate that it brought the accounts of
interest to us up to near the levels that Congress provided in
fiscal year 2010, this committee in particular provided.
We do, however, note that the increase was distributed
differently in the various accounts than it was when Congress
provided the increase in 2010 and we have not been provided an
explanation of why that is so we are uncertain about that. It
is important that we maintain these overall funding levels and
provide additional funding to address the increased management
needs and responsibilities that the tribes are required to
assume to protect the treaty rights that Mr. Frank just spoke
to.
So specifically for Western Washington Fisheries
Management--that is the base funding for our tribes--we are
requesting an additional 8.486 million over the President's
request consistent with the requests that we have been making
for at least five years to meet the true needs that the tribes
have. We support what is in the Washington Timber, Fish, and
Wildlife Program, what is in the President's budget. We request
a small increase in the U.S.-Canada Salmon Treaty
Implementation line of 436,000 over the President's request to
meet the requirements of implementing that international
treaty. And in the Salmon Marking Account, we are requesting an
additional 1.332 million to meet the needs of marking the ever-
increasing hatchery production of the tribes and to meet the
needs of assessing the impacts of marked fish in the fisheries.
The other account in the BIA is the Fish Hatchery
Maintenance Account in Fish, Wildlife, and Parks. That is very
important to our tribes and we would like to have that
increased back to the level that it was in fiscal year 2010 I
believe it was, which would be an additional 614,000 over the
President's budget. That account is paying for the huge backlog
of maintenance projects for our hatcheries, which is primarily
supporting the fishery treaty right now.
And then contract support, we support what the President
has in the budget. And EPA, the Indian General Assistance
Program is very important to us. We support what is in the
President's budget. That is providing the capacity for the
tribes to engage with EPA in their environmental programs.
We are, however, disappointed that the President did not
include the Multimedia Tribal Implementation Grants Program. It
has been in the last two budgets but not funded and it was not
included in this year's budget. We see this as a hugely
important opportunity to move from capacity building to
implementation, actually doing the projects that we have
identified need to be done. And so that is one that we would
request funding be provided.
And then lastly, Puget Sound restoration, that is very
important to us and we request that that be increased to the
levels that were funded in fiscal year 2010 at $50 million.
Mr. Dicks. 2010 was a very good year.
Mr. Grayum. Yes, it was. Thank you, Congressmen.
Mr. Simpson. We are going to have to have a lot more
revenue for that.
Mr. Frank. Could I have Ed Johnstone, our treasurer----
Mr. Simpson. For just a minute.
Mr. Frank. Yeah, just a minute.
Mr. Simpson. And identify yourself for the record.
Mr. Johnstone. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. My name is Ed
Johnstone for all Indian Nation policy representative for
Fisheries and treasurer of the Northwest Indian Fisheries
Commission.
I want to follow up just a little bit about where Billy was
talking about our treaty rights at risk. And the relevancy to
the treaty rights at risk when he is talking about the habitat,
our treaty rights at risk also because of the court decisions
and the mandates into the court decisions--for instance, U.S.
v. Washington, when Judge Boldt, you know, instructed us that
the things we needed to do to be self-regulating for instance
and to be co-managers of the resources, he put out some
criteria that you had to have enforcement of your own tribal
members, your own officers. You had to have scientists
available or on staff. You had to show that you could manage
your fisheries, and we were able to be funded at that time
through Senator Magnuson. And through the work of Billy and
others, we got what is called Western Washington Bold Account,
your baseline account.
But subsequently, there are other decisions like the
Rafitti decision where there were no instructions and there was
no opportunity to get that account plussed up, and we can
distribute it if it is proper to show you in a bar graph. The
impacts of the other duties and responsibilities and subsequent
decisions where the tribes are at the table and are co-managers
and the funding has not followed that upward line or upward
trend. In fact, it has been decreased at several points over
time.
And so we were talking about getting back to the 2010
level. We are talking about our treaty rights, our requirements
under those decisions are just as great as everyone else that
comes before you in trying to demonstrate their need. And this
is a graph that demonstrates how far outpaced our duties and
responsibilities to us are versus the amounts of money that we,
you know, get appropriated through these different funding
streams. And so when we see an account gets plussed up, we
wonder how maybe, for instance, another region gets more
consideration than we do. And I think our decision predates
some of those other decisions.
So we are just concerned about where we are going with some
of these accounts but again very appreciative of being able to
work with Congress and the committee as we look at these vital
areas of our survivability out in the Pacific Northwest.
[The statement of Billy Frank follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Thanks, Billy. I appreciate it.
Next, we have Clifford Cultee.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

LUMMI INDIAN BUSINESS COUNCIL

WITNESS

CLIFFORD CULTEE
Mr. Cultee. Good morning.
Mr. Simpson. Good morning.
Mr. Cultee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and distinguished
committee members, for the opportunity to share with you the
appropriation priorities of the Lummi Nation for the fiscal
year 2013 budgets of the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the
Indian Health Service.
The Lummi Nation is located on the northern coast of
Washington State and is the third largest tribe in Washington
State serving a population of over 5,200. The Lummi Nation is a
fishing nation. We have drawn our physical and spiritual
sustenance from the marine tidelands and the waters for
hundreds of thousands of years. Now, the abundance of wild
salmon is gone. The remaining salmon stocks do not support
commercial fisheries. Our fishers are trying to survive from
the shellfish products. In 1999, we had 700 licensed fishers
who supported nearly 3,000 tribal members. Today, we have about
523 remaining. This means that over 200 small businesses in our
community have gone bankrupt in the past 15 years. This is the
inescapable reality the Lummi Nation fishers face without
salmon. We can no longer survive in the traditional ways of our
ancestors.
Lummi's specific requests, BIA, $2 million, Phase 1, new
water supply system--increase in funding for hatchery
construction, operation, and maintenance. Funding will be
directed to increase hatchery production to make up for the
shortfall of wild salmon; $300,000 funding for the Conservation
Law Enforcement Officer Program to ensure that the Lummi Nation
need for natural resource enforcement officers will be funded.
Committee Directive Requests, Bureau of Reclamation--the
Lummi Nation requests that the Committee directs the Bureau of
Reclamation to fund Lummi Nation work to develop comprehensive
water resources conservation and utilization plans that
accommodates the water needs of its residents, its extensive
fisheries resources.
BIA Natural Resources Branch--to work with the Lummi Nation
to ensure that its needs related are available for harvest are
compensated through the increased hatchery construction,
operations and maintenance funding.
DOI Office of Indian Energy, Economic, and Workforce
Development to work with the Lummi Nation in support of its
comprehensive Fisherman's Cove Harbor and Working Water Front
Project which addresses Indian Energy, Economic and Workforce
Development needs of the Lummi Nation membership.
Implement ACA and IHCIA--asking the Department and the U.S.
Indian Health Services to fully and completely implement the
Indian Specific provision of the Affordable Care Act and the
newly reauthorized Indian Health Care Improvement Act. Wellness
is the number one priority of the Lummi Business Council in
2012 and '13. Lummi Nation requests that the committee support
the SAMHSA Proposed Tribal Block Grant to combat drug epidemic
among the Lummi Nation membership.
Head Start for Tribal Development--the Lummi Nation
requests the committee direct BIE and DHHS, Children's Bureau,
support the construction of a new Lummi Nation Head Start/
daycare facility with technical and financial assistance.
Serve Indian veterans--direct the Indian Health Services to
immediately develop and provide formal consultation between
Indian Health Services, U.S. Veterans' Affairs and tribes on
the formal Memorandum of Understanding for the provision of VA
medical services to tribal veterans and their families.
BIA, $2 million, Phase 1, water supply increase in funding
for hatchery, construction, operation, and maintenance. Funding
will be directed to increase hatchery production to make up for
the shortfall of wild salmon.
And with that, I would like to conclude and thank all of
the committee members for their work.
[The statement of Clifford Cultee follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. I appreciate you being here today,
appreciate all of you being here today.
Let me ask Joseph. You mentioned that you are attempting
rescission from being a Public Law 280 tribe?
Mr. Pavel. Yes.
Mr. Simpson. What exactly does that include? I mean how do
you----
Mr. Pavel. Well, we have said in Washington I think it has
been a new thing. The State has adopted a new procedure, but
when we did it, you have to get the concurrence from the State
and involve the process of the state legislature passing an act
and approving, the governor to sign a retrocession----
Mr. Simpson. Okay.
Mr. Pavel [continuing]. To the tribes. So that and then so
we passed that act. You know, and basically it was an
amendment. Some other tribes had already done it so we just
kind of went in and amended that particular act to include the
Skokomish Tribe. Then you have to get the concurrence from the
Department of Interior and they also have to have an opinion
from Department of Justice that they would concur with that.
And then I think part of that process is for Interior to
evaluate whether you have the capacity and the ability to
sustain the capacity to implement the necessary law enforcement
and judicial programs to handle those duties.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. I just wondered because some tribes in
Idaho have tried to go through that same process and I did not
know what was included. It is a typical government process.
Mr. Pavel. Yeah. It is important to get the endorsement of
the local county. Mason County is kind of a depressed area of
the State and they were certainly very supportive of the tribe
taking on these duties. They were looking at it as a way to get
more law enforcement dollars into their area and also to reduce
their area of coverage, so they were very supportive of us and
that had a lot to do with our ability to do that. I know some
counties are not like that.
Mr. Simpson. Good. Of the Puget Sound restoration, the
geographic program gets, what, 30 million in this budget? In
last year's budget it was 50 million--how much of that goes to
the tribes? Do they compete competitively for various programs
or is some of it set aside for the tribes?
Mr. Grayum. The EPA has allocated a certain amount of that
to the tribes both for specific projects and for capacity for
the tribes to be actively participating in the effort. So it is
an EPA allocation.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. Mr. Moran?
Mr. Moran. Yeah, that is fine, but I would defer to Norm on
this since they are his constituents. He has invested so much
time to focus on these issues.
Mr. Simpson. We agree with you on his retirement also by
the way.
Mr. Dicks. Oh, thank you. Well, I just want to thank the
chairman and Mr. Moran for being so supportive and Mr. Cole and
the whole committee has been very supportive on tribal
programs. I think that says a lot. And I just want to say that
I have enjoyed our working relationship with the tribes. Each
one of the tribes--I am not as close to the Lummis but the
other four are in my district and we have had extensive working
relationships. And they have always been positive, always
trying to protect the resource to help the people, the tribes.
I was out at the Nisqually last weekend with Jean Takekawa
and that whole area has been restored. We have restored the
Skokomish area back into an estuary. I mean those two projects
alone probably increased estuary in the State of Washington by
about 30 percent because so much of it had been developed. And
the Puyallup Indian Land Claim settlement, I am an
appropriater, not an authorizer, but right here in this
committee we appropriated $105 million back when $105 million
was a substantial amount of money. And to see the growth of the
tribes has been great. We have still a long ways to go but on
the salmon issue, especially taking out the dams on the Elwha.
I appreciate the committee's steadfast support for that. That
will help us.
But again, I have enjoyed our working relationship. Down on
the Quinault many times, say hello to Guy for me, but I
appreciate your being here today. And we've got one more year
to go. We are going to do a good job.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
When people are testifying, I go to your websites so I can
picture what you are talking about with restoration. And all of
you have fabulous websites, so I really felt like I am
landlocked in a way. I am around a lot of water but I am not on
an ocean, so this was very helpful for me.
Can I just ask a question? The Supreme Court is hearing the
healthcare case right now. The Supreme Court is going to talk
about severability, and as we know, the Indian Healthcare Act
is part of the Affordable Care Act. Do you know if the tribes
submitted to the court (as they are talking about severability
if they strike down the rest of the law) to leave the Indian
Healthcare Act stand as-is because it is a different section of
law? And if I have caught you off guard, I apologize. Someone
can get back to my office later.
Mr. Bean. There was a brief filed by the National Congress
of American Indians.
Mr. Simpson. Is your mike on?
Mr. Bean. I am not entirely familiar with it but I
understand that the National Congress of American Indians had
submitted a brief to the court.
Ms. McCollum. That is good. And then my only other
observation is that we are hearing a lot about law and order
and the importance of enforcement. So I think we are hearing a
common thread, Mr. Chairman. I do not think we heard quite as
articulate an argument last year about the dollars. So I want
to thank you all for being so crisp in your testimony on that.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. Sharp?
Ms. Sharp. I would like to maybe add to not only the law
enforcement piece but just substance abuse prevention. We did
some formulas at Quinault and we determined that the national
average spent per capita on substance abuse prevention and
education is roughly $1,600 per capita. Washington State is
1,900 per capita and just for our tribe it was $414 per capita.
And when you consider that state governments have a tax base,
it further magnifies the need within Indian Country for
precious dollars for substance abuse prevention. And so I
really appreciate your making that observation and that point
because we are off the charts and off the scale on substance
abuse and all the associated problems, domestic violence and
suicide, so it is very important to look at those factors.
Thank you.
Mr. Dicks. Violence against women, too, by people coming
from outside the reservations is a serious problem.
Mr. Simpson. Did you have something you want to say?
Mr. Bean. Yeah, I just have a brief comment from the
Puyallup Tribe if I may for Congressman Dicks from the Tribal
Council from the children at our school at Chief Leschi, from
our fishermen, from our elders, from our community, we raise
our hands and say thank you. Thank you for being here. Thank
you for all the work you have done for us.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you all for being here. When Congressman
Dicks decided to retire I said who the heck is going to take
care of the Puget Sound now? And he looked at me and said you
are the closest one. So I appreciate all of you being here
today. Thank you for your testimony.
Our next panel is W. Ron Allen, T.J. Greene, and Sneena
Brooks.
How are you doing today? And Ron, you are going to testify
on two different subjects, on behalf of the Pacific Salmon
Commission and also the tribe?
Mr. Allen. Yes.
Mr. Simpson. Okay.
----------                              --
--------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

JAMESTOWN S'KLALLAM TRIBE

PACIFIC SALMON COMMISSION

WITNESS

W. RON ALLEN
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning.
Again, I am Ron Allen, Chair for the Jamestown S'Klallam Tribe.
We are located in western Washington. We are in Norm's district
and we also equally raise our hands to Norm for your service,
Norm.
Mr. Dicks. Thank you.
Mr. Allen. Thirty-eight years you have done a fabulous job
for not just our state and our community but for the United
States and your leadership will be missed I know by all.
I am also very active with the BIA, the Tribal BIA Budget
Advisory Committee. I represent the Northwest tribes and so I
am active in that forum. I am also active on the IHS side in
terms of the budget needs in IHS. Before I jump into some of
the issues from my tribe first, you know, the question was
raised about the review by the Supreme Court, one thing that I
think that you guys need to know is that the Indian Healthcare
Improvement Act, it took us eight years, eight years to get it
reauthorized, which is very annoying for us in tribes and this
is a treaty obligation.
And what people do not realize is that even with the four-
plus billion dollars that is provided by IHS--and you have been
doing a great job in terms of providing additional resources
for it--what you do not realize is that probably 50 to 60
percent of our citizens live outside what we call the service
area that IHS provides. And so when we talk about those
unserved or underserved people that it was trying to address,
many of them are our people and we do not have the authority
under the Indian Healthcare Improvement Act to serve those
people. So that is an important issue I think that we need to
raise.
And then you talked about the retrocession issue. It is
more than just the process of getting the retrocession done; it
is about making sure it is collaborated with the BIA so that we
are provided they be law enforcement programs and court systems
in order to take over the jurisdiction that we have under our
authority for the tribes in our area.
So shifting back to my tribe, you have our testimony and we
appreciate being able to submit it to you. We are very
supportive of the request and recommendations that are being
provided by many of our organizations in the Northwest, you
know, the Northwest Fisheries Commission, the affiliated
tribes, northwest Indians that Fawn is the president of and
Columbia River Intertribal Fish Commission that collaborates
with the northwest tribes, and NCAI, who do a great job of
analyzing the budget and providing recommendations to you.
My tribe is a small tribe. We have a very small land base
and we have limited resources. But nevertheless, we have equal
interest and one of our requests is for some financial
assistance to buy a small piece of property that is a
culturally relevant piece that we are trying to prevent from
being developed because it has a very religious traditional
purpose in it. So you see the $495,000, we have asked for that.
The other simple request was we wanted to get additional
resources in our fishery base budget because like all the
tribes in the Northwest--well, on the west side of Washington
State, we not only just manage the thin fish but we manage
shellfish and we have limited resources to manage shellfish and
it is a very complicated industry to manage but from clams to
gooey duck to crab to shrimp, et cetera. And so we all are in
need of additional resources to appropriately and effectively
co-manage with the State on those kind of resources. And so
that is what our request is from the Jamestown Tribe.
I would note in here that in our testimony we identified
recommendations from the different entities with regard to the
BIA budget. We are very delighted that you have been holding
BIA pretty much harmless at this point and IHS some slight
increases. My testimony has a small error in it, actually
probably significant for you. In contract support on the BIA
side you are going to fund 100 percent, and we are very
delighted that you are going to do that. On IHS side in my
testimony it says 145. That was last year's request and so I
did not catch that error before we actually submitted it to
you. But I do know it is $100 million shortfall. And so that is
a big issue for us. Again, it is a contractual obligation
between the United States and Indian Tribes and contracts are
contracts. So where we would honor it with any other entity--I
do not care whether it is defense issues or educational
institutions or whatever it is, we would honor those contracts.
And we believe that that is important for the tribes to do a
good job.
So those are the points that I would raise with my tribe.
Shifting to the second topic that I want to raise--it is
related--I am a commissioner for the U.S.-Canada and Pacific
Salmon Commission. I represent the 24 tribes, the Puget Sound
Tribes and Columbia River Tribes up into Idaho including Nez
Perce. And, you know, our job is to make sure that we manage
the salmon well and make sure that we turn it to a sustainable
level. We have to make sure we have salmon so that Norm has
fish to catch when he is in retirement. And so I take this duty
seriously.
Mr. Dicks. I release all my fish.
Mr. Simpson. The one that is on your wall did not get
released.
Mr. Dicks. That was in Alaska.
Mr. Allen. Okay. Anyhow, Chairman, so it is a very
important treaty that was consummated back in 1985. We
renegotiated it three different times and there were never
areas where we received the resources in order to manage the
responsibilities from Alaska all the way to the upper reaches
of Idaho.
And everybody has a role. The States have their role and
they get their resources through Commerce. And the State
Department has a role because the resources for the
international obligation is processed through them. The tribes'
role in this process comes through the Department of the
Interior and we have been funded about $4.1 million and I think
the proposal is around 4.3 and we are asking for 4.8. I think
what we want to emphasize with Congress is that when we engage
with all of our counterparts both within the United States from
Alaska to the three states and then with our Canadian
counterparts, the tribal expertise is critical to that process.
We are very, very active and we are among the leaders with
regard to that technical responsibility. And we have to share
that responsibility. So we do it with the tribes and we
coordinate with the Northwest Indian Fish Commission and
Columbia River Intertribal Fish Commission in order to
accomplish this objective.
That money that is in there is distributed among all of us
in order to carry out our respective responsibilities and it is
critically important and we just need the resources to be able
to do the job. When you think about our intergovernmental
relationship, we are a small fish in this great big pond and we
have to fight for our rights and we do do that. But we have to
have the capacity to do it. You have to have the resources and
the talent. So if you were ever to walk into our forum and
realize the technical responsibilities to manage that fishery,
assure that we are carrying it out responsibly whether it is
the Chinook, the Coho, the Saki, the Pinks, the Chum Fishery.
It is a challenge and we kind of overload our staff in a big
way. So we are trying to get additional resources to do a
responsible job to make sure that we are harvesting it
correctly while we deal with the other H's, meaning the hydro
issues or the habitat issues and so forth.
So that is my request. You will see it in here----
Mr. Simpson. Harvest.
Mr. Allen. Pardon me.
Mr. Simpson. And yes, the harvest, too. It is a tough
issue. It is a balancing act when you are dealing with ESA with
regard to the fish you are trying to protect while being able
to harvest what is harvestable. And that is true both in
Canada, you know, where they have their own ESA legislation, as
well as our own country. So it is complicated; it is tough, but
we take it responsibly. And as Billy Frank always says, we are
fish people. We are going to make sure that the fish are going
to be here for our future generations.
Thank you.
[The statements of W. Ron Allen follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. I appreciate it very much.
T.J. Greene.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

MAKAH TRIBAL COUNCIL

WITNESS

T.J. GREENE
Mr. Greene. Greetings. It is good to be here among friends.
Mr. Chairman, members of the subcommittee, I am T.J. Greene,
Treasurer, the Makah Tribal Council. I am accompanied by
Councilman Brian Seveck. We want to thank you for this
opportunity to present testimony on the views of Makah Tribal
Council on the fiscal year 2013 federal budget.
This hearing is especially meaningful to us at the Makah
Tribe because it is the last chance we will get to appear
before Congressman Dicks. We have truly been blessed not only
that Norm Dicks is our Congressman but also by his long-
standing friendship with our tribe. Congressman Dicks has
visited our reservation many, many times since he was a young
man. He has spent countless hours visiting with us, touring our
reservation, and hearing our concerns, but he may have spent
just as much time off our shores in what he recently called his
favorite fishing spot. I do not know if he says that to
everybody but he says it to us.
Mr. Dicks. It is the most beautiful place to fish for
salmon.
Mr. Greene. Words cannot express our gratitude to you,
Congressman, for all that you have done for us and all that you
mean to us.
I would like to testify today on three priority issues:
one, federal assistance for cleaning up the Warmhouse Beach
dump on our reservation; federal grant funding for replacing
our commercial fishing dock; and lastly, our work in support of
a sustainable federal ocean policy.
The Makah Tribe is taking aggressive steps to address the
serious environmental and health risks posed by the Warmhouse
Beach Open Dump, a decades-old landfill located on the Makah
Reservation that was used by the U.S. Department of Defense and
other federal agencies to dispose of hazardous waste. The dump
is leaching harmful chemicals into a nearby stream which flows
into the pristine waters of the Strait of Juan de Fuca at
Warmhouse Beach, a traditional shellfish location for the Makah
people. This summer, we are taking the important step of
opening our new solid waste transfer station in Neah Bay, which
will enable us to close the dump. Now, the challenge before us
is to clean it up so it will stop polluting our waters.
The tribe has documented that the Makah Air Force Station,
which supported radar operations at Bahokus Peak from World War
II through 1988, disposed of many hazardous substances at the
dump since its opening in the 1970s, including asbestos,
batteries, pesticides, paints, and waste oil. For many years,
other federal agencies with operations on the reservation also
disposed of their waste at the dump. So the Federal Government
bears substantial responsibility for cleaning it up and
preventing further exposure of the reservation community to the
environmental and health hazards it causes.
The Makah Tribe has been trying for many years to secure
federal assistance for cleaning up the dump, especially through
negotiations with the Defense Department or possibly through
the federal Superfund Program. We would appreciate the
subcommittee's support in our efforts.
The second issue, the Port of Neah Bay Commercial Fishing
Dock is over 60 years old. The condition has now deteriorated
so badly it has been closed to semi-truck traffic for seven
years. Structural surveys of the dock indicate that the dock
now needs to be completely replaced. This commercial fishing
dock generates over 6 million in fish landings annually. It
supports the traditional maritime culture of our tribe, about
half of the working-age population of Neah Bay, and over 100
minority-owned business enterprises. It also supports the
ecosystem management and biological data collection efforts of
the State of Washington, National Marine Fisheries Service, and
tribes to ensure sustainable fisheries of over 20 groundfish
species, salmon species, halibut, and shellfish.
We have been working with many federal agencies, including
the EDA, BIA, U.S. Department of Transportation, the Office of
Indian Energy and Economic Development, and state agencies to
find funding that can help us with this dock replacement
project, thus far without success. We have grant requests
pending through EDA and the TIGER IV program. We would
appreciate the Federal Government's assistance in finalizing
this important economic development initiative.
The Makah Tribe works to be careful stewards of ocean
resources. We are one of the hosts of the First Stewards
Symposiums entitled ``Coastal People Address Climate Change''
this July at the National Museum of the American Indian, the
first national symposium on the impacts of climate change on
coastal indigenous peoples.
We are proud that our tribal chairman, Micah McCarty, has
been asked to serve on numerous advisory bodies on ocean
fisheries issues, including the Governance Coordinating
Committee that is working with National Ocean Council on
national ocean policy.
The Makah Tribe is unique in having a marine sanctuary, the
Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary right of four shores
and within our ``usual and accustomed'' fishing area. We are
proud of our work on ensuring tribal consultation on federal
maritime matters and helping to improve oil spill pollution
prevention and response. Many vessels involved with the
sanctuary, ocean and fisheries research, and oil spill
prevention and response are stationed in Neah Bay. We are the
only ocean harbor in the Pacific Northwest that is not closed
in heavy storms because of hazardous bar conditions. In order
to serve the growing number of these vessels, however, we need
to improve our harbor, for example, by deepening our entrance
channel. We would appreciate the subcommittee's support for our
efforts to make Neah Bay Harbor a first-class home port for
vessels helping to keep our ocean resources sustainable.
We look forward to expanding our collaboration with federal
and state governments and private sector to ensure maritime
policies that will be sustainable well into the future.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman and members of the
subcommittee, for this opportunity to testify before you today.
Kuwhat is Norm's Makah name. It means killer whale. Salmon
is important to the killer whale; it is important to Norm.
[The statement of T.J. Greene follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette [presiding]. Mr. Green, thank you very much
for your testimony. And as you may have noticed, there has been
a bloodless coup and I am going to chair this subcommittee for
a little bit.
I want to thank you very much for your testimony and thank
you for informing us about Mr. Dicks' name. Some of us who have
traveled with Mr. Dicks have had to fight off Greenpeace as
they have attempted to roll him into the ocean from beaches
across the world.
Next, we are going to hear from Sneena Brooks, a member of
the Colville Business Council. Welcome and we look forward to
your testimony.
----------                              --
--------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF THE COLVILLE RESERVATION

WITNESS

SNEENA BROOKS
Mr. Brooks. All right, thank you.
I do not have a really cool name for Mr. Dicks but we do
appreciate all the support you have given for the Colville
Tribes.
Thank you, subcommittee today. This is my first time
testifying in front of this committee so I am really pretty
nervous.
Mr. LaTourette. You cannot screw up.
Mr. Brooks. I cannot screw up. Well, I am following this
guy right here, you know, so pretty well seasoned.
Mr. Greene. Real pro.
Mr. Brooks. Yeah. So thank you.
Good morning to you. I am Sneena Brooks. I am the vice
chair of the Colville Business Council and I am here today to
talk about the President's fiscal year 2013 request.
The Colville Tribe was pleased for the first time in many
years the fiscal year 2013 request contains a significant
increase, the $15.4 million as allocated to the BIA Trust
Natural Resource Management Program. This increase will restore
programs that were cut from previous budgets and provide tribal
land managers with the needed assistance to ensure tribal trust
resources are protected.
One of the activities that is funded under this account for
the Colville Tribes is the ability for us to patrol 161
shoreline miles of Lake Roosevelt, the reservoir behind Grand
Coulee Dam, the national recreational area which about 1.5
million visitors attend annually. The National Park Service
also conducts patrols, you know, on the lake there but the
Colville Tribe is responsible for 35 percent of the lake and we
are the most visible presence on the lake there today. So we
are very pleased that the budget contains the total of $750,000
for that increase and I hope the subcommittee supports that.
The second thing that we would like to point out on the
increase is the $1.5 million for the attorney fees and
litigation support program. This is pretty valuable to the
Colville Tribes. This program was cut in the 2012 budget but
now that it might be back in there on this budget the Colville
Tribes and other tribal programs use this to protect the trust
resources.
We have one of the largest lead-zinc-copper smelters in the
world just about 10 minutes north on the Columbia River. For
the last 100 years up into the '90s it is dumping a lot of slag
into the river and polluting the river and not only the
Colville Tribal Trust properties but also the Bureau of
Reclamation properties, the National Park Service properties,
and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service properties. And so this
$1.5 million is not very much in the grand scheme of the Indian
Affairs budgets but it is pretty vital to us because we are
able to bring those guys back to the table and get them back
into the work area to start cleaning up the mess that we are
looking forward to them doing for us.
The Colville Tribes is also very pleased to see the $11
million increase in the law enforcement activities. There is a
portion, though, $3.5 million that is increased for the
Criminal Investigation and Police Services account. We would
like to see that increase up to a $15 million mark. Currently,
the Colville Tribe, you know, we have 1.4 million acres to
reside over. Service time for our police officers within our
reservation boundaries, you know, it is within about a two-hour
time frame, the response to some of the activities that happen
on the reservation, so we are very well aware, very
understaffed for the tribal officers. And oftentimes we even
have at least one tribal police officer operating the whole 1.4
million acres. And so that is extremely difficult to deal with,
you know, as far as, you know, we have an increase in gang
violence, we have drug smuggling coming onto our reservation
and a lot of different activities like that, you know, that we
are not able to capture with the amount of staff that we have.
So we would like that account increased from $3.5 million up to
the $15 million mark. And actually, this is the first year
where we may have to almost drop 20 of our tribal police
officers because of BIA not being able to fund our police
services. So I would appreciate if we could raise that amount
to a $15 million mark to alleviate some of that stress from our
police officers there.
So I think that is my time but I just thank the
subcommittee here and, like I said, I am nervous as hell and I
thank you guys for listening to me. Thank you.
[The statement of Sneena Brooks follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Well, Mr. Brooks, you have nothing to be
sorry for. You did a great job and we appreciate your insights
and your testimony.
Getting here late, I do not have a lot of questions but,
Mr. Greene, you were talking about dredging and one of the
problems that not only the Congress but the whole country faces
is the inability to free up funds to dredge navigable
waterways. And aside from your interest, you should be aware
that there are folks who are working on releasing some of the
funds from the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund to hopefully go in
and help not only your harbor but other harbors around the
country. If we could ever get our act together here, hopefully,
we could get that out of here.
So Mr. Moran, questions?
Mr. Moran. I will defer to Killer Whale here.
Mr. LaTourette. Mr. Killer Whale.
Mr. Dicks. Well, thank you. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. And I want to say that Mr. LaTourette has been a big
supporter of the bipartisan approach on this committee in
support of our tribes, and it is very much appreciated. And
also, when I was chairman, he always voted for the bill. So he
gets a big star.
Mr. LaTourette. I just liked the bill.
Mr. Dicks. Right. Yeah, but it was important. And I just
want to add, Neah Bay is at the northwest corner of the lower
48 States. You have got the Strait of Juan de Fuca on one side;
you have got the Pacific Ocean on the other side. So you cannot
get much better than that. And there is a little island as you
go out called Waddah Island. When I was fishing there with my
father in the '50s, in 1952. One day the limit was three kings
and six silvers; we got nine kings. That was one of the great
days of salmon fishing.
Mr. Moran. But that was over the limit, though.
Mr. Dicks. Well, but there were three of us. My brother--I
want to make that perfectly clear.
Mr. Moran. Oh, okay.
Mr. Dicks. And in recent years, we would go 23 miles off
the coast to a place called Blue Dot and caught big salmon,
Billy, 35- to 40-pound king salmon. That was pretty
spectacular. And there is a place called Skagway right around
the corner where we used to fish a lot and it is just one of
the most amazing places on Earth. And I have enjoyed our
relationship and working with Ron Allen, of course, and the
Colvilles have a special place in my heart because they took a
gillnetter and converted it into a purse seiner so they could
release wild fish.
Selective fishing is important. I may offer an amendment
this year that it is a national responsibility to catch
hatchery fish so that they do not breed with wild fish in the
river. And the Nisqually Tribe have just put in a weir; the
Elwhas have a weir. We are moving in the right direction but it
has taken leadership--and over on the east side it is not that
easy to do. There are some differing views on these issues but
we will leave that for another day, Mr. Chairman.
But thank you for your testimony and thank you for your
friendship over the years. And I will be up there this summer.
Mr. Moran. I just tried to envision in the 1950s you
bringing in a 40-pound fish. You could not have weighed much
more than 40 pounds.
Mr. Dicks. Well, I was about 12 years old and I was able to
handle it.
Mr. Moran. Wow.
Mr. Dicks. The only problem was the first one my dad had a
bad net and it went through the net and I started to cry. Then
we caught all the rest. And there were three of us, Jim. Three
times three is nine. Okay.
Mr. Moran. It is beyond the statute of limitations anyway.
Mr. Dicks. Yeah, well----
Mr. LaTourette. Mr. Dicks, thank you very much for your
kind words and also for your testimony. I assume everybody
knows that Mr. Dicks announced that he is retiring, and it is
going to be a great loss to not only the committee and the
subcommittee but the United States Congress, but you can also
tell that he is a retiring member because he has admitted to
poaching on the record. He would not do that if he was facing
reelection.
I am going to recognize Ms. McCollum next, but on the Great
Lakes we know that Neah Bay is an icebreaker that has gotten us
out of a lot of trouble in the wintertime.
Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As the oldest granddaughter, I understand limits and being
in the boat as a youngster. Then when I started being able to
actually figure out how to catch them myself we were not out
for as long, which meant then we had to stop someplace to get
me a Coke because part of the fishing was kind of a little
escape from Grandma. But yeah, you count if you are in the
boat. You count if you have a license.
As I mentioned before, I was looking at the websites, and
you have a children's page. Not that many tribes have
children's pages. Congratulations. That is really very, very
good.
Mr. Greene. Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. And the breaking news is your temperature. I
will not tell you what it is; it is a little colder than it is
here.
I just wanted to ask a little bit more about what is going
on with the Department of Defense helping you with cleaning up
the dump site, and the toxins leaching into it. I have an old
army arsenal in my congressional district, Arden Hills, and we
had problems with water being contaminated and filters put in
and all that. Could you tell me a little more about what is
going on with the clean up at the Warmhouse Beach Open Dump?
What a lovely name to call a dump, the Warmhouse Beach Open
Dump.
Mr. Greene. Well, it is a real beautiful location is one of
the sad things. It is actually used as a landmark for fishing.
And we would like to get rid of that landmark out there.
Mr. Dicks. Called the Garbage Dump.
Mr. Greene. The Garbage Dump, fisherman go there, there is
halibut and link cod and different things off of that site and
they use it as a landmark. But getting back to where we are at
with the Department of Defense, you know, it has been a few
months since we have had any actual dialogue with the
Department of Defense. We have had some good dialogue. There
have been some Department of Defense investigators came out,
took depositions from people at the tribe, former Air Force
personnel that married into the tribe and are living there. And
so it is in kind of that fact-finding stage still, you know,
just I guess ground truth everything that the tribe is
claiming. So that is where we are at.
And, you know, we are looking at doing a partnership with
the Federal Government, you know. We are not here to demand
that you take care of everything; we just want you to take care
of what you are responsible for and, you know, certainly we
will take care of what we are responsible for. So that is kind
of where that is at right now. We are trying to do it in a
cooperative manner and not adversarial.
Ms. McCollum. Well, that is what my municipalities are
doing with the Department of Defense with cleanup. They are
making sure that the water stays contained where it is and that
it does not get into drinking water and municipal wells and
other things like that. So I will be interested to follow that
along with you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Greene. Okay.
Mr. LaTourette. Thank you, Ms. McCollum. I want to thank
all of you for your testimony and answering our questions. You
go with our thanks and again, you did fine. Next year you will
be a veteran and you will come back and just wow us with your
polished testimony. So thank you very much.
We will call up the next panel. On the next panel--and if
you could again attempt to observe the 5-minute rule, the
lights will be instructive in that regard--we will hear from
Andy Joseph, who is the chairperson of the Northwest Portland
Area Indian Health Board; Larry Blythe, who is Intertribal
Timber Council member; Ron Suppah, the vice chairman of the
Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon;
Les Minthorn, who is the chairman of the Board of Trustees of
the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservations;
and Gerald Lewis, who is the chairman of the Columbia River
Intertribal Fish Commission.
We will wait for the door to close. I think Mr. Dicks is
out retelling some fish stories. Maybe the fish got to be 60
pounds by the time he is done now.
Again, we are in receipt of your written testimony. If you
can confine your remarks to five minutes, we would appreciate
that. If you cannot, we will certainly understand that as well.
I want to welcome you. We look forward to your testimony. Mr.
Joseph, you are first.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

NORTHWEST PORTLAND AREA INDIAN HEALTH BOARD

WITNESS

ANDY JOSEPH
Mr. Joseph. Good morning. My name is Badger. I am Andy
Joseph, Jr., Chair of the Health and Human Services Committee
for the Confederate Tribes of Colville and also the Chair of
the Northwest Portland Area Indian Health Board, 43 tribes of
Washington, Idaho, and Oregon. And good morning, Chairman and
Ranking Member Moran, members of the subcommittee.
First, I will summarize our recommendations by underscoring
the federal trust responsibility to provide healthcare to
Indians and the significant health disparities that affect our
people. My written testimony documents these health
disparities. This fact, along with the trust responsibility,
makes it a requirement that Congress provide an adequate level
of funding for the IHS budget. The fundamental budget principle
for the Northwest Tribes is that the basic healthcare program
must be preserved by the President. Preserving the IHS-based
program by funding the current level of health services should
a fundamental budget principle of Congress. Otherwise, how can
unmet needs ever be addressed if the existing program is not
maintained?
In fiscal year 2013, we estimated it will take at least
$403 million to maintain current services, yet the President's
request only $115.9 million increase for IHS. The IHS explains
that the overall increase is adequate to sustain the Indian
health system, expand access to care; however, we do not
believe this will be the case. The Northwest Portland Area
Indian Health Board estimates that an additional $287 million
is needed to maintain the current levels of care. Our estimates
are based on actual medical inflation rates from the Consumer
Price Index and growth in the IHS user population.
My written testimony explains our methodology with the
following recommendations. One, the Northwest Portland Area
Indian Health Board recommends that the subcommittee restore
the $126 million in funding eliminated in the President's
request for inflation, population growth, and a tribal pay
cost. Our estimates are based on budget worksheets provided and
used by the IHS during the fiscal year 2013 National Budget
formulation meeting.
Two, the Northwest Portland Area Indian Health Board
recommends that at least an additional $10 million be provided
for the contract health service program CHS, to cover the
inflation and population growth.
Three, we recommend that the subcommittee provide an
additional $99.3 million to fund past years' contract support
cost shortfalls that are owed to tribes under the P.L. 93-638.
Four, the Portland Area has developed a new initiative
approach to constructing health facilities in order to address
the health needs of tribes. My written testimony provides a
detailed explanation of this new initiative program, and we
recommend that the subcommittee include $10 million for the
Portland Area to develop a demonstration project to prove the
viability of this program.
I recognize that our recommendations may seem unreasonable
in the current fiscal environment, but when the significant
healthcare needs of Indian people are considered, our
recommendations are realistic. I hope you will agree by
supporting the IHS budget, and I am happy to respond to any
questions from the subcommittee.
Thank you.
[The statement of Andy Joseph follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Mr. Joseph, thank you very much for your
testimony.
Mr. Blythe, next we will hear from you.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

INTERTRIBAL TIMBER COUNCIL

WITNESS

LARRY BLYTHE
Mr. Blythe. Mr. Chairman, committee, good morning. It is
good to be back here in Washington again, in front of the
committee. I am Larry Blythe. I am currently President of the
Intertribal Timber Council, and also I am the Vice Chief for
the Eastern Band of Cherokees in North Carolina.
The Intertribal Timber Council is a 36-year-old association
of 60 forest-owning tribes and Alaska Native corporations that
collectively manage more than 90 percent of the 18 million
acres of timberland and woodland that are under BIA trust
management. Mr. Chairman, as the first order of business the
ITC would like to express our deep appreciation for the
leadership provided by you and this subcommittee in
understanding and protecting the BIA and Indian Health Service
budgets.
Even in the best of times Indian Country struggles with
joblessness and economic deprivation many times that of the
country as a whole. The BIA and IHS budgets are a core element
of the Federal Government's solemn promise to our people and
are vital to our welfare and progress. We thank you for your
commitment toward honoring these historic and enduring
obligations.
I have submitted the Intertribal Timber Council's full
testimony for the record and will focus today on just some core
priorities.
Number one, we ask that the committee consider providing
BIA natural resource funding in amounts sufficient to assure
the Federal Government's full compliance with its trust
obligations to manage and protect tribal natural resources. Our
forests and all natural resources are important to all tribes.
Their protection and management is an integral part of the
trust responsibility of the United States.
Unfortunately, the failure of the United States to exercise
its fiduciary responsibilities for management of the Indian
estate for individuals as well as tribal governments has
necessitated costly settlement of litigation. The Colville
Tribe's $193 million trust management settlement is a recent
example. Morally and legally, the United States must live up to
its trust obligations to the Indian people. We ask that, as
this Committee reviews the BIA's proposed fiscal year 2013
budget for natural resources trust management, please bear
clearly in mind the solemn obligations of the United States to
ensure that trust responsibilities are met.
Secondly, in the BIA operations of Indian program budget,
restore the inequitable funding cuts proposed for
administrative cost savings. The Intertribal Timber Council
urges this committee to reject the $33 million in
Administrative Cost Savings, ACS reduction in operation of
Indian programs, and to restore those funds. The BIA devised
the reduction allocation process on its own, without
consultation, and the results are grossly inequitable. While
BIA says it will consult with tribes on the ACS cuts, the BIA,
by having already allocated the ACS cuts among BIA locations
and programs, has made a sham of the promise of consultation.
If the BIA is to pursue cost savings through streamlining,
consolidation, or other efficiencies, any process for
allocating those savings must be open, fair, and equitable, and
consultation with the tribes before such an allocation occurs
is essential to achieving those goals and obtaining broad
tribal support.
ITC urges you to reject the ACS cuts and restore the $33
million, including the $1.9 million reduction proposed for
forestry which would eliminate 9 BIA forestry positions and
most likely be at regional or the agency locations.
Thirdly, we ask that BIA TPA Forestry Program be increased
by $5 million above the fiscal year 2012 recommendation. The
program has been seriously underfunded for years. Independent
studies by nationally-recognized forestry experts in 1993 and
2003 documented BIA forestry per-acre management funding is
less than half that of the National Forest System. These
funding inadequacies in BIA trust forestry are now being made
manifest in large tribal trust mismanagement law suits and
settlements against the United States. The requested $5 million
increase is also needed to maintain a wide range of tribal
forest trust activities customarily supported by forest
management deductions which have been severely eroded by years
of depressed timber markets.
Fourthly, stewardship contracting expires at the end of
2013 cutting off an essential tool for tribes, local
communities, and others to perform needed forest management
activities on Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management
land. For tribes in particular, stewardship contracts can be
key in carrying out protective forest health activities on
adjacent federal land under the Tribal Forest Protection Act,
Public Law 108-278.
Under fire management, the Intertribal Timber Council
requests the restoration of the Department of Interior hazard
fuel funding to $216 million. Efforts to reduce the risk of
fire are critical to sustaining fire adapted tribal
communities, adaptable ecosystems, cultural values, and
economies that sustain tribes.
The Intertribal Timber Council also requests the
restoration of Department of Interior Burned Area
Rehabilitation funds to $33.2 million.
The Intertribal Timber Council also requests the suspension
of the Department of Interior Hazard Fuels Prioritization and
Allocation System until such time as it can be tested and
proven reliable. Current runs of the model project drastic,
unprecedented transfers of funding from BIA-sponsored tribes
dependent on commercial forests to Bureau of Land Management
shrub-grass ecosystems. The new model's removal of significant
amounts of fuels funding away from tribes will greatly increase
fire and health risks to tribal trust forests and pose
significant and unjustified threats to tribal forest revenues,
subsistence uses, and tribal employment. We do not believe this
shift is warranted.
Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, that
concludes my testimony. Thank you.
[The statement of Larry Blythe follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Suppah, we would like to hear from you now.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

THE CONFEDERATE TRIBES OF THE WARM SPRINGS RESERVATION OF OREGON

WITNESS

RON SUPPAH
Mr. Suppah. Good morning, Chairman, other members of the
committee. Our people are the Warm Springs, Wasco, and Paiute
Tribes. I am Ron Suppah, Vice-Chairman of the Confederated
Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon. Our over
640,000-acre reservation in central Oregon ranges from the
snow-capped Mt. Jefferson to the salmon-bearing Deschutes
River, with forests, farmland, and high desert between.
The vast majority of our tribal members live on the
reservation, where we are suffering from almost 60 percent
unemployment. Putting our people to work and providing basic
social service, especially healthcare and education for our
members, is extremely challenging at Warm Springs.
Our federal appropriation priorities reflect the
circumstances we face, and I deeply appreciate your invitation
to speak before you today. My full testimony is submitted for
the record. Today I want to focus on our priorities.
Number one. Indian Health Service. In 1992, Congress
authorized a joint venture agreement between the IHS and Warm
Springs. The tribe financed construction of a new clinic, and
the IHS agreed to fully fund and staff the facility.
Unfortunately, the federal funding has been far short of its
commitment. The Warm Springs support the proposed $4.4 million
funded level for IHS. This increase is about half of what is
needed to maintain existing services and prevent cannibalizing
current services to pay for federal mandate increases.
Of that amount the Warm Springs requests a $1.9 million
increase in funding for IHS hospitals and clinics to provide
full direct services for Warm Springs joint venture.
Clean water is critical for human health. The Warm Springs
community is facing a costly replacement of our water treatment
system, an estimated $30 million. We request these funds from
the Sanitation Facilities Construction Program.
Tribal Forestry Management. The Warm Springs are concerned
about a net cut to the BIA's forest management account. The
tribe, pursuant to contract with the BIA, manages the forest
land on the Warm Springs Reservation. Over the past decade
several hundreds of thousands of forest lands have been
destroyed, many of the fires coming from adjacent federal
lands.
The Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs aligns itself with
the budget request given today by the Intertribal Timber
Council. This includes three items.
Number one. Restoration of the $1.9 million in inequitable
ACS cuts in BIA TPA Forestry, number two, that the BIA TPA
Forestry Program be increased by $5 million above fiscal year
2012, and third, that the DOI Hazard Fuels Prioritization and
Allocation System be suspended until such as it can be.
Indian school construction. Currently Jefferson County
operates a K through five school at Warm Springs, and older
children must travel a significant distance to the Town of
Madras to attend school. Both the Warm Springs and Jefferson
County are submitting referendums to fund construction of an
on-reservation K through eight school.
As such, the Warm Springs oppose the proposed $52.8 million
cut to the Bureau of Indian Education construction budget. Some
funding for replacement school construction would be extremely
beneficial to fulfill an intergovernmental agreement.
Trust reform. The Bureau of Indian Affairs and Office of
the Special Trustee have been confronted with trust
mismanagement claims from individual Indian allottees and
tribes for mismanaging both monetary assets and non-monetary or
natural resources assets that span many decades. The Inter-
Tribal Monitoring Association has provided a very valuable
central source of policy-level information and analysis,
technical assistance, legal research, and help in facilitating
interactions between tribes and federal officials to engender
more trust effective relationship and solutions.
Tribal fisheries management. Warm Springs is a founding
member of the Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish Commission, our
policy and technical coordinating agency for treaty fisheries
management for the Columbia River and International Fisheries.
We support the testimony given today from CRITFC Chairman
Gerald Lewis.
That concludes my testimony, and again, I would like to
thank you guys for the time.
[The statement of Ron Suppah follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaTourette. Mr. Suppah, thank you very much for your
testimony.
Chairman Simpson has returned. He obviously thought I was
not doing a good enough job, but I want to thank you all for
your testimony, and we will turn the reins back over to
Chairman Simpson.
Mr. Simpson. I had to go ask the BOR about Indian water
right settlements and what their budget is going to be.
Mr. Minthorn.
Mr. Minthorn. Yes, sir.
Mr. Simpson. Okay.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

CONFEDERATE TRIBES OF THE UMATILLA INDIAN RESERVATIONS

WITNESS

LES MINTHORN
Mr. Minthorn. For the record my name is Les Minthorn. I am
the Chairman of the Umatilla Tribe in northeastern Oregon. My
enrollment number is X162, and I am also a full-time U.S. Army
Veteran, and I am here today to highlight, you know, the budget
concerns that you have been listening to all morning. We have
six items that we would like to highlight, and we are also, you
know, for your information we are in the district of Greg
Walden, Doc Hastings, and Cathy McMorris Rodgers. So when you
go around the neighborhood in Washington, those are the
representatives in our area.
And so as we come here we have six items that we would like
to talk about, and as you mentioned when you talked about water
litigation, that is one of the things that we would like to
highlight because of our treaty in 1855, and we do not have a
water right unless we negotiate it, and so we are hoping that
the BIA Water Rights Protection Budget is increased to a level
that allows litigation and technical support to help us
negotiate with the federal, state, and local stakeholders.
So there is a lot of technical work involved with the
basins that we certainly live in and depend upon. The Umatilla
Basin Project, the Walla Walla area is also in our area, and we
certainly support the Water Rights Protection Budget and the
increase that is available. We are happy to support that for
assisting our Oregon Congressional stakeholders to try to
negotiate a reasonable settlement. You know, we have never got
to the table all these years. We would like that technical
support to help us get there.
Under contract support, we support the increase for
contract. Because we are a 638 tribe, we do compact with the
Bureau of Indian Affairs programs, and we certainly expect
contract support to be there as well as direct funding that
comes with the appropriations for that particular agency.
Under law enforcement activities, we have one item that we
have never pushed before because of many reasons, but we would
like to propose that the conservation, because the treaty
activities on the Columbia River with our fishing rights and
hunting in various parts of our area, conservation officers are
very important for not only enforcing tribal members but non-
tribals. And so the jurisdiction issue on all reservations is
very critical to sanity, as you well know in the Court systems.
Under tribal courts, talking about sanity, you know, we
need more revenue or support in that particular arena because
in 2010, when the Tribal Law Enforcement Order Act impacted our
tribal court that we have, and there is only 33,000 people live
on our reservation, and most of them are tribal members, and so
we do have a tribal court. But when the Law and Order Act was
passed, it added burdens on our tribal court, and we would like
to see an increase in that particular budget line item.
And you have been hearing good words about Indian health
service and the good work that they do. We would like to
support that increase for contract health support, and again,
it is an issue that we have compacted for that particular arena
with our Indian Health Service group in Oregon, and we have a
little clinic on the reservation, and so that is really
critical. Because if you do not have enough budget, you are
just putting patients off until the next budget cycle we can
cover that. So we do support that.
Under treaty fisheries management, we are going to stand up
and support the Columbia River Treaty. The tribes in the
Columbia River, they are here to offer testimony. We support
the testimony that is going to be provided by the chairman of
that group.
And basically we agree that most of the work that is done
by the committee and whoever in the City of Washington here,
you know, it is very difficult, but when we come, we are
building our capacity to the point where we are not self-
sufficient yet, but each time we come and we ask for specific
funding, it builds our capacity to take care of our own. And
eventually we will be self-sufficient some day, but until then
we need the support of your committee and the rest of the
federal agencies that we have a relationship with.
And we value our relationships very highly with Congress
and the State of Oregon and all the other tribes and states
that we have to deal with.
Thank you.
[The statement of Les Minthorn follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Gerald Lewis.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

COLUMBIA RIVER INTERNATIONAL-TRIBAL FISH COMMISSION

WITNESS

GERALD LEWIS
Mr. Lewis. Good morning, Chairman Simpson and subcommittee
members. My name is Gerald Lewis. I am a member of the
Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation. I am also a
Tribal Council Member and Chairman of the Columbia River
Intertribal Fish Commission out of Portland, Oregon. It is my
pleasure to address you today regarding our funding needs and
those of the fisheries programs for our member tribes; the
Yakama Nation, Nez Perce Tribe, Umatilla Tribes, and the Warm
Springs Tribes. We often refer to ourselves by our acronym,
CRITFC.
We are celebrating our 35th anniversary year in 2012. Our
base program funding is in the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Rights
Protection Implementation Account. Our programs are carried our
pursuant to the Indian Self-Determination and Assistance Act.
We conduct a Comprehensive Treaty Fisheries Program intended to
maintain compliance with court orders, regional
intergovernmental agreements, and international salmon
treaties.
Together our tribes manage and co-manage lands equivalent
to the size of the State of Georgia. We are leaders in
ecosystem management, working in collaboration with five
states, 13 federal agencies, and private entities. CRITFC and
our member tribes are principals in the region's efforts to
halt the decline of salmon, lamprey, and sturgeon populations
and rebuild them to levels that support ceremonial,
subsistence, and commercial harvests. To achieve these
objectives, we emphasize the highest level of scientific rigor,
cost-effective management strategies, and holistic approaches
to protection of first foods.
While many of the Pacific Coast salmon stocks remain in
distress, our tribes are building Columbia Basin successes acre
by acre, tributary by tributary, and stock by stock as we
witnessed within this document here, which we will share with
the committee.
However, we are very appreciative of recent increases to
rights protection implementation. However, we have two
requests.
First, the need remains high. We ask that this subcommittee
exceed the President's request for the base programs for CRITFC
and our members' Tribes Fisheries Programs, both in the Bureau
of Indian Affairs Rights Protection Implementation Account
specifically.
We request $7.7 million for the Columbia River Fisheries
Management, $3 million above the President's request.
We also request, as you heard earlier, $4.8 million for the
U.S. Canada Pacific Salmon Treaty, 364,000 above the
President's request to implement obligations adopted by the
United States and Canada under the treaty.
Second, as leaders of our member tribes have stated,
Chairman Brooklyn Baptist, Les Minthorn, and Ron Suppah, we are
appreciative of recent increases to rights of protection
implementation but are troubled by the arbitrary allocation of
increases and decreases within the subaccounts.
We ask this subcommittee to direct the BIA to return to the
2000, allocation formula, then sit down with account holders to
determine where and how, if at all, the formula should be
changed.
I want to speak for a moment about public safety and law
enforcement in treaty fishery areas. Our written testimony
details recent court rulings related to criminal jurisdiction
in Oregon and Washington. CRITFC currently contracts with DIA
for two federal enforcement positions. We seek two more full-
time enforcement officers so we can provide the comprehensive
safety and service coverage the tribal people living along the
Columbia River have asked for and deserve. We support the
President's request for BIA Enforcement Services.
In closing, thank you, Chairman Simpson. We will be holding
our May commission meetings at our Hageman Genetics Lab. I want
to extend a personal invitation to you and your staff to stop
by and spend some time with us while we are there.
Thank you.
[The statement of Gerald Lewis follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Mr. Moran.
Mr. Moran. I think I will pass, Mr. Chairman. It is good
testimony, and it involves Idaho and the northwest, so I think
I will defer to those who are more intimately familiar with it.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. LaTourette.
Mr. Moran. Respect the testimony and you coming here.
Mr. LaTourette. Well, that puts me in a tough spot being
from Ohio, but I am going to ask a question anyway.
Mr. Suppah, I am interested in your observation about 60
percent unemployment and would ask you to give me, if you
could, sort of a historical perspective. I presume it is higher
with the difficulties that the entire country has suffered, but
60 percent is about seven, eight times the national average. So
can you share with me where it has been for the last 10 years?
Is it always in the 60 percent range? Is it 50 percent, and it
has grown to 60? What has gone on in the last 3 years?
Mr. Suppah. Basically it has been consistent at that level
for about the past 5 years, and the problem we are having is
mainly with development of economic development on our
reservation, and maybe inviting outside businesses to come onto
the reservation because they are so much of a problem with all
of the regulations that they have to encounter in order to
conduct business on our reservation. So I think that is one of
our highest priorities is economic development for our tribe.
Mr. LaTourette. Do you have or could you provide to the
subcommittee, I assume the tribe is interested in attracting
economic development and businesses to the reservation and
supply jobs and other commerce. Do you have somewhere at your
disposal a list of the specific impediments in terms of
regulations that are preventing people that want to come to do
business with you from doing so?
Mr. Suppah. Sir, probably the highest level that you could
go to on that question there, that issue is taxation simply
because you sometimes drive off potential financers and
business people by having maybe dual taxation on the projects,
whether they are on the improvements or whether they are on the
revenues produced by that.
Mr. LaTourette. Okay. I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman,
that is something I am interested in, maybe we could talk about
it a little bit later.
Thank you all.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
In your testimony, you asked for increases for working on
invasive species with the Forestry Council and the welfare of
fire work. I see the importance of that, but one of the things
that our Forestry Councils in Minnesota have really been
fueling more stress with is invasive species, such as the ash
borer and the gypsy moth.
So if maybe I could ask you to speak to that just for a
minute because I have another question afterwards. If you have
some documentation you can give us later, that would be great,
too.
Mr. Blythe. Under the stewardship contracting, of course,
with the United States Forest Service, our tribe has been doing
some invasive species work locally with the Forest Service
ranches close by, and some of that has to do with eradication,
some of the aquatic species in some of the lakes that are, you
know, specifically I do not know, you know, which species they
are, but I know we have had several contracts over the past few
years, and of course, our testimony today is stewardship
contracting.
From a reduction of fuels, a reduction of, you know, just
the thinning of the forest that surrounds the reservation, and
particularly to fire hazard reduction, but the invasive species
area, the reservation experiences it, you know, locally with
some of the things that we are doing, but it is mainly with the
working with the Forest Service.
Ms. McCollum. Okay. So if the Forest Service is getting a
cut, and you are getting a cut, that is going to have an impact
on that.
Mr. Blythe. And we look at it as an employment issue for
us. I mean, we have crews that are just doing specific things,
which helps some, you know, not just the reservation, but I am
sure they have contracts with the county folks or just general
contractors doing work, too. So it is an impact to employment.
Ms. McCollum. And I have two other questions.
One, you are looking at doing your levy referendum for
building your K-12 school. Right now you are K-5. Does your
levy referendum then include operations funding? Or if you are
successful with passing your levy, do you go to the Bureau for
more dollars for hiring teachers? How does that work?
Mr. Suppah. Right now the process is that the Jefferson
County School District will be having a referendum for a
bonding for the complete, approximately $21 million need for
construction of a K through eight on the reservation.
At the same time, running parallel to that, the Warm
Springs Tribe will be having a tribal referendum asking the
membership to pay half of that or a little bit over $10 million
for our share of that because I guess we have to strategize to
reduce the terrible dropout rate by our membership from the
Madras 509J School District, so that is why we are proceeding
towards building our own school on our reservation so we have
more control and more management elements including curriculum
and et cetera. And I think that the school district will be
providing the teachers, and they will be sending an
administrator to the reservation for that.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you. Sir, when you were talking about
job opportunities to address your 60 percent unemployment, do
you have a strategy when seeking out businesses that provide
training for tribal members to be able to take advantage of the
jobs, especially with dropout rates the way that they are
sometimes and a lack of skills? I have been on several
reservations where they have attracted businesses but then it
is non-reservation people who are working on the business. So
they get some bit of a profit for having the business there,
but they are really not reaching the full potential of
employing people from their own village.
So do you have a two-step solution for that--attracting the
business and then also trying to gear up the training and the
job opportunities for tribal members? Either one of you can
answer.
Mr. Minthorn. The Umatilla Tribe is a little different than
Warm Springs. Warm Springs is pretty much a closed reservation.
Ms. McCollum. Okay.
Mr. Minthorn. And we are a checkerboard reservation where
we have non-tribal members, non-trust land across our
reservation, and we are fairly small, about 172,000 acres
remaining. So part of our strategy we have the I-5 freeway
running through the reservation and railroad, and so part of
our economic development strategy was to secure enough
infrastructure planning monies to put water, sewer, dark fiber
to the business park that we have created. And so we set aside
12 square miles of enterprise zone and the dual taxation that
was referenced, that was an issue in the very beginning.
So we negotiated with the State of Oregon to allow the
tribal tax ordinance that we have to prevail, and the state
would not tax that business that came to our reservation, and
we negotiated that agreement so that we did not have a double
taxation on any business that wanted to come.
And so we do have 12 square miles of enterprise zone, we do
have infrastructure, and we do have a sign out there that we
have three tenants on that square mile, 12 square miles, but
one of the tenants has 300 employees. So as you secure the
infrastructure through EVA or whoever for water, sewer,
transportation departments, that helps attract higher job
paying businesses to the reservation.
And we do negotiate other benefits similar to the county,
but we have 12 square miles of trust land that we are trying to
fill with higher businesses, and our unemployment rate used to
be 35 percent, and now it is roughly 10 to 12, and I think
Oregon is roughly 10. So we are getting there, but we still
have issues relating to the dropouts word that you heard and
getting them to work. We need places for them to be and things
for them to do to keep them in school.
Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, and I thank the panel for being
here today, and we look forward to working with you as we try
to put together the budget for the coming fiscal year.
Thank you.
I am pleased to invite the Honorable Don Young up to
introduce the Alaska tribes that are here today.
Mr. Young. For those from Alaska, please, thank you, Mr.
Chairman and the ranking member for inviting such a diverse
group of Alaskans whose work for organizations has tremendous
impacts on the lives of the Alaskan native people, and I simply
want to welcome and introduce the following individuals for the
long trip. By the way, it is 5,500 miles. I cannot figure it
out. My Senator said it was only 4,000 miles. I cannot figure
out how that happened, but that is the Senate for you.
First we have Patty Brown-Schwalenberg, Executive Director
of the Chugach Regional Resources Commission. Please come up,
Patty.
And we have Dan Winkelman, Vice President for
Administration and General Counsel, Yukon-Kuskokwim Health
Corporation. The Yukon Health Corporation provides basic health
services for about 30,000 Yupik Eskimos in the western portion
of Alaska, and most of the time, Mr. Chairman, it is only
accessible by plane and small boat.
Marie Carroll, President and CEO of the Arctic Slope Native
Association. Marie and Arctic Slope Native Association have
worked tirelessly towards opening the Barrel Replacement
Hospital, which will service 38,000 patients who reside in
Alaska's most-northern community.
And we have Gloria O'Neill, President and CEO of Cook Inlet
Tribal Council. The Cook Inlet Tribal Council has been able to
develop strong partnerships to ensure Native Alaskans in one of
Alaska's urban areas to be able to pursue educational
opportunities. This is a fine example of what can be done with
dollars when they are available.
Ed Thomas, President of Central Council of the Tlingit and
Haida Indian Tribes of Alaska. Mr. Thomas represents Native
Alaskans in the southeastern portion of Alaska; the Central
Council of the Tlingit and Haida is responsible for preserving
sovereignty and enhancing economic and cultural resources and
promoting self-sufficiency.
James Segura.
Mr. Simpson. This will be the first panel, and then the
other ones that Don will mention will be called up on the
second panel.
Mr. Young. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Then we have James Segura,
Chairman of Southcentral Foundation. Southcentral Foundation
has recently received the Baldrige National Quality Award,
which is the highest Presidential award for performance
excellence.
We have Victor Joseph, Tanana Chiefs Conference President.
Tanana Chiefs Conference provides a unified voice for advancing
tribal governments for promoting physical and mental wellness,
education opportunities, and cultural values to the Native
Alaskan tribes to the interior of Alaska, which is my area.
We have Charles Clement, President and CEO of Southeast
Regional Alaska Consortium. SEARHC is health consortium of 18
native communities in southeast Alaska. They have done a fine
job of providing for healthcare and dental service in these
communities.
And last we have Lloyd Miller, the National Tribal Contract
Support Cost Coalition. Mr. Miller has worked tirelessly to
ensure that contact support costs are foremost in IHS
conversions.
May I say, Mr. Chairman, this is a group that has done well
in Alaska, and we want to continue to do that because if you
laid Alaska over all the land east of the Mississippi River,
all the land east of the Mississippi River, that is Alaska, and
in that you have 245 Congressman. You only got one, Mr. James,
keep that in mind. And that is really crucial because it is all
diversified. It is just a large, big area with different
problems.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you, and I will sit for a
few seconds. Then I have to go and vote on subpoenas. Not mine.
Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Don, and I was going to say, it is
not going to a subpoena on me, is it? But I appreciate your
support for not only Alaska Natives but Indian tribes all
across the country, and I know you have worked very closely
with this committee and members of this committee to address
the issues, the unique issues that they face.
So thank you for being here today.
Mr. Moran. Mr. Chairman, if I could, because Don is going
to leave while we are hearing testimony, I want to thank you,
Chairman Young, for being here to introduce the leaders of the
Alaska tribes and villages. I know it took extra effort to do
that, but they appreciate it, and most importantly I am sure
they appreciate the fact that they are so well represented.
I do not know how you represent as vast an amount of land
and diversity as you do, but you do a great job. So I just
wanted to say, Mr. Chairman, we are very pleased to have Don
Young before this panel.
Thank you.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Jim. I appreciate that.
Mr. Simpson. I was just wondering what you did to your
nose. I mean, who did you mouth off to?
Mr. Young. This is a classic keep your nose out of other
people's business.
Mr. Simpson. Good lesson.
Mr. Young. Thank you. I do have to leave. I do apologize.
Mr. Simpson. Thanks, Don.
Patty, you are up.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

THE CHUGACH REGIONAL RESOURCES COMMISSION

WITNESS

PATTY BROWN-SCHWALENBERG
Ms. Schwalenberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am an enrolled
member of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa
Indians in northern Wisconsin and honored to serve as the
Executive Director of the Chugach Regional Resources
Commission, a capacity that I have held for the past 18 years.
Chugach Regional Resources Commission or CRRC is tribal
nonprofit that was established by the tribes in the Prince
William Sound and Lower Cook Inlet area to specifically address
natural resources, substantive, and environmental issues. They
thought that having a stand-alone organization would better
serve the environment and the resources upon which they depend.
So we have been funded by the Bureau of Indian Affairs for
quite some time. However, we have a 638 contract, but they have
not met their contractual obligations for the past 10 years and
that we were never in the BIA budget, and so we would have to
come back here and fight for money and make sure they carved
out a piece somewhere, which takes quite awhile, and so then we
go without funding for the first several months of the fiscal
year.
I am pleased to report that the BIA has finally recognized
its obligation and requested the full $350,000 in fiscal year
2013, so we are in the President's budget, and I would urge the
subcommittee to support this funding and keep it in there. I am
humbled to listen to the testimony earlier with the issues that
Indian Country is facing nationwide and the millions and
millions of dollars that are needed, and I sit here before you
asking for $350,000.
But with that $350,000 we have been able to take that and
multiply that six times. In the age of partnerships now where
funding agencies are requiring that you have partnerships in
order to get any funding from other funding agencies, we have
been doing that for 18 years because we have to. We do not have
the luxury of having a lot of money to do many things with, but
with that money we have been able to establish the Alutiiq
Pride Shellfish Hatchery, the only shellfish hatchery in the
State of Alaska, and we are working on research and culture of
the king crab, sea cucumbers, geoducks, purple-hinged rock
scallops, mussels, and littleneck clams among others.
We are in the process of finishing up the development of a
K through 12 natural resource or science curriculum that
integrates traditional ecological knowledge with science, and
we will be piloting that in the K-9 school district, the
Chugach Region of the Chugach School District, excuse me, as
well as the Effie Kokrine School up in Fairbanks. So we are
real excited about that, and we are also going to be working on
a math curriculum that will do a similar thing.
We are also an active participant in the Alaska Migratory
Bird Co-management Council, establishing regulations on an
annual basis for the substantive harvest of migratory birds in
the spring and summer and any other variety of fisheries
enhancements and research projects that affect the people in
the Chugach Region are the kinds of things that we work on, and
we are able to do because of this funding.
So I would like to thank you for the opportunity to
testify, and I would urge you to include our $350,000 in your
fiscal year 2013 budget, including 100 percent of contract
support. That would also be very helpful.
[The statement of Patty Brown-Schwalenberg follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Patty.
Dan.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

YUKON-KUSKOKWIM HEALTH CORPORATION

WITNESS

DAN WINKELMAN
Mr. Winkelman. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members of
the subcommittee.
The Yukon-Kuskokwim Health Corporation is a consortium of
58 tribes and has been contracting with the Indian Health
Service for over 20 years. Today in remote western Alaska
YKHC's budget is over $150 million, and we have 1,500 employees
who provides comprehensive health services as Representative
Young said to about 30,000 residents, mostly Yupik Eskimo, some
Deg Hit'an Indian, which is what I am.
Our region is a roadless area nearly as large as your
state, Mr. Chairman, where our annual per capita income is
around $11,269. Our unemployment rate in our villages is over
20 percent according to the State of Alaska and over 30 percent
live in poverty. In our main hub, the city of Bethel, our gas
has been $6.15 a gallon since last fall. If you go farther out
into our villages, it ranges from 7 to $8 a gallon. We are
expecting a large price increase this spring when the next
barge full of gas comes in.
Many homes in our region are without piped water and sewer,
and approximately 6,000 homes in rural Alaska are without safe
drinking water. Over the last 10 years as the cost of fuel has
increased, the airfare has increased dramatically for patients
that go to and from our villages to our Bethel Hospital for a
higher level of care to treat their illnesses. A good example
is if you are a Kolik man living, which Kolik is a village
which is near the Bering Sea coast, and if you need to get to
the hospital, you would have to get on a small single-engine
plane, ride for a half an hour to the village of Emmonak, and
in Emmonak you would transfer there, that is near the mouth of
the Yukon River, like I said, and go from there to Bethel, and
that is another hour and a half journey.
Current costs of that is $690 round trip. You can just
imagine that if you are from a large area where a lot of people
live in poverty, that is very tough to do to try to get access
to healthcare.
It is against this sort of backdrop that we have been
delivering healthcare in our region, and as we all know, in the
Cherokee Nation case versus Leavitt, a unanimous Supreme Court
reaffirmed the government's legal obligation to pay full
contract support costs, and they base that upon, first, it is
the statutory duties and also the contractual duties. Yet 24
years after this Congress passed full contract support cost
legislation to tribes and 7 years after the Cherokee Nation
case that reaffirmed those obligations, tribes have yet to
receive full contract support costs.
So why are tribes the only group of federal contractors not
paid full contract support costs when it is mandated by both
law and contract and, in fact, this committee last year
directed the agency, the Service, and the Bureau to both submit
their full contract support costs payments in this year's
proposed budget.
Why? Well, indeed, even the U.S. Supreme Court wondered why
when in Cherokee Nation, its decision, it listed several ways
that the Federal Government could avoid breaking its
contractual promise to pay full contract support costs to
tribes. The Court said, and I quote, ``We recognize the
agencies may sometimes find that they must spend unrestricted
appropriated funds to satisfy needs they believe more important
than fulfilling a contractual obligation. But the law normally
expects the government to avoid such situations. For example,
by seeking added funding from Congress.''
Yet, the Indian Health Service in its proposed fiscal year
2013, budget did not even come close to fully funding contract
support costs when there is a $100 million shortfall. They only
requested $5 million. Why?
The impact was described by September 28, 2011, bipartisan
letter sent from nine U.S. Senators to President Barack Obama,
``When these fixed costs are not paid, tribes are compelled to
divert resources by leaving positions vacant in the contracted
programs serving their members in order to make up the
difference.''
That is certainly true. YKHC's year end fiscal year 2011
shortfall, it consisted of $3.6 million. These shortfalls
directly affect the ability of tribal health organizations and
tribes to provide healthcare to their members and to reduce,
most importantly, health disparities within our regions.
This is really important because the cancer mortality rate
where I come from in my region is 26 percent higher than it is
for whites. While in America cancer rates are decreasing, in
Alaska it is increasing dramatically, and in fact, is the
leading cause of death for Alaskan native women.
Just as disturbing as our suicide rate. We are nearly four
times higher than the national average, and if you look at 15
to 19 year olds in our region in the YK Delta, it is a
staggering 17 times the national average.
Even though our region is nearly as large as your state,
Mr. Chairman, our genuine interactions, that is what we
cherish. We cherish our people, our friends, and we know most
everyone, even though it is a very large region.
Others speak with numbers and statistics, but with us what
is important are those friendships. To us essentially they are
not just statistics, but they real people, real people with
names like my mother, Louise, my aunties Katherine and Nora, my
uncles, Benny, Gilbert, and Adolph. Personally I stopped
counting when I was preparing my testimony at ten people in my
family that passed away from cancer. I stopped counting at five
people from my family that committed suicide. These are
staggering numbers, and unfortunately, unless you are an Alaska
native, it is hard to understand that, and what is probably
more tragic is that within our communities that almost becomes
normal or expected.
Ultimately receiving full contract support costs is not
just about money. It is about being able as a health
corporation that is made up of tribes or a tribe, it is about
being able to direct those resources and come up with a program
to help reduce those disparities. It is about portable
mammography machines and being able to take those and deploy
those out to our villages and being able to detect breast
cancers early in stage one when our survival rates are much
higher versus later stages. It is about the ability of
developing a behavioral health initiative and deploying that to
a village and being able to combat those suicides and help save
a teenager's life.
Unfortunately, it is too late for my mother, Louise, and my
aunties and my uncles, but it is not too late for the 30,000
other residents of the YK Delta and the rest of Indian Country.
Thank you.
[The statement of Dan Winkelman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Dan. Appreciate it.
Marie.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

ARCTIC SLOPE NATIVE ASSOCIATION, LTD.

WITNESS

MARIE CARROLL
Ms. Carroll. Good morning, Chairman Simpson and Ranking
Member Moran and other distinguished members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for the honor and opportunity to
testify before you this morning regarding the fiscal year 2013,
budget for the Indian Health Service.
My name is Marie, my Eskimo name is Cacom, Carroll. I am
the President/CEO of the Arctic Slope Native Association,
Limited, a tribal health organization based in Barrow, Alaska.
I am an Inupiat from the northern-most tribe in the United
States.
We operate the Samuel Simmonds Memorial Hospital under the
Self-Determination Act through Title V 630 Compact with the
IHS. We provide health and social services to eight villages
spread across the region the size of the State of Minnesota.
I am here to provide testimony about the staffing package
for our hospital project to replace our 49-year-old hospital,
which was constructed in 1963. In partnership with IHS, ASNA is
constructing the replacement regional hospital through a Title
V agreement.
I am pleased to report to you that our hospital
construction project is on budget and is the first hospital
project of its size to be constructed by a tribal health
organization under Title V. We anticipate that ASNA and IHS
will begin the acceptance and commissioning process at the end
of this year, 2012. ASNA plans to move from the old facility to
our replacement hospital between April and July of next year in
2013.
The main purpose of my testimony today is to address the
exclusion of our staffing package from the President's fiscal
year 2013 budget. IHS has told ASNA that they did not recommend
the staffing package for fiscal year 2013, because of the
uncertainty of full funding for a construction budget in fiscal
year 2012. Thanks to you and your colleagues Congress gave us
full funding for fiscal year 2012, which has kept our project
on time and on budget, a significant accomplishment in the
arctic environment.
This brings me to the conclusion of my testimony. ASNA has
been responsible in carrying out the Title V Construction
Agreement, and we are now without a staffing package to bring
our replacement hospital online in the second quarter of 2013.
On behalf of ASNA I am here to request that you fund our
staffing package for the portion of the fiscal year in which
our replacement hospital will be operational, because our
staffing package is approximately $1.1 million per month. The
total amount we would need in fiscal year 2013 budget is $6.6
million.
We are grateful for the new facility that will benefit not
only the Alaskan native people who reside in the Arctic but
also everyone who lives or visits our region because we operate
the only hospital north of the Brooks Range, and from the east
to the western village of Point Hope, approximately 650 air
miles in our region.
We have only six exam rooms today in our existing hospital,
which was designed to serve a population of 2,133 people. Today
our service population is more than 15,000. That includes non-
tribal people and growing. We are expecting more visitors
beginning this summer from the Coast Guard and Shell Oil, who
has been permitted to drill in the Chukchi Sea.
Now more than ever there is a greater sense of urgency to
meet the needs of our growing service population, and in my
language we end our public statements by simply saying cleon
nokbuck, meaning thank you very much.
So please do not hesitate to call me if you ever have an
opportunity to visit our part of the world. Thanks, again, for
this opportunity to testify.
[The statement of Marie Carroll follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Marie.
Gloria, good to see you again.
Ms. O'Neill. Good to see you, too.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

COOK INLET TRIBAL COUNCIL

WITNESS

GLORIA O'NEILL
Ms. O'Neill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
subcommittee. Again, my name is Gloria O'Neill, and I serve as
President and CEO of Cook Inlet Tribal Council. CITC is an
Alaska Native tribal non-profit organization which serves as
the primary education and workforce development center for
native people in Anchorage. CITC builds human capacity by
partnering with individuals to establish and achieve both
educational and employment goals that result in lasting,
positive change for themselves, their families, and their
communities.
CITC serves Alaska Native and American Indian people
primarily in the south central Alaska area, which includes
Alaska's most urbanized and populated communities. It is home
to an Alaska Native/American Indian population of more than
40,000, constitutes 40 percent of the native people of the
State of Alaska, and Anchorage is the fourth largest native
community in the Nation. CITC's programs address many of the
social, economic, and educational challenges faced by Alaska
Native people. For example, Alaska Native students are twice as
likely to drop out as their non-Native peers, 33 percent of
Alaska's unemployed are Alaska Native people, and almost 20
percent of Alaskan Native people have incomes below the federal
poverty line, nearly three times the rate of non-Native people.
So how do we successfully as native communities address
these disparities? An effective and proven tool available to
Native American people in responding to community and social
issues is the Indian Employment Training and Related Services
Demonstration Act or the 477 Program, administered by the
Department of the Interior. The law allows the consolidation of
funding streams from the U.S. Departments of Interior, Health
and Human Services, and Labor into a single employment and
training program and report. And on a national level the 62
travel grantees in consortia of 477 Programs serve 267 tribes
out of 545 tribes. So this is big impact.
So how does 477 work at CITC? The 477 Program allows CITC
to increase effectiveness and innovation and eliminate
inefficiency and maximize program outcomes while adhering to
the strictest government accountability standards. CITC
provides a comprehensive, integrated service delivery model to
assist Native job seekers, combining DOL, DOI, and HHS funding.
A key component is our Tribal TANF Program, which is based
on a philosophy of self-sufficiency. CITC has transitioned over
2,270 TANF recipients from welfare to work in the past 5 years,
with an average hourly wage of a little over $11.50.
And efficiencies gained within the TANF Program resulted in
a 5-year savings of $7.1 million. These savings that have been
re-invested in supporting participants and their self-
sufficiency efforts.
Over the past 5 years 477-related Programs in our
organization have provided 8,257 jobseekers with career
coaching, training, and job search assistance, of which nearly
5,500 were placed in jobs, so 65 percent. The average hourly
wage of a jobseeker coming into CITC for services increased
from $9.95 an hour to $17.23 an hour.
Again, CITC has demonstrated that the 477 Program is very
successful in connecting people to long-term, meaningful jobs.
In short, the 477 Program is a win-win for the federal
funders and CITC, since it eliminates wasteful inefficiency,
while maximizing program outcomes. In addition to being
successful on the ground, the 477 Program is fully accountable.
It achieved the highest Office of Management and Budget rating
in Indian Affairs. These programs provide tribes, tribal
organizations the ability to leverage their federal job
training and job placement funding for DOI, HHS, and DOL,
including TANF, Childcare, and other programs.
And as a result, 2012, 477 National Report shows that
tribal programs served over 41,000 people, of whom only 4
percent did not complete their objectives. More importantly, of
those who obtained employment, adults gained $9.25 per hour,
youth gained $6.40 per hour, and people on Cash Assistance
gained $7.60 per hour.
As you can see, the 477 Program is critical to our
effectiveness, especially in this environment of shrinking
federal dollars.
So this committee has been very responsive to the tribal
concerns and supportive of the 477 Program, and we are grateful
that your action last year resulted in considerable momentum to
resolve agency issues regarding 477 implementation. We continue
to meet in good faith with the agencies but have not reached a
solution. In spite of our progress in our meetings, we still
struggle with the agency's fundamental acceptance of the
flexibility of 477, that 477 offers, and the spirit of the law.
First, we request permanent suspension of the 2009, OMB
Circular A-133, and any similar requirements to account by
funding source number.
Second, we request written assurance that 477 funding will
permanently be transferred through 638 contracts and self-
governance compacts.
Third, we request that the subcommittee reintroduce Section
430, the language about 477 that was offered last year and add
the following paragraph to read to clarify the intent of the
program, and that is, ``all funds transferred under an approved
Public Law 102-477 Plan may be reallocated and re-budgeted by
the Indian tribe or tribal organization to best meet the
employment, training, and related needs of the local community
served by the Indian tribe or tribal organization.''
While working diligently and hopeful about the process, the
National Tribal Work Group representatives remained concerned
that in the absence of specific language, authorizing language,
as provided in Section 430, with the requested addition, the
spirit, the letter, and the opportunities of Public Law 102-477
law will be subject to changes in implementation from
Administration to Administration.
Thank you for your time and consideration.
[The statement of Gloria O'Neill follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Gloria. I appreciate it very much.
Edward.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

CENTRAL COUNCIL OF THE TLINGIT AND HAIDA INDIAN TRIBES OF ALASKA

WITNESS

EDWARD K. THOMAS
Mr. Thomas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and distinguished
members of the committee. My name is Ed Thomas. I am President
of the Central Council out of Juno, Alaska, and I did tell
Gloria to be short, so she was only 2 minutes over her time.
Mr. Chairman, I have been managing federal programs since
1976, which is a long time ago, and I have been involved in the
federal budgeting process almost every year since then, and my
biggest disappointment in that involvement is we keep building
the Indian budgets based on previous year's budget as opposed
to what the needs are.
I wanted to thank the members of the committee of the panel
up here that pointed out the dramatic needs in Alaska, that the
needs are very great. The unemployment rates are much higher in
our rural Alaska than they are in this country, and as you
know, when the unemployment rate grows above 10 percent, the
public wanted to throw people out of Congress and get rid of
the President. So if you multiply that by seven times, that is
what it is in some of our villages here in the winter months.
So that is the gravity of the situation in our area, and I
think that with the high rising cost of energy you are going to
see the problems get worse because the budgets did not adjust
to meet the needs of those people who are already in a poverty
situation and now the high cost of energies are going to
increase their cost of living even more.
Another problem that I talk about in my testimony is the
problem of the way money is appropriated to the various
departments. The Department of the Interior tries its best from
their perspective to do a good job in allocating amongst the
various bureaus, but if you look at the budget for the
Department of the Interior since 2004, to 2012, you are going
to see every one of those agencies getting more increases than
went to the Bureau of Indian Affairs. The Bureau of Indian
Affairs grew during that period of time by 8 percent. The Fish
and Wildlife grew by 30 percent, Park Service by 27 percent,
Geodetic Surveys by 18 percent, and BLM by 13 percent.
And, so, you know, as you look at the cutbacks that are
inevitable and because of the need to cut back federal
spending, you are going to find the Bureau is going to say,
well, gee whiz, we are barely cutting you, we are tightening
our belt. Well, there really should not be any cutting in the
BIA until those agencies have been reduced down to the 2004
level plus their 4 percent or 8 percent, rather.
This is very important because as we go through this cycle
of budget debates, I think you are going to see that those who
have the strongest voice in Congress are going to be those that
want to celebrate and the Park Service. You are going to see
those agencies that are not dealing with people continuing to
protect themselves because they have large public interest
groups behind them.
I also talk about the indirect costs, and I appreciate the
panel talking about the indirect cost problems. I will not go
into it, but I want to just state that we are a Nation of laws,
and indirect cost laws are there. We do our best to live by it,
but they are never funded by the Administration in accordance
with what is required by the law. And so it really is critical
that we address that.
Now, I was honored last year to provide testimony to
Congress, and there was an appropriations of just a little over
$360,000 for Tlingit and Haida to make up some of that loss.
Well, we did not get any of it. The reason being that when it
went forth to the Administration, it was for shortfalls in BIA.
Well, we did not have a shortfall in BIA. We had shortfalls in
all of those other non-BIA programs, Head Start, Economic
Development, and I can go down the list, but I do not have the
time.
But I think that it is important to make sure that as we
develop laws, that we develop them so that we can abide by
them. What I mean by that, we are required to do an audit of
our tribal operations, and indirect cost is set by the
government, and so the government then should fund that
percentage rate. There are a lot of ways to have lawyers talk
around that, and that is what we have been doing for all these
years, and it really has not done us any good. I did in my
testimony provide some language that would help us address
that.
One final note is that for years and decades and
generations Indian programs have been non-partisan in nature,
and I am an Independent. I am not a Democrat or Republican. But
I must say that in this debate going on in Congress, we must
get rid of the tax breaks of 2001 and amended in 2003. We
cannot afford them. And why do I mention that? Because if we do
not get more income, we are never going to be able to fund
programs for the needy, whether it be Indian, or whether it be
non-Indian. There just is not the resources there, because we
have a couple wars going on, and we have the declining economy.
So, Mr. Chairman, with all due respect, I know that that is
a hot budget item, a hot item around here, and I hope you do
not hold it against the other Indians for my comments, but I
guess it was----
Mr. Simpson. Thanks for----
Mr. Thomas [continuing]. Important to state that as I walk
out the door, and----
[The statement of Edward K. Thomas follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thanks for bringing up that non-controversial
subject. That is certainly an issue that is going to be faced
by the coming Congress. I mean, we have got to reduce our
deficit. I am one of those who happens to believe you have got
to do everything to reform entitlement programs. You have got
to control discretionary spending, and you have got to have
more revenue. How you do that is what the debate today on the
floor and tomorrow on the floor will be all about. So----
Mr. Thomas. I will be happy to provide you some technical
assistance.
Mr. Simpson. You mentioned writing laws that we can abide
by. It is interesting to note that throughout all of the
Federal government, the authorization is about three times what
we actually spend. Everybody thinks that the Appropriations
Committee is just willy-nilly going out and spending money, but
the authorizers have actually authorized about three times the
level of spending, and then we get criticized by the
authorizers. So I do find that interesting. When you talk about
contract support, and fully funding contract support, that is
something this committee is committed to doing, and we actually
thought we had done it last year. We had a debate with IHS
about what fully funding it was. From what I have been told,
the best scenario is to find out what is needed to fully fund
contract support costs, and then be just barely below that,
because if there is excess, if you have overfunded what
contract support will fully cost, that money then cannot just
be shifted to some other program. It goes back to Treasury. So
in a limited budget, I do not want to put too much money in
there, but I would like to come as close as I can. We have had
a debate with IHS about how you find the correct numbers to
fully fund contract support costs. We want to be as accurate as
we can. We want to fully fund contract support costs, and we
are going to continue to work to do that, so I appreciate your
testimony.
Mr. Winkelman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, I just
spoke with the director in Alaska, she was just there a few
days ago, and she did bring up that point, that the agency
would never be able to fund fully contract support. Well, they
are not even close now.
Mr. Simpson. Yeah.
Mr. Winkelman. And I reminded her that for new and expended
programs, all you have to do is budget for it, much like the
Department of Defense does. It is my understanding that the
Department of Defense and their Federal contractors, they
budget for it a year ahead of time, and they propose it in
their proposed budget. And that is how you would be able to
fully fund contract support costs. All you have to do is budget
for it. And, unfortunately, the shortfall is so large now, and
I am more frustrated than you are, and this committee, because
when I saw that $5 million, and now there is a projected number
of $100 million, it is not even close. And it is in law, there
has been a court case on it, and if they would just put the
request in, then I would not have had to travel down here, and
we would not have to talk about contract support.
Mr. Simpson. Do you not like being in Washington?
Mr. Winkelman. No, I love being in Washington, I really do,
but it is in law. I mean, what else do we have to do?
Mr. Simpson. Yeah, I know. And we are going to, this
committee, do everything we can to make sure that we find those
resources to do it. Ms. McCollum?
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Chairman, in light of the hour, and the
fact that there is a classified briefing at one o'clock, we
have the information. My office will follow up with a couple of
you with a little more, but I want to be able, to the best of
my ability, to hear the next panel before I attend the
classified briefing. Which they will not reschedule just for
me.
Mr. Simpson. I know, I have got a bunch of interns out in
the hallway that I have got to step out and take a picture
with, so as the next panel is coming up, I will go take that
picture, and Betty will start it, and then I will be right back
in. I appreciate all of you being here. We will work on these
issues as we try to address the upcoming budget. And I should
say, to all of you from Alaska, we mentioned Don, and what a
great representative he is, and what a great job he does for
all of you. Also, the ranking member on the Interior Committee
in the Senate is Senator Murkowski, and our staff have worked
very closely with her and her staff in trying to address these
issues. She is very influential, and does a great job for all
of you too. The next panel.
Mr. Winkelman. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. James Segura, Victor Joseph, Charles Clement,
Selina Moose, yes, you are on this panel, and Lloyd Miller. If
you would come up? And the first one to testify will be James.
If you will start that? I will be right back in.
Ms. McCollum. I will wait until the door closes. Good
afternoon and welcome. And James Segurna----
Mr. Segura. Segura.
Ms. McCollum [continuing]. Segura, Chairman of the Board at
the Southcentral----
Mr. Segura. That is fine.
Ms. McCollum [continuing]. Foundation. If you would please
lead off, sir? Thank you.
----------                              --
--------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

SOUTHCENTRAL FOUNDATION

WITNESSES

JAMES SEGURA
Mr. Segura. Sure. It gets mispronounced a lot. My name is
James Segura. I am Chairman of the Board for the Southcentral
Foundation in Anchorage, Alaska. Southcentral Foundation is a
tribal organization, and we have a self-government compact with
the Indian Health Service. Under that compact, we carry out
various IHS medical, dental, optometry, behavioral health, and
substance abuse treatment service programs for over 45,000
Alaska Native and American Indian beneficiaries in and around
Anchorage, plus another 13,000 people in 55 rural villages. Our
service area is larger than the State of Oregon, and to do all
this we employ over 1,400 people.
The first issue I need to discuss concerns our joint
venture of contract. Three years ago Southcentral Foundation
and the Indian Health Service entered into a binding joint
venture contract. Under that contract, the SCF agreed to build
a new 88,451 square foot primary care clinic in the Mat-Su
Valley using borrowed funds from non-IHS sources. We have done
our part, and we will receive our Certificate of Beneficial
Occupancy for the Mat-Su Clinic on July 15 of this year.
In return, Indian Health Service agreed to pay to staff the
facility at 85 percent of its designed capacity, which comes to
$27 million. Indian Health Service commitment includes a
commitment to request funding from Congress on the same basis
as Indian Health Service requests funding for any other new
facility. But something has gone terribly wrong, and it is
probably due to budget pressures. Indian Health Service's
budget only requests 50 percent of its staffing requirement for
the clinic, or $13.5 million. This is a huge gap. If Indian
Health Service does not cover the full $27 million cost of
operating the clinic, SCF will be forced to reprogram other
funds to make up for the difference.
We understand that there are budget pressures, but a deal
is a deal. A contract is a contract. Before the administration
requests discretionary increases, it needs to honor its
contractual commitment to SCF. We did our part. The
administration must do its part.
The second issue I need to discuss concerns our main
contract with Indian Health Service. Once again, the
President's budget does not call for full funding to reimburse
the contract support costs we spend on these Federal programs.
We are running the government's programs. We are incurring
costs to run those programs. Costs like federally required
audits, and Workers' Compensation Insurance. Our contract and
the law says Indian Health Service must reimburse those out of
the costs. The committee has said IHS must reimburse those out
of the costs. But the budget does not allocate sufficient funds
to pay all of the costs of all of the tribal contractors, like
SCF.
Our best estimate is that the administration budget will
mean a $99 million shortfall across all of the tribal
contractors next year, yet the budget only requests a mere $5
million to cover these contract requirements. At Southcentral
Foundation, we have no choice. These costs are fixed costs.
They are audited costs that are set by the government. If
Indian Health Service does not reimburse these costs, we at
Southcentral Foundation have no choice but to cut positions,
cut services, cut billings, and collections, cut medical care.
It is as simple as that. Cutting contract support costs
actually cuts our programs.
Last year this committee reiterated the binding nature of
these contracts. It instructed the Indian Health Service and
the BIA to fully fund all contract support cost requirements.
The BIA has done this. Indian Health Service has not. So far as
we can tell, no other contractors are treated this way. Only
tribal contractors are treated this way. This has to stop.
In fiscal year 2013, Indian Health Service should pay its
contract obligations in full. The contract support cost line
item should be full funded at a minimum of $571 million. This
way the Department can finally honor these contracts in full.
Remember, every tribe has contracts with Indian Health Service
to run some Federal facility or program. Every tribe is hurt by
the shortfalls, and every tribe will be helped if the shortfall
is eliminated.
To summarize, before any other increases are considered,
these contract obligations must be honored in full. Joint
venture staff funding and contract support cost funding must be
funded at 100 percent. Just as our contracts require, we have
done our part. It is time for the government to do its part.
Thank you for granting me this opportunity to testify on
behalf of the Southcentral Foundation and the 58,000 Native
Americans we serve. Thank you.
[The statement of James Segura follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, James. Victor.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

THE TANANA CHIEFS CONFERENCE

WITNESSES

VICTOR JOSEPH
Mr. Joseph. Thank you. I want to take a minute to thank you
for this opportunity, and the other subcommittee members. And I
also recognize Andy Jimmy, our Board Chairman, back in the back
there.
My name is Victor Joseph. I am the health director for
Tanana Chiefs Conference. TCC is an Alaska tribal consortium
that serves 39 Federal recognized tribes across an area that is
almost the size of Texas. Today I will testify on three
matters. First I will explain TCC's need to receive its full
staffing package of $30 million for our joint venture
construction project. Next I will explain our concerns with the
limited increase in contract support cost. Finally I will offer
TCC's full support of H.R. 4031.
IHS has long recognized the need to build a new medical
facility in Fairbanks that serves the IHS beneficiaries in the
interior of Alaska. The facility is needed to support services
across our region, but IHS has never provided the money to
build one. Two years ago we offered to build a new facility
with borrowed funds, if the government would agree to cover the
full cost of staffing. Government agreed, and in 2010 IHS
signed a joint venture construction project with TCC. Today
construction is under way. We are under budget, ahead of
schedule, and we project receiving our Certificate of
Beneficiary Occupancy in early September. Under our agreement,
IHS should be able to provide TCC with full 100 percent funding
for our staffing package. But because of budget restrictions,
IHS has only requested 27 percent of our staffing package, or
about $8 million.
You have heard from other tribal entities from Alaska, and
like TCC, IHS has requested less than 100 percent for their
projects too. We can only think of two reasons for this
disconnect. First, it is possible that when these budget
requests were developed last summer, IHS used dated
information. If that is the problem, we hope that IHS submits a
revised budget request that fully funds all staffing needs.
Second, it is possible that IHS is treating our facilities
different than other smaller facilities. If that is the case,
that is simply wrong.
We at TCC, and other tribal entities, will spend far more
than IHS requested. In order for us to carry out our
responsibilities under this agreement, we need to receive the
full amount that was agreed upon in negotiated staffing
packages. We recognize, of course, that we are not the only
joint venture projects that must be funded next year. IHS has
correctly requested 100 percent funding to honor its contract
with the Chickasaw and Cherokee Nation. All that TCC asks is
that IHS also honors its contract with us. It is not a matter
of choice or priorities. It is a matter of obligation.
We have borrowed heavily to build a new IHS facility. There
is no tearing back for us. We expect the government to likewise
honor its written commitment to fully fund joint venture
projects that were agreed upon. Like the joint venture
projects, we have similar concerns with contract support costs.
TCC incurred substantial contract support costs in operating
our IHS programs across our region. IHS has a commitment, a
contractual commitment, under Indian self-determined action to
pay those costs.
Just last summer the House Appropriations Committee agreed
that the legal obligation must be honored in full. Thank you.
The Committee directed IHS to submit a budget that would do
that, but that did not happen. Even though there is currently a
$50 to $60 million shortfall in contract support payments, and
even though it is clear that the shortfall will grow to almost
$100 million under the President's proposed budget, the budget
requests only $5 million. Not only does the budget request defy
the House Committee's clear instructions, not only does it make
the current situation worse, but once again it violates our
contract rights to be paid in full. Please understand that we
are incurring these contract costs every day, and when the
government fails to repay them, we have to take them out of
programming.
Finally, TCC fully supports H.R. 4031. H.R. 4031 will also
allow a court to hear our claims. An amendment is necessary to
provide a just outcome for self-determining tribes. We
encourage the support of this bill.
Our joint venture contract with IHS is a contractual
obligation for IHS to provide full staffing in exchange for TCC
building its own clinic, and then leasing it to IHS. Contract
support costs are a similar contractual legal obligation for
IHS to provide full support in exchange for tribes to operate
IHS programs. We know times are hard for everyone, but we
operate IHS programs under contracts, and now we have a second
contract with IHS. All we ask and expect is the government to
hold up its end of the bargain and honor these contracts in
full.
Thank you for this opportunity to present this testimony.
[The statement of Victor Joseph follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Victor, appreciate it.
Charles.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

SOUTHEAST ALASKA REGIONAL HEALTH CONSORTIUM

WITNESS

CHARLES CLEMENT
Mr. Clement. Yes, sir. Chairman Simpson, my name is Charles
Clement. I am the President and CEO of SouthEast Alaska
Regional Health Consortium, SEARHC. In light of the comments
that have been made, I will address my testimony. My written
testimony has been submitted to the committee. Thank you for
your time.
I would like to echo many of the comments that have been
made with regard to contract support cost, but I would like to
share with you and the committee a little bit about how those
impact SEARHC specifically. SEARHC is a consortium of 18 tribes
and tribal organizations throughout southeastern Alaska. I
think, like everybody else in Alaska, we have to define it to a
state. It is about the size of Maine, is the state that I
serve. So maybe that will endear somebody.
Mr. Simpson. Minnesota, and everything west of the
Mississippi.
Mr. Clement. And there is Texas to the left, and I am also
a member of the southernmost tribe in Alaska and the
easternmost tribe, so we have got the geography lesson covered.
SEARHC operates in a compact with the IHS that is valued at
about $42 million. We have an operating budget of eight
million. We have about $118 million. It has long been our goal
to sort of fully realize our contract support cost funds that
are due the organization.
I think, you know, the challenge in Alaska is largely
associated with some of these geographical challenges. I think
that is why we all bring it out. It is transportation, it is
energy, and then there are just these substantial health
disparities due to a variety of reasons, largely socioeconomic
impacts.
But I think when we talk about how it impacts SEARHC
specifically, I am a new CEO. I have been on the job for about
60 days. I actually used to work for Jim for the last 15 or so
years. So I have been on this job, you know, 60 days, but I can
tell you, as a new CEO, what you do is you try to gauge an
assessment of the organization. And I can tell you, from
SEARHC's perspective, what is really happening with lack of
payment on contract support costs, is there is a slow
deterioration of infrastructure and services.
You know, as has been stated before that, you know, these
funds are fixed costs. We have to pay them. So where does the
money come from? Well, you have deferred investment in
infrastructure, and you have deferred investment in services
that are provided to beneficiaries. And so you start to spiral
down. I mean, if you look at SEARHC, we have almost 100
vacancies that are pending that we are not going to fill, or we
have no plans to fill until we get more funding. And when we
get more funding, we see more services, we generate more
revenue. It is a self-fulfilling cycle.
We have facilities and physical plant infrastructure that
is some of the oldest probably left in Alaska. I mean, it has
been heavily invested in over time, but in the last several
years, I would say the last decade or so, there has been very
specific deferred investment, that we have not upgraded the
facilities, we have not kept up to date. I mean, I think one of
our favorite facilities we like to talk about is the double
wide trailer that was built in 1954 out in one of our villages.
I do not think, I mean, it is on par with anything, and
anywhere in Alaska. Well, maybe not in Victor's area, but
they've got some real challenges there also.
But, you know, what you have is a cycle. And so we talk
about, you know, I think our contract support shortfall was
$2.8 million. It is the culminating effect of that shortfall
year over year over year. And so what you have is you have
multiple years of deferred investment, and it compounds the
problem. I mean, it makes a tough situation, an impossible
situation, that much more difficult.
And so when we do make up the shortfall, we will get, you
know, say it is fully funded. That money will be the down
payment, and the rest will be on our shoulders, admittedly. But
it, you know, the work just begins when we get the money. We
have to put the money to work and make that investment so we
can see patients, so we can invest in our communities, invest
in our physical plan and our organizations.
We want to have organizations that our beneficiaries are
proud to come to, that they are not 1954 double wide trailers
that have not seen investment in 20 years. We want to have
facilities and organizations that we can lure providers to.
There is no medical school in Alaska. We have to bring every
doctor, just about, either we have to steal them from another
tribal organization in the State, or we have to bring them in
from outside of Alaska.
And, you know, talk about a hard sell, you know, to come in
to Alaska in the middle of winter to a facility that is a
marginal, you know, maybe a marginal, I am trying to find a
nice word for it, but it is difficult. You know, you bring
these folks in, come from a new highfalutin medical school, to
bring them in to rural Alaska, and you drop them off, it is a
shell shock.
And so the investment and contract support cost is really
just the beginning for us, but it is a substantial beginning.
It shows the commitment on behalf of the government to work
with us in partnership for the success of all Alaska Natives
and American Indians. My written testimony is a little bit
different than that, but just in light of the comments that
have already been said, I did not want to repeat too much. So
thank you for your time, I appreciate it very much.
[The statement of Charles Clement follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Just out of curiosity, who does the
WWAMI Program benefit? I mean, Alaskans go to medical school in
Washington, along with Idaho and Montana students. Do most of
those students return to Alaska?
Mr. Clement. I do not know if most of them do, but a lot of
them do. It plays a big part in the tribal health system and
overall Alaska because we place residents through the WWAMI
Program and the various organizations, so it is a big benefit
to Alaska and Alaska Native organizations, but I do not know
how much specifically actually come back into the system.
Mr. Simpson. Idaho is having that debate right now of
whether we ought to build our own medical school, or whether
the WWAMI does the job for Idahoans. It is an interesting
debate. I appreciate it, thank you. Selina?
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

NATIONAL NATIVE AMERICAN AIDS PREVENTION CENTER

WITNESS

SELINA MOOSE
Ms. Moose. Thank you. First of all, I would like to
apologize for earlier. This is my first time here----
Mr. Simpson. That is okay.
Ms. Moose. And I did not want to be left out, being that I
came all the way from Alaska just to----
Mr. Simpson. That is okay. All right.
Ms. Moose. Chairman Simpson, esteemed members of the House
subcommittee, my name is Selina Moose. I am an Inupiat from
northwest Alaska, the size of Indiana, and I am speaking to you
today as a member of the Board of Directors for the National
Native American AIDS Prevention Center, also known as NNAAPC,
and as a concerned indigenous person. Thank you for allowing me
to come to you from Alaska and to speak to you today openly and
honestly.
The National Native AIDS Prevention Center is the only
national HIV and AIDS specific Native organization in the
United States. It was founded in 1987. NNAAPC's mission is to
stop the spread of HIV and related health disparities among
American Indians, Alaska Natives, and Native Hawaiians. NNAAPC
is providing education, resources, training, and development
services in all 50 States. We are creating materials to support
the public health infrastructure that is slowly growing in
Indian country.
I am concerned because I believe that the government is
turning its head away from the HIV epidemic, particularly not
paying attention to the impact on the first peoples of this
land, and it is the issue that I would like to discuss today.
In 2002 my brother died of AIDS in the village, and because
of that I got involved with HIV and AIDS, particularly for our
native peoples. And we also did a documentary video of how our
family went to our village and told them about, you know, the
concern we have, and that my brother was positive. That is
concern of our people.
We are finding that more and more Native communities are
responding to our message, but the Federal government is the
one pushing us further and further down on the list of
priorities. In 2010 the CDC released a total of $250 million
over five years in prevention funding directly to grantee
organizations. Only one Native organization was funded. Out of
$43 million annually, only a little over $300,000 was granted
to a Native organization, and our organization, NNAAPC, almost
closed its doors in 2009. Our funding disappeared as a
reflection of the funding shift that no longer categorized
Native Americans as racially specific priority population for
HIV prevention activities.
States with smaller population sizes and fewer AIDS cases
are finding their prevention budgets slashed by up to 50
percent. Fewer prevention opportunities are available in states
with large Native populations, like South Dakota, Oklahoma,
Wyoming, Idaho, Alaska, Hawaii, and Montana because the money
is no longer there to support local programs. New initiatives
also call for targeting specifically African-American,
Hispanic, Latino communities, further diverting money from
Native communities.
I understand that these decisions are based upon HIV and
AIDS surveillance, and I do not want to underscore the
importance of providing appropriate prevention activities in
these communities of color, yet Native Hawaiians and American
Indians, Alaska Natives, have the third and fourth highest
rates of new HIV infections annually, respectively. In fact,
between 2007 and '10 the number of new HIV diagnosis among
American Indians, Alaska Natives rose by 8.7 percent, greater
than many other groups. Also, fewer of us survive after having
received an AIDS diagnosis. These statistics do not support the
de-prioritization of our communities. In fact, they suggest a
serious health disparity.
I believe that the U.S. government has a responsibility to
its native people. We have a commitment from the government, a
commitment that says we care about the health and wellbeing of
our Native American people, a commitment that says that the
government's trust relationship to provide for the health care
of Native people is sacred, and exists not only just in
writing, but in practice as well. This relationship demands
that American Indians, Alaska Natives, always be placed as a
priority population, that we do not fall in the shifting
government whims.
I know I am running out of time. I do not have very much
left. Okay. With the 2010 release of the President's national
HIV/AIDS strategy, the whole of this country needs to examine
how we are meeting the prevention and treatment of needs of
people living with, and are at risk for HIV. This nation cannot
afford to continue to allow Indian country to linger 10 years
behind the rest of the country. In order to address these
health disparities and ensure the health of our Native peoples,
I ask you to consider the following as you move forward with
your budget deliberation.
One, I ask that the Congress increase funding for American
Indian, Alaska Native specific HIV programming in the budgets
of Federal agencies like Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention and Indian Health Service. I ask that the Congress
examine the success of special diabetes program for Indians
that set aside $150 million annually for local diabetes
education and prevention efforts, and model a similar HIV
program for Native Americans that would allow for stable
funding and local ownership prevention efforts.
I ask that Congress designate funds specifically for the
creation of a national Native HIV/AIDS resource center so that
consistent funding would be set aside to create a persistent
presence at the national level to provide support for community
efforts at education and guidance for decision-makers.
And lastly, I ask that the Congress allocate funds for the
specific provision for HIV testing materials to American
Indians and Alaska Native communities to support enhanced
testing initiatives. Again, I think you for the opportunity
that you have provided me to share some of the facts, and to
share my feelings about the state of HIV in American Indian and
Alaska Native communities. I hope that you consider our request
in light of what I have shared with you today. Thank you.
[The statement of Selina Moose follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Selina.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

NATIONAL TRIBAL CONTRACT SUPPORT COST COALITION

WITNESS

LLOYD MILLER
Mr. Miller. Mr. Chairman, Congresswoman McCollum, thank you
for the honor to appear today. My name is Lloyd Miller. I am an
attorney with Sonosky, Chambers, Sachse, Miller and Munson. I
have been litigating contract support cost cases for many
years, and I litigated the Shoshone Paiute and Cherokee case in
the Supreme Court in 2005. And for the committee's information,
there is another case to be argued next month, on April 18,
involving the Ramah Navajo Chapter, and the Pueblo Zuni, and
the Oglala Sioux Tribe involving contract support costs in the
Supreme Court.
But I am here today not so much to talk about litigation as
to talk about the contract support cost issue from a legal
perspective. I represent the National Tribal Contract Support
Cost Coalition. It includes some of the organizations you have
heard from today. It includes the Cherokee and Choctaw you
heard from yesterday. It includes the Shoshone Paiute, Shoshone
Bannock Tribe. It includes Riverside, San Bernardino Community
in California. It includes 290 tribes in 11 States, tribes or
intertribal organizations, over 50 percent of the federally
recognized tribes in the United States.
All of them suffer contract support cost shortfalls. And
these shortfalls are shortfalls in reimbursements. As you heard
today, quite eloquently, these costs are paid. It is not a
question of paying them. They are paid. And if they are not
reimbursed by the government, then they come out of health care
services, they come out of law enforcement. And this is very
true with the Shoshone Paiute reservations, where they have had
to make cuts in law enforcement in order to balance the books.
In the committee's report this year, the committee
requested that the Indian Health Service and the Bureau of
Indian Affairs fully fund contract support costs. The Bureau of
Indian Affairs heeded to committee's instruction. The Indian
Health Service did not. On page 98 was the instruction to the
committee. The second problem with the budget submission from
the President and the Indian Health Service is that the Indian
Health Service did not tell this committee how much the budget
was going to be short.
As we all recall, I think, because of the discussions, in
the prior fiscal year, the President shared with the committee
that at the funding levels being requested, contract support
would be underfunded by about $149 million. This year you have
not been given the information by how much will the President's
budget request under fund contract support.
We have, however, undertaken the task of trying to figure
that out for you. We retained a gentleman named Ron Demaray who
used to run the contract support cost activity for the Indian
Health Service. He is the nation's expert in this area. What I
gave you a moment ago is his estimate. Completely transparent.
It shows you the assumptions and the calculations he has made,
which would show that, at the President's budget request, there
would be a 99.4 million shortfall in fiscal year 2013. So you
have heard statements that the shortfall will be $99, $100
million. This is where the calculation comes from.
Of course, the request is that there be a full funding
allocation made in the 2013 budget. That is request number one.
But what I mentioned about the absence of information leads to
request number two. The second request we make, and it is in
this language, which I will distribute to the committee, and
which was included in my written testimony, addresses the
secrecy which has descended over the agency.
I have been practicing law since 1979. I have been around
contract support cost issues since contract support costs were
addressed by Congress in the 1987 hearings and the 1988
amendments. Never before have we witnessed the kind of secrecy
we see today. The Indian Health Services refuses to disclose
any information whatsoever to tribes and tribal contractors
around the country how much are we paying you, how much are you
entitled to, how much are you short?
They will visit with each tribe individually, but they no
longer, as of a few months ago, share any of this data on a
national basis. It is therefore impossible to know what the
national shortfall is. It is impossible for us to test the
statements the agency makes to the committee. As you know, last
year the agency made incorrect statements to the committee. At
that time we were able to test those statements, we were able
to correct them with the committee. This year we do not have
that information. So we are requesting language that would
require the agency, this would have to be language in the
statute, that would direct the agency to share all of its data
with the Indian tribes, as it did for every year until this
past year.
Then the third and final thing I would mention about
contract support costs is to echo what Mr. Thomas testified to
a little while ago. This issue about indirect costs due from
other agencies is actually a no cost problem which costs tribal
contractors around the country. And if I may just take a moment
to explain it, when the Federal government sets an indirect
cost rate, then you are entitled by that rate to tap each of
your grants, or contracts or your own tribal accounts at that
rate. So if you get a 25 percent rate, you take 25 percent out
of every grant. But some of the agencies will say, no, you may
not take any money out of the grant we are giving you, or you
may only take 15 percent out of the grant we are giving you.
What Mr. Thomas's proposal is asking is not that there be
more money. It is asking that he has the permission and the
authorization from Congress to take the 25 percent out of the
grant because he was issued a 25 percent rate, which tells him
he must tax every grant he receives by 25 percent. When he is
unable to carry out the direction to tax the grant by 25
percent, he must dip into his own tribal funds to make up for
that tax. Otherwise he is penalized by the Federal agency that
set the rate.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify today.
[The statement of Lloyd Miller follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Thank all of you for being here
today. The issue of fully staffing IHS facilities is something
this committee takes very seriously, because it is just stupid
to build facilities and not put the staff in there for them.
Why build the facility if you are not going to have a staff
there? We will look very seriously at this budget, and make
sure, A, that everybody is treated fairly, and, if we can find
the resources, that, B we will staff those facilities so that
they can do what they were built to do.
Secondly, I would like to say that last year we put more
money into contract support costs than ultimately ended up in
there. Some of the pushback we got was from the Senate, and so
we need help with the Senate. I am not trying to overfund it. I
am just trying to fund it, and to fully fund it. And at the
last minute, IHS came in and said, no, you guys overfunded it,
according to their numbers.
Now, not to blame them too much, but they indicated that
they had had one person that worked there for years that did
all of this stuff, and he left, and so it was kind of a new
effort for them. I think IHS wants to fully fund contract
support too. I know they do. But, again our big difficulty is
trying to find out exactly what it is. Now, I can tell you that
IHS has told us that they believe the shortfall is going to be
in the neighborhood of 70 to 80 million, not $100 million. That
is the difficulty we have in finding out what the number is.
And as I said, what they have said is that we do not want to
overfund it, because then the money just goes back to Treasury.
Now, maybe that is what we need to change, so if it is
overfunded, it could be used for contract support, rather than
the contract health support, or the referral support. I am
going to rename it so I can keep the two straight. But there
are some challenges here, and I think everybody is working
toward trying to have the best result and do what is right. And
I think we all agree what is right, and that is to fully fund
it. And we are going to work on getting that done again this
year.
But, again, when we get a bill and go over to the Senate,
and we have done what we think is right in contract support, we
are going to need some help in trying to push that through,
because, you know, everybody throughout Congress has different
priorities. This is one of my highest priorities, so we will do
what we can.
Mr. Miller. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Simpson. Go ahead. Yeah.
Mr. Miller [continuing]. One suggestion. I heard the
concern that you have shared, a very important concern, that
the account not be overfunded. Years ago a portion of the
account was made available without regard to fiscal year
limitation, shall remain available until expended was the
language in the bill. This might address the committee's
concern. Maybe $20 million of it remains available until
expended, or maybe all of it remains available until expended,
whatever, in your judgment, is the right thing to do. But there
is a way to address the problem of not overspending the
account.
Mr. Simpson. Yeah. That is a good idea. Because then you
could say whatever is not spent remains available, and next
year it would lower your amount you would have to put in----
Mr. Miller. Precisely.
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. For your estimate. Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Chair, I really appreciate all the
succinct testimony, and I will speak to others who care
passionately about AIDS funding. Are you coming to Washington,
D.C.? There is going to be an international conference here.
Ms. Moose. Yes, I am.
Ms. McCollum. So please give your office my card, and we
can talk more later. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you all for being here today and coming
all the way from the great State of Alaska, that includes the
State of Idaho, Indiana, Maine, all the others we have
mentioned. Texas, all of those. All these dinky little states
down here. Thank you.
Mr. Miller. Thanks a lot.
Mr. Simpson. You bet. Thank you. Last panel is Michele
Hayward, Leonard Masten, Bambi Kraus. Is that right?
Ms. Kraus. Yeah.
Mr. Simpson. Close?
Ms. Kraus. Are there three of us?
Mr. Simpson. Michele. Which one is Michele? Okay. You are
first.
Ms. Hayward. Do I hit this button?
Mr. Simpson. Yeah.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

CALIFORNIA RURAL INDIAN HEALTH BOARD

WITNESSES

MICHELE HAYWARD
JIM CROUCH
Ms. Hayward. All right. Good afternoon. My name is Michele
Hayward. I am a member of the Redding Rancheria. I am the
secretary with the tribal council there, and I am the Chair of
the California Rural Indian Health Board, which places me on
the National Indian Health Board. And I am also on the CSC Work
Group representing California, so I appreciate today being
here. Thank you for your time, and I am very honored to
represent California Indians.
I brought my staff and the Board members, so I want them to
introduce themselves real fast.
Mr. Crouch. Jim Crouch, Executive Director, California
Rural Indian Health Board.
Mr. LeBeau. Mark LeBeau, Health Policy Analyst, California
Rural Indian Health Board, and member of the Pit River Tribe
from Northeastern California.
Ms. Cazares-Diego. Andrea Cazares-Diego from Greenville
Rancheria and Health Board Member.
Ms. Hayward. Group was founded in 1969 and represents about
32 tribal governments, and we serve 28 IHS active users. But we
are here today to request for budget funds, and the first one
is a $10 million increase for the Indian Health Care
Improvement Fund, and $50 million for the contract health care,
$17 million for the youth regional treatment facility in
Southern California, and $350,000 for a special case with Smith
River Rancheria, who reside in Curry County in Oregon. So, with
that, I am going to turn it over to my executive director, Jim
Crouch.
Mr. Crouch. Thank you, Michele. You have our written
testimony. Basically we are talking about another lawsuit,
different than the one Mr. Lloyd Miller was talking about,
known as Rincon v. Harris, that was adjudicated in the 1980s.
It basically requires that the IHS resource distribution
process be reasonable, rational, and defensible, which
basically means that what is known as current services funding,
or base budget funding, is not sufficient to withstand those
criteria. For that reason, Congress created the Indian Health
Care Improvement Fund, it was initially known as the Equity
Fund, to bring funding equity to tribal health programs and IHS
operating units across the country.
They are, in essence, putting no money in that account for
this year, and we are urging you to put aside $10 million of
the hospital and clinic line item money in a committee move in
order to fund some effort towards equity. You are going to get
a report on Indian Health Care Improvement Fund from the agency
this year. What you will see is that they have not brought
equity to their system, and that they are setting aside maybe
two percent of their appropriations over these last several
decades to achieve equity in a $4 billion budget.
Secondly, we are asking for hospital and clinics. One of
the mechanisms for achieving equity is to fund used, excuse me,
contract health care. The contract health care distribution
fund has four basic co-factors. Three of those are essentially
base budget funding co-factors. The fourth issue is reasonable
access to an IHS inpatient facility. The entire tribal health
program in California is ambulatory clinic based. There are no
IHS hospitals in the entire State of California, which is
pretty much the size of the State of California. We therefore
need better access to contract health funding. The formula
tries to do that, but, actually, if there is not more than $100
million put in in new money each year to the CHS program, you
will not reach those other components and have any impact on
funding equity.
We would like to ask $17 million in facility construction.
Again, there have been no IHS facilities built in California.
There is one joint venture project just a year and a half old.
We would request that you go into the design and build phase
for the Southern Youth Regional Treatment Center, which would
serve youth in the southern part of California. There is
another Northern YRTC on the way. The south has the land in
hand. It belongs to IHS. You should fund the next phase.
Finally, special case of Smith River. They live seven miles
south of the Oregon border. Their membership is fully
recognized tribe. On their reservation they have a clinic that
is part of a consorted tribal health program, United Indian
Health Services. By law and statute, that clinic system, which
is governed in part by Smith River members, must not provide
contract health care dollars and services for the Smith River
members who live in Curry County, Oregon. This is because the
contract health service delivery area in California is
statutorily defined.
What we are proposing is that you use your authority as a
committee and fund the account for new tribes, which is a
portion of the contract health service line item, in the amount
of $350,000, an appropriate amount based on the new tribes
formula for the 174 members of this Federally recognized
California based tribe that live in their traditional Tolowa
homelands, which happen to be north of the California line.
Those are our four requests. Thank you for your time this
afternoon.
[The statement of Michele Hayward and Jim Crouch follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Where do those 174 people get their health
care now?
Mr. Crouch. Seven miles south of the Oregon line, on the
Smith River Rancheria. It is 638 operated tribal health program
that they participate in the governments of. It is a satellite
of United Indian Health. And they like the primary care, but it
is difficult, of course, that the providers cannot do the
necessary referral to other kinds of service.
Mr. Simpson. So that is what the $350,000 would----
Mr. Crouch. Yeah. These guys literally fall into a crack.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. Leonard.
Mr. Masten. That would be me. Well, the short version, and
the long version. I will give you the short version.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

HOOPA VALLEY TRIBE

WITNESSES

LEONARD MASTEN
HAYLEY HUTT
Mr. Masten. My name is Leonard Masten. I am the Chairman of
the Hoopa Valley Tribe, and Hoopa Valley Tribe is one of the
largest land based tribes in California. We have a little over
3,000 tribal members. We are a successful self-governed tribe.
However, we face important funding needs.
Mr. Simpson. Where is the Hoopa Valley?
Mr. Masten. We are, as the crow flies, about 60 miles from
the Oregon border. We are in Humboldt County. Sorry. The
Trinity River flows through our reservation, and then into the
Klamath River, then another 20 miles to the ocean. But one of
our main concerns, and from sitting back here and listening to
everybody else, is IHS. And we have an ambulance service
shortfall every year of about $470,000 that we have asked IHS
for funding repeatedly for the last three years, and again we
are told that they do not fund ambulance services in Indian
country.
Again, we hear and see through Appropriations that they are
funding several other reservations for air ambulances. And
maybe because one has wings and the other has wheels there is
some kind of difference. And again we ask that it be put into
their budget, and if you do not ask for it, you are not going
to get it. So we are asking, and we did talk to the director
several times about her putting that into her budget.
So, you know, if possibly we could get funded the help, our
services, we service not only the Hoopa Valley Reservation, but
the Yurok and the Karuk are around us. We have another town
that is 10 miles away from us, Willow Creek, another one the
other way 12 miles, Orleans, that we service, and we are not
getting any funding from those people. Our closest ambulance,
besides us, is about 70 miles away, over hills and through a
two lane road to get to the coast, where the hospital is.
But it is something that is really needed. We have to
search through tribal budgets to try to meet that shortfall
every year. And we are having meetings. We do have our
supervisor for our area, who is a Native now, that is helping
try to help find funds. And the local communities now are
having fundraisers to try and come up with that funding, but it
would be nice to have some secure funding so we do not have to
close down, and threatening to basically not go into those
other areas, and stay on the reservation, just so that we can
get our people where they need to be. But we really do not want
to do that, so with some increased funding, we will hopefully
be able to move forward with that.
Number two would be law enforcement. I had retired from law
enforcement with the Bureau of Indian Affairs, but the law
enforcement is huge in our area. We have a standing cross
deputization agreement. We were one of the first in California
to have a cross deputization agreement with Humboldt County.
Our officers are trained just like the State officers, and they
cross deputize us to enforce State Law on our reservation
because of the Public Law 280 that gives the State jurisdiction
for criminal activity on our reservation.
We do have the Law and Order Act code that was enacted this
last year. We had two meetings now with the U.S. Attorney's
Office, and I am a little disappointed that there is no funding
that came with that. And we are being told by the FBI and our
own District Attorney's Office that, because there is no
funding, that the FBI is really reluctant to commit to coming
onto our reservation to enforce Federal law.
And right now we are kind of getting a little flak, or I
am, I guess. Our sheriff, who we have the cross deputization
with, is kind of threatening to pull our cross deputization if
we enter into the Federal law enforcement agreement. And that
is what I was saying, and I have got a meeting next week with
him, but it is all over. He think, I guess, if we go with the
Federal stuff that we are going to be taking our cases all the
way to San Francisco, which is a five hour drive from where we
are. It do not make any sense, but we are not going to do that.
And without some additional funding for the law enforcement
Order Code, I do not see how we could be able to even
participate.
We only have two officers on at a time for 24 hour
coverage, only one during the day, and we have to drive the 120
miles round trip to go to court, which is off the reservation,
so it is very difficult. So we are asking for $1.5 million to
staff eight to 10 officers and help deal with the problem that
we have now. It is the county's responsibility, but we have one
officer from the country that has to deal with not only us, but
the neighboring towns.
And the Karuk Tribe, which is the northern tribe from us,
they actually contribute money to the county to provide a half
time officer for their area, because they have no officers up
there. So it is a huge problem, but it is something that I
think can be addressed through the Appropriations.
I will have Hayley do the--she has been involved with the
wildland fire, and I will pick up after she is done.
Ms. Hutt. Okay. Hi, my name is Hayley Hutt. I am a member
of the council for the Hoopa Valley Tribe, and one of our big
issues is our Wildland Fire Department. We are a self-
governance tribe. We are the first to compact our Wildland Fire
Department. We are up in a real mountainous area, as he
described. Anyway, we have to pay for the fire, and then we get
reimbursed, and only compact tribes have to do this.
So if any other organization, like, Forestry, or Bureau of
Land Management, or Parks and Recreation, if they fight fires,
they do not have to come up with their own revenues to pay for
the fire, but we do. And it is an average anywhere from 500,000
to a million dollars. We are a timber tribe, so that is where
we get our revenues. We have not made sales, and we may not
make a sale this year. Our prices are really low, so this
offsetting is a big problem.
So we have a solution, and our solution is that we did
receive an escrow amount of money of $175,000. We want to put
that in Treasury account and draw it down through the ASAP
system. We would continue to file our reimbursements through
the Bureau of Indian Affairs Regional Office, and then the
monies would go back into that ASAP account. Right now that
money is in our general fund, and we are always way over that.
So if we are into $500,000 or more, that money comes from our
revenues.
Last year we said to the BIA, we cannot do this. This will
break us. And we are now in a drought year, and we are going to
have big fires, and we do not have a timber sale. So we are
asking for that escrow account to be put in this other system,
for it to be increased to the 10 year average. We know that
monies are already set aside based on a 10 year average, and so
we want access to that money in advance so we do not have to
front the Federal government to protect the forests, and we
protect all the forests around our reservation as well.
This solution has been pitched to everybody, so if you
bring it up with Bill Downs, or Lyle Carlisle, or Vicky Force,
anyone, they know Hayley, and they know the fire issue, and
they know the solution. So that is what we are asking for.
We also have a big problem with our septic system. Our
whole valley floor is septic systemed up to our ears, and they
are old systems. They are failing. We are not meeting the EPA
standards, and we cannot build more homes. We cannot build
businesses. We do not have the basis for economic development
just on our sewer line alone, let alone, of course, all the
other stuff.
So we have come up with a plan, and we are shovel ready,
but that plan is $26 million. It is a five year phased plan. So
we just want to put that in the forefront of your mind, that we
are desperate for help on that need. I think we have taken up
our time.
Mr. Masten. I only have one other issue. We have a couple
others in there, but it is in already written testimony, so I
will try to shorten it up so you can kind of get back on time
anyway, but the other one was our Klamath Basin Restoration
Project. In 2010 several Klamath Basin entities signed an
agreement, including the so-called Klamath Restoration
Agreement, KBRA. The Federal agency signed the KBRA.
Nevertheless, the Department of Interior, in 2012, enacted
budget cuts from the real estate services to implement this.
And our concern is that we have a huge problem with real
estate and property that is on our reservation, and we are
having a really tough time funding any type of services for a
program to deal with our land. We are having to contract a lot
of that out to get another group of surveyors.
We have even asked help from the National Guard, who comes
in and provides help through our health service for doctors,
nurses, and dentists, and those types of things, to help out
during the summertime. And we have not seen them yet, but it
has been two years now that we had to ask them to bring in,
they said they would when they were there, was bring a team of
their surveyors in to help us get caught up and get a lot of
that stuff done.
But I do not, you know, I think we need to keep the money
where it is supposed to be for the activities of the land, and
to trust stuff. But we think that Congress should not fund
Indian termination activities, and monies that are needed to
provide these real estate services to the Indian tribes in our
area.
And with that, I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your
attendance, and wish there were more people here, but----
[The statement of Leonard Masten and Hayley Hutt follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Well, most of them take a chance to read it
over. Unfortunately, there are about 38 hearings going on.
Mr. Masten. Yeah.
Mr. Simpson. I had to step out for a minute and run up to
BOR hearing, talking about Indian water rights, and----
Mr. Masten. Yeah.
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. How BOR is going to pay for
those. So it gets crazy time around here. But it actually helps
us and helps the staff----
Mr. Masten. Yeah.
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. Decide what to do. Bambi.
----------

Wednesday, March 28, 2012.

THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF TRIBAL HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICE
(NATHPO)

WITNESS

BAMBI KRAUS
Ms. Kraus. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Again, thank
you for listening to the testimony the past two days. It is
always compelling, and I appreciate your time.
Chairman Franklin is the actual chairman of The National
Association of Tribal Historic Preservation Office. He was
unable to be with us today. He is in California. I am based
here in Washington, D.C., and I am actually Tlinget from Kake,
Alaska, so it has been nice to see all the Alaskans here
earlier.
I am actually here to talk about programmatic needs versus
specific issues, even though I think contract care and contract
support costs are indeed a programmatic issue. But in terms of
the Interior programs, I am here to talk about the National
Park Service and the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and then just to
touch onto the Smithsonian Institution.
So The National Association of Tribal Historic Preservation
Office works with over 130 tribes, even though we provide
technical assistance to all Indian tribes, and there are
currently over 130 tribes participating in this program. And
that is 30 states and millions of acres of land that the tribal
governments are responsible for managing. The THPOs that are in
existence, for the most part, almost all of them have accepted
the responsibilities of a State Historic Preservation Officer
for tribal lands, and that includes a Section 106 performance
compliance work, per the National Historic Preservation Act.
So I try and make sure that everybody understands it,
historic preservation is not just a feel good project. It
really is a needed necessity for Federal compliance with
various cultural and environmental laws. So in terms of the
people you have heard from the past two days, any Indian
school, any Indian health clinic, is going to have to go
through, you know, compliance work, any other development
project that breaks ground.
So that gives you an idea of the tribes that we work with.
I want to thank you for your prior support for the Historic
Preservation Fund for tribal programs. The administration
requested level funding from last year, which is, you know, a
great success in today's economy, however, there are more
tribes coming into the program. And without the money that
comes along with additional tribes participating, it means
there are fewer dollars for the tribes that are already
existing.
So it is a very popular program, and it has been wildly
successful. It is severely underfunded. It is nothing you have
not heard, but for a lot of reasons I am here to try and
explain why it is so important, and if you could get a slight
increase over the administration request so that they could
take, you know, at least fund some of the tribes that are
coming into the program.
So that is the Historic Preservation Fund. We also do quite
a bit of work in monitoring the National Native American Graves
Protection and Repatriation Act. Federal Indian law that was
created for the benefit of Indian tribes, and yet the
Government Accountability Office did a report in 2010 with a
title, ``After 20 years, Key Federal Agencies Still Have Not
Fully Complied With The Act''. And it looked at the Bureau of
Indian Affairs, BOM, BOR, Fish and Wildlife, the Park Service,
as well as Forest Service, Army Corps of Engineers, and
Tennessee Valley Authority.
And that report title summarized the experience that Indian
people have had trying to implement a law that was created for
their benefit. It has been a very frustrating experience. It
has been very expensive, in terms of not funding the tribes at
a level that they can actually use to benefit their own
programs. I like to try and point out to people that when it
was passed in 1989 and implemented in 1990, Indian tribes did
not have the wealth that they do today.
So if you think about 20 years ago, Indian tribes were
told, you know, learn how to talk to a museum, and figure out
what they hold of your lineal descendants, their cultural
sacred objects. I mean, it is an amazing amount of complex
work, and they were told overnight to go and contact museums
and Federal agencies to try and get back things that had been
taken out of Indian country. So that, you know, it was
gratifying to see the GAO do that work and bring that topic at
least to some level of attention. That was the first time any
Indian law and cultural preservation had ever been looked at in
such a way.
They followed that up with a second part on the
Smithsonian, and the title said it all also. It was ``Much Work
Still Needed To Identify And Repatriate Indian Human Remains
And Objects''. So in terms of that particular GAO report, which
was just released in June of 2011, they calculated that it
takes about three years for an Indian tribe to work through the
process of repatriation for the Natural History Museum. But one
example was it took one Indian tribe over 18 years to get
through the process to repatriate remains and objects. So there
is a lot of work to do, and our testimony puts in there monies
to help rectify that problem, or to support the tribes.
And my last bonus minute, I want to just point out for the
Bureau of Indian Affairs, to this day they do not have any line
item specifically for cultural resources, which is astounding.
And I just, you know, had e-mail to me while I have been
sitting here that the BIA was established March 11, 1824, which
is 188 years ago, and it was transferred from the War
Department to Interior in 1849.
And so we are looking at 188 years that they have never
included any money to do any compliance or feel good work for
Indian people, and something that is so uniquely American
Indian today, and that would be our own cultural preservation
and identity. And I just wanted to, you know, make the plea to,
you know, the BIA needs to look at what they are doing. It is
one thing to serve a contract. It is another thing to actually
work with living human beings.
And NATHPO has stepped out to try and start bringing this
issue to the attention of the Congress and the administration.
It would be great to have, you know, people actually working to
create health communities that can take advantage of all the
other money that you are putting into it, whatever
infrastructure you are doing.
So with that I would like to, you know, I am available for
questions and follow-up later, but thank you very much for your
time. Thank you.
[The statement of Bambi Kraus follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. You know, I thank all of you for
being here. I have served on a City Council. I do not know of
any community that does not have a problem funding ambulance
service. It is amazing. We always fight with our county about
who is going to fund it. The County pays the City so much to
run their ambulances out there, and then they always fight
about how much to pay, and every local community has problems
with ambulance service. But you are right, it is a big problem.
We went to some reservations last summer where they do pay for
the air service because the reservation is so vast that getting
an ambulance there is not going to be helpful.
Mr. Masten. That is right.
Mr. Simpson. So, anyway, that is something that we also
will look at. But I appreciate all the testimony on all the
variety of issues that come up. And the one thing we always
find out through these hearings for a couple days, with tribes
from across the country, is that there are some common issues
that run throughout Indian country, contract support, police
services, those kind of things, and yet there are unique tribal
issues that are different for every tribe that we try to
address. We appreciate very much your testimony here today, and
it will help inform us as we try to write the budget for this
coming fiscal year, which we will probably get into in the next
three or four weeks, five weeks, something like that, before we
get it to the floor. I think it will be June before it gets to
the floor.
We need you to stay for just a second so that, just this
last panel, so that we can get your names correct for the
record, okay? I am a big fan of historic preservation, and, as
a country, we are still a young country compared to, you know--
--
Ms. Kraus. Um-hum.
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. European civilizations. I am not
saying our civilization is young. Yours is obviously very old.
But as a country, we are a young country, and we can do a lot
to preserve our history and culture, and if we do not, it will
be gone. Thank you all very much.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

I N D E X

----------

Part 8
Interior, Environment & Related Agencies
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations for 2013
Public Witnesses
Day One--March 22, 2012
INDEX--ORGANIZATIONS

Page
American Thoracic Society........................................    33
Animal Welfare Institute.........................................    80
Association of State Drinking Water Administrators/State of
Delaware.......................................................    40
Cancer Survivors Against Radon (CanSAR)..........................    58
Children's Environmental Health Network..........................    52
City of Edinburg, TX.............................................    46
Defenders of Wildlife............................................    86
Dusty Joy Foundation.............................................    64
Friends of Deer Flat Wildlife Refuge.............................   155
Friends of the Refuge Headwaters.................................   161
Geological Society of America....................................    21
Interstate Mining Compact Commission.............................     2
LWCF Coalition...................................................   129
Marine Conservation Institute....................................   142
National Association of Clean Air Agencies (NACAA)...............    27
National Fish and Wildlife Foundation............................    98
National Wildlife Refuge Association.............................   135
The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(ASPCA)........................................................    74
The American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE)...................     9
The Friends of the Potomac River Refuges.........................   149
The Nature Conservancy...........................................   111
The Wilderness Society...........................................    92
The Wildlife Society.............................................   122
The Wilderness Land Trust........................................   117
USGS Coalition...................................................    15
Wildlife Conservation Society....................................   105

INDEX--WITNESSES

Brad Brooks......................................................    92
Christy Plumer...................................................   111
Desiree Sorenson-Groves..........................................   135
Dr. Jeffrey B. Hales.............................................    33
Dr. Robert Gropp.................................................    15
Dusty Donaldson..................................................    64
Edward Hallock...................................................    40
Elias Longoria, Jr...............................................    46
Elizabeth Hoffmann...............................................    58
Greg Conrad......................................................     2
Greg Knadle......................................................    98
Gregory E. DiLoreto, P.E.........................................     9
Joan Patterson...................................................   149
John F. Calvelli.................................................   105
Kasey White......................................................    21
Kevin Boling.....................................................   129
Mary Beth Beetham................................................    86
Nancy Blaney.....................................................    80
Nancy Perry......................................................    74
Nsedu Obot Witherspoon...........................................    52
Reid Haughey.....................................................   117
Robert C. Christensen............................................   155
S. William Becker................................................    27
Terra Rentz......................................................   122
Todd Paddock.....................................................   161
William Chandler.................................................   142

Public Witnesses
Day Two--March 23, 2012
INDEX--ORGANIZATIONS

American Forest Foundation.......................................   294
American Historical Association..................................   207
Americans for the Arts...........................................   170
Americans for the Arts...........................................   178
Civil War Trust..................................................   245
East Bay Regional Park District..................................   262
Federal Forest Resource Coalition................................   313
National Association of State Foresters..........................   268
National Conference of State Historic Preservation Officers......   226
National Endowment for the Humanities............................   188
National Endowment for the Humanities............................   195
National Parks Conservation Association..........................   233
National Recreation and Park Association.........................   250
National Trust for Historic Preservation.........................   220
Partnership for the National Trails System.......................   239
Preservation Action..............................................   214
Public Lands Foundation..........................................   320
Society of American Foresters....................................   300
The Trust for Public Land........................................   256
Wyoming Humanities Council representing the Federation of State
Humanities Councils............................................   200

INDEX--WITNESSES

Barbara Tulipane.................................................   250
Bill Imbergamo...................................................   313
Deborah Frances Tannen...........................................   195
Dr. James Grossman...............................................   207
Elena Daly.......................................................   320
Erik M. Hein.....................................................   214
Gary Werner......................................................   239
Hunter R. Rawlings III...........................................   188
Jim Lighthizer...................................................   245
Katherine DeCoster...............................................   256
Ken Pimlott......................................................   268
Paul Ulrich......................................................   200
Robert E. Doyle..................................................   262
Robert L. Lynch..................................................   170
Robert Malmsheimer, PhD, JD......................................   300
Ruth Pierpont....................................................   226
Stanley Tucci....................................................   178
Tom Cassidy......................................................   220
Tom Kiernan......................................................   233
Tom Martin.......................................................   294

American Indian & Native Alaskan Witness Days
Day One--March 27, 2012
INDEX--ORGANIZATIONS

Catawba Indian Nation............................................   558
Cherokee Nation..................................................   439
Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma.......................................   426
Dzilth-Na-O-Dith-Hle Community Grant (DCG) School Board..........   460
Fort Belknap Indian Community....................................   384
Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission..................   533
Hopi Tribal Court................................................   498
Institute of American Indian Arts................................   455
Lac du Flambeau Band of Chippewa Indians in Wisconsin............   526
Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe........................................   515
Little River Band of Ottawa Indians..............................   521
Mandan, Hidatsa and Arikara Nation of Fort Berthold..............   403
Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida...........................   544
National Congress of American Indians............................   330
National Council of Urban Indian Health..........................   343
National Indian Health Board.....................................   336
National Johnson-O'Malley Association............................   445
Navajo Agricultural Products Industry (NAPI) Board of Directors..   472
Navajo Hopi Land Commission, Navajo Nation.......................   493
Navajo Nation....................................................   487
Nez Perce Tribal Executive Committee.............................   348
Oglala Sioux Tribe...............................................   390
Oglala Sioux Tribe Department of Public Safety...................   396
Ramah Navajo School Board, Inc...................................   466
Sac & Fox Nation.................................................   433
Shinnecock Indian Nation.........................................   508
Shoshone-Bannock Tribes of the Ft. Hall Indian Reservation.......   354
The Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of the Fort Peck Reservation....   377
Tribal Law and Order Commission..................................   360
United South and Eastern Tribes, Inc.............................   551
United Tribes Technical College..................................   413
Ute Tribe of the Uintah and Ouray Reservation....................   480

American Indian & Native Alaskan Witness Days
Day One--March 27, 2012
INDEX--WITNESSES

Affie Ellis......................................................   360
Ben Shelly.......................................................   487
Bill Harris......................................................   558
Brooklyn D. Baptiste.............................................   348
Charles Head.....................................................   439
Colley Billie....................................................   544
David Gipp.......................................................   413
Dr. Robert Martin................................................   455
D'Shane Barnett..................................................   343
Edward T. Begay..................................................   472
Ervin Chavez.....................................................   460
Eugene ``Ribs'' Whitebird........................................   515
Faye BlueEyes....................................................   460
George Thurman...................................................   433
Harold Dustybull.................................................   445
Irene Cuch.......................................................   480
Jefferson Keel...................................................   330
Jim Zorn.........................................................   533
Jimmie Mitchell..................................................   521
John Yellow Bird Steele..........................................   390
Kitcki Carroll...................................................   551
Larry Wawronowicz................................................   532
Lloyd Miller.....................................................   373
Lorenzo Curley...................................................   493
Mickey Peercy....................................................   426
Nancy Martine-Alonzo.............................................   466
Randy King.......................................................   508
Richard Greenwald................................................   396
Richard Trujillo.................................................   498
Stacy A. Bohlen..................................................   336
Stoney Anketell..................................................   377
Tex Hall.........................................................   403
Tino Batt........................................................   354
Tom Gede.........................................................   360
Tom Maulson......................................................   526
Tracy ``Ching'' King.............................................   384
Troy Weston......................................................   390
Virginia Thomas..................................................   445

American Indian & Native Alaskan Witness Days
Day Two--March 28, 2012
INDEX--ORGANIZATIONS

Arctic Slope Native Association, Ltd.............................   672
California Rural Indian Health Board.............................   726
Central Council of the Tlingit and Haida Indian Tribes of Alaska.   687
Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish Commission......................   650
Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation..................   619
Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservations..........   645
Cook Inlet Tribal Council........................................   680
Hoopa Valley Tribe...............................................   733
Intertribal Timber Council.......................................   632
Jamestown S'Klallam Tribe........................................   601
Lummi Indian Business Council....................................   593
Makah Tribal Council.............................................   613
National Native American AIDS Prevention Center..................   711
National Tribal Contract Support Cost Coalition..................   718
Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission............................   586
Northwest Portland Area Indian Health Board......................   626
Pacific Salmon Commission........................................   601
Puyallup Tribe...................................................   574
Quinault Indian Nation...........................................   568
Skokomish Tribe..................................................   580
Southcentral Foundation..........................................   694
SouthEast Alaska Regional Health Consortium......................   706
The Chugach Regional Resources Commission........................   660
The Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon   639
The National Association of Tribal Historic Preservation Officers
(NATHPO).......................................................   741
The Tanana Chiefs Conference.....................................   700
Yukon-Kuskokwim Health Corporation...............................   665

American Indian & Native Alaskan Witness Days
Day Two--March 28, 2012
INDEX--WITNESSES

Andrea Cazares-Diego.............................................   726
Andy Joseph......................................................   626
Bambi Kraus......................................................   741
Billy Frank......................................................   586
Charles Clement..................................................   706
Clifford Cultee..................................................   593
Dan Winkelman....................................................   665
David Bean.......................................................   574
Ed Johnstone.....................................................   586
Edward K. Thomas.................................................   687
Fawn Sharp.......................................................   568
Gerald Lewis.....................................................   650
Gloria O'Neill...................................................   680
Hayley Hutt......................................................   733
James Segura.....................................................   694
Jim Crouch.......................................................   726
Joseph Pavel.....................................................   580
Larry Blythe.....................................................   632
Leonard Masten...................................................   733
Les Minthorn.....................................................   645
Lloyd Miller.....................................................   718
Marie Carroll....................................................   672
Mark LeBeau......................................................   726
Michael Grayum...................................................   586
Michele Hayward..................................................   726
Patty Brown-Schwalenberg.........................................   660
Ron Suppah.......................................................   639
Selina Moose.....................................................   711
Sneena Brooks....................................................   619
T.J. Greene......................................................   613
Victor Joseph....................................................   700
W. Ron Allen.....................................................   601

Written Testimony from Individuals and Organizations
INDEX

11 Tribes and Tribal Organizations...............................   750
Air Chek, Inc....................................................   753
Ala Kahakai Trail Association....................................   757
Alaska Tribal Health Compact.....................................   759
Aleutian Pribilof Islands Association, Inc.......................   763
Allied Radon Services, Inc.......................................   767
American Association of Radon Scientists and Technologists, Inc..   769
American Bird Conservancy........................................   773
American Forests.................................................   777
American Geosciences Institute...................................   781
American Indian Higher Education Consortium, The.................   785
American Institute of Biological Sciences........................   789
American Lung Association........................................   793
American Public Power Association................................   797
American Society for Microbiology................................   799
American Society of Agronomy.....................................   803
Andrew D. Chavez, Commissioner, District III, Taos, NM...........   806
Appalachian Trail Conservancy....................................   809
Association of American State Geologists.........................   812
Association of Art Museum Directors..............................   816
Association of Clean Water Administrators, The...................   820
Association of Community Tribal Schools..........................   823
Association of Public and Land-grant Universities................   827
B.A.S.S. LLC.....................................................   830
Berkley Conservation Institute...................................   832
Bernalillo Board of County Commissioners.........................   833
Cancer Survivors Against Radon...................................   836
Chippewa Ottawa Resource Authority...............................   840
Coastal Wildlife Refuge Society..................................   844
Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Forum......................   846
Colorado Water Congress..........................................   850
Columbia Gorge Refuge Stewards...................................   852
Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians of Oregon..................   854
Conference of Radiation Control Program Directors, Inc...........   858
Conservation Fund, The...........................................   861
Cooperative Alliance for Refuge Enhancement......................   865
Dance/USA........................................................   868
Debra J. Greenman, Private Citizen...............................   872
Environmental Council of the States, The.........................   873
Friends of the Florida Panther Refuge, Inc.......................   877
Friends of the Little Pend Oreille National Wildlife Refuge......   878
Friends of the National Wildlife Refuge of Rhode Island..........   882
Friends of the Tampa Bay National Wildlife Refuges, Inc..........   884
Friends of Virgin Islands National Park..........................   887
Green Mountain Club, The.........................................   890
Healing Our Waters--Great Lakes Coalition........................   894
Hendrick Associates..............................................   898
Independent Tribal Courts Review Team............................   899
Inter Tribal Buffalo Council.....................................   903
Izaak Walton League of America...................................   907
Kern County Valley Floor Habitat Conservation Plan Industry and
Government Coalition...........................................   911
League of American Orchestras....................................   914
Little Traverse Bay Bands of Odawa Indians.......................   918
Marlene MacEwan, Private Citizen.................................   921
Merritt Island Wildlife Association..............................   924
Metropolitan Water District of Southern California...............   928
Michigan Department of Natural Resources.........................   931
Minnesota Radon Project, The.....................................   933
Moat Creek Managing Agency.......................................   936
Multiple organizations in support of FS International Programs...   939
National Association of Forest Service Retirees..................   942
National Association of State Energy Officials...................   946
National Ground Water Association................................   948
National Institutes for Water Resources..........................   951
National Radon Safety Board, The.................................   955
National WH&B Legislative Team...................................   956
National Wildlife Federation.....................................   960
Natural Science Collections Alliance.............................   964
Northern Everglades Alliance.....................................   967
Norton Sound Health Corporation..................................   969
Nuclear Energy Institute.........................................   972
OPERA America....................................................   976
Oregon Water Resources Congress..................................   980
Outdoor Alliance, The............................................   982
PALA Tribal Historic Preservation Office.........................   986
Performing Arts Alliance.........................................   987
Pueblo of Acoma..................................................   991
Ramah Navajo Chapter-Ramah Band of Navajos.......................   995
Red Cliffs National Conservation Area............................   999
Red Lake Band of Chippewa Indians................................  1001
Santa Clara Pueblo...............................................  1006
Sawtooth Society.................................................  1010
Standing Rock Sioux Tribe........................................  1013
State of Utah, Office of the Governor............................  1017
State of Wyoming, Office of the Governor.........................  1019
Teaming With Wildlife Program....................................  1021
Theatre Communications Group.....................................  1023
Thrush Aircraft..................................................  1026
Tina Nappe, Private Citizen......................................  1030
Tom and Georgiann Manz, Private Citizens.........................  1031
Town of Ophir....................................................  1032
Tribal Education Departments National Assembly...................  1035
Washington Wildlife Recreation Coalition.........................  1037
Whitetails Unlimited, Inc........................................  1040
Wildlife Conservation Society....................................  1043
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources........................  1047

Written Testimony from Individuals and Organizations--received after
submission deadline
INDEX

Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium...........................  1049
APS Four Corners Power Plant.....................................  1051
Barbara Sorgatz, Private Citizen.................................  1053
Bat Conservation International...................................  1054
Carpe Diem West..................................................  1058
Clean Vapor, LLC.................................................  1062
Coalition in support of FWS International Programs...............  1066
Coalition in support of USFS International Programs..............  1070
Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa.......................  1073
Friends of Balcones Canyonlands National Wildlife Refuge.........  1077
Friends of Rachel Carson NWR.....................................  1080
Healing Our Waters-Great Lakes Coalition.........................  1082
Humane Society of the United States, Humane Society Legislative
Fund, and Doris Day Animal League..............................  1086
Malheur Wildlife Associates......................................  1091
National Federation of Federal Employees (NFFE) Local 1957.......  1094
National Tribal Environmental Council............................  1098
Oregon Water Resources Congress (OWRC)...........................  1102
PNM Resources, Inc...............................................  1106
Pueblo of Zuni...................................................  1108
Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy...............................  1112
Squaxin Island Tribe.............................................  1115
Sustainable Northwest............................................  1119
Ukpeagvik Inupiat Corporation....................................  1123
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR)...........  1126
Wyoming State Engineer's Office..................................  1128

