- COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2012

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
2012
=======================================================================

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES

FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia, Chairman
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas               CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama               ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JO BONNER, Alabama                        MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio                       JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Mike Ringler, Stephanie Myers, Leslie Albright,
Diana Simpson, and Colin Samples,
Subcommittee Staff
________

PART 6
Page
Department of Commerce...........................................    1
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.................................  183
National Institute of Standards and Technology...................  269
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration..................  337
Office of the United States Trade Representative.................  465

S

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

PART 6--COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS
FOR 2012

COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
2012
=======================================================================

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES

FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia, Chairman
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas               CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama               ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JO BONNER, Alabama                        MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio                       JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mr. Dicks, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Mike Ringler, Stephanie Myers, Leslie Albright,
Diana Simpson, and Colin Samples,
Subcommittee Staff
________

PART 6
Page
Department of Commerce...........................................    1
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.................................  183
National Institute of Standards and Technology...................  269
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration..................  337
Office of the United States Trade Representative.................  465

S

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

67-061                     WASHINGTON : 2011

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\        NORMAN D. DICKS, Washington
JERRY LEWIS, California \1\          MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia              PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia               NITA M. LOWEY, New York
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey  JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                     ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama          JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
JO ANN EMERSON, Missouri             JOHN W. OLVER, Massachusetts
KAY GRANGER, Texas                   ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho            DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas          MAURICE D. HINCHEY, New York
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida              LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
DENNY REHBERG, Montana               SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas                JESSE L. JACKSON, Jr., Illinois
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana          CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California              STEVEN R. ROTHMAN, New Jersey
JO BONNER, Alabama                   SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
STEVEN C. LaTOURETTE, Ohio           BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                   ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona                  MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida           BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania
STEVE AUSTRIA, Ohio
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming
TOM GRAVES, Georgia
KEVIN YODER, Kansas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi

----------

1}}
Chairman Emeritus

William B. Inglee, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
2012

----------

Thursday, March 17, 2011.

DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

WITNESS

HON. GARY LOCKE, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

Opening Remarks From Chairman Wolf

Mr. Wolf. Welcome, Mr. Secretary. Good afternoon.
There are going to be a series of votes coming up pretty
soon. So we will just proceed.
We have a number of issues to discuss with you today with
respect to the fiscal year 2012 budget. You are requesting $8.8
billion in a new budget authority that amounts to $868 million
or about 11 percent higher than the House-passed Continuing
Resolution for fiscal year 2011.
The largest increases in your budget include an additional
$768 million for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, $145 million for the National Institute of
Standards and Technology, $70 million for the International
Trade Administration, and these increases are partially offset
by reductions in Census totaling $199 million.
These funding changes are just a few within Commerce.
Practically every account within Commerce is increasing in your
request. You are also proposing a number of new initiatives in
your budget as well as the termination of a few small but
potentially significant programs.
The Congress unfortunately will not be in a position to
provide such increases. The fiscal crisis facing the Nation is
real and will require a level of austerity that goes beyond the
President's budget. So we are going to ask you to help
prioritize.
And this is not in the statement, but I am sorry to see you
go, frankly. And it is probably not a good appointment in all
honesty because I think you are engaged in this thing and your
ideas with regard to exports. And now you are going to have a
vacancy there for a long period of time.
But I want to congratulate you on your nomination. But when
I heard it, I did not think it was such a good idea because of
that very reason. But there are some questions we will have.
These are not confirmation hearings obviously on China, but I
will have some questions with regard to China, to encourage
more job growth in manufacturing in this country.
I will go to Mr. Dicks if he wants to make a comment and
then we will go to your testimony.

Opening Remarks From Rep. Dicks

Mr. Dicks. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Secretary Locke, it is good to see you and we
congratulate you on your nomination to be Ambassador to China.
We have worked together since you were King County executive
and governor of Washington. And I think you have done a fine
job as Secretary.
We have some great initiatives, the National Export
Initiative, the Manufacturing Extension Partnership, just to
name two. And we were pleased with your work on comprehensive--
with NIST's effort on comprehensive cybersecurity.
I am concerned, and I hope you will have a chance to
discuss this during the hearing, on the effects of H.R. 1 on
NOAA procurement, acquisition, and construction. And we are
concerned about the tsunami that has happened in Japan and what
the effect of these budget cuts would be on our weather
satellites and our buoys out in the ocean which I know are very
important.
And I hope you could tell us what the impact of the $450
million cut will be in H.R. 1. I think you are in an ideal spot
to be able to translate this, and this process is not over yet.
We are still trying to make sure that we, you know, make
appropriate cuts. And if there has been mistakes made, we still
have a chance to review this in light of the current
circumstances.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Secretary. Proceed.

Opening Statement by Secretary Locke

Secretary Locke. Thank you very much, Chairman Wolf and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. I am really pleased
to join you today to talk about the President's budget request
for the Department of Commerce for fiscal year 2012.
Since I joined the Department of Commerce two years ago, we
have focused on delivering our services more efficiently and at
less cost to the taxpayer. Those efforts have paid off.
The 2010 Census was completed on schedule and under budget,
returning $1.9 billion to the taxpayers.
Our Economic Development Administration has cut the time it
takes to grant awards from 128 business days to 20 business
days.
Our Patent Office reduced an application backlog of almost
800,000 when the President assumed office. We have reduced by
10 percent last year even as applications surged by 7 percent.
And next month, we will be rolling out and starting a
program allowing applicants to have their patents evaluated
within one year for a very small extra fee.
Our efficiencies and cost savings are not one-time
achievements. We have instituted comprehensive performance
management processes throughout the Department which should
help our reforms stand the test of time.
And it is in this context of proven savings and performance
that I hope the committee will consider Commerce's fiscal year
2012 budget request.
Our 2012 budget request is lean. It cuts outdated programs,
drives major efficiencies in others. And our budget
incorporates $142 million in savings thanks to significant IT
improvements, aggressive acquisition reform, and other
administrative savings.
At the same time, it contains key investments that will
help America win the future by spurring innovation, increasing
America's international competitiveness, and supporting
scientific research as well as supporting our coastal
communities. These are core missions of the Department of
Commerce.
On the innovation front, the Department of Commerce is
responsible for providing the tools, systems, policies, and
technologies that give U.S. businesses a competitive edge in
world markets. And that is why we are requesting additional
funds for our National Institute of Standards and Technology
including an increase of more than $100 million for research
into advanced manufacturing technologies, health information
technologies, cybersecurity, and interoperable smart grid
technology.
These investments in standards setting and in basic
research, which are often too risky or too expensive for the
private sector alone, have historically spurred waves of
private sector innovation and job creation.
To further support innovation, our 2012 budget request
calls for the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office to gain full
access to its fees so that we can expand the already
substantial reforms undertaken by Under Secretary David Kappos,
working with line staff, labor, and career managers. These
reforms will help get cutting-edge inventions and technologies
into the marketplace much more quickly which will then create
jobs.
The Commerce Department, through our International Trade
Administration, is playing a lead role in the President's
National Export Initiative, which seeks to double U.S. exports
by 2015. American companies, especially small- and medium-size
businesses, rely heavily on the federal governmental support
available under the National Export Initiative. I hear about it
everywhere I go.
These companies often face significant hurdles in getting
access to working capital to produce the goods they want to
sell abroad or simply finding reliable foreign customers and
vendors for their American-made goods and services.
Our International Trade Administration helps many companies
clear these hurdles. And last year, we helped more than 5,500
U.S. companies export for the first time or increase their
exports. We coordinated an unprecedented 35 trade missions to
31 different countries.
These efforts are paying off with U.S. exports up 17
percent last year and indeed exports to China were up 34
percent last year. Our fiscal year 2012 budget envisions more
funds for activities such as business-to-business match-making
services and identifying and resolving trade barrier issues.
Finally, I want to touch on the critical work done by our
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration or NOAA, an
agency that is a key source of scientific information which is
also increasingly critical to America's economy.
Last year, NOAA played a pivotal role in responding to the
BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill by providing targeted weather
forecasts, oil spill trajectory maps, and by ensuring the
safety of Gulf seafood.
This past week, NOAA issued its first tsunami warning just
nine minutes after the tragic earthquake struck Japan. NOAA was
able to so quickly sound the alarm because of strong
congressional support.
In 2004, before the tsunami that struck Indonesia, NOAA had
only six buoys in the Pacific to detect seismic and wave
activity. Today thanks to congressional support, it has 39
buoys.
So the work that NOAA does to predict and respond to
weather and natural disasters saves communities, saves them
money and, most importantly, saves lives.
What I discussed is, of course, just a fraction of the work
of the Commerce Department and I direct you to our written
testimony for greater detail.
In the meantime, we are happy to answer any questions that
you might have.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Fattah, you have a statement you want to----
Mr. Fattah. I will reserve. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Sure. Thanks.

TSUNAMI WARNING NETWORK

A couple of issues and I kind of will jump around. But
first we extend our sympathies to the citizens of Japan. The
tsunami that struck there on March 11, 2011, has caused extreme
devastation and we wish them the best in their recovery.
I think I can speak for other Members, but I certainly
speak for myself that we will support, and I think I speak for
this entire committee, efforts to provide relief and technical
expertise and other forms of support to Japan during this
period of recovery.
There has been much discussion since the terrible tsunami
in Japan about our country's ability to forecast tsunamis. I
want to assure everyone that H.R. 1 does not cut funding for
the tsunami network.
In fact, there are no specific cuts to any program in NOAA.
Rather, if H.R. 1 is enacted, the Department of Commerce will
be required to submit a spending plan to the committee for
approval. The committee will work with NOAA to ensure that life
and safety programs are not cut.
For the record, and I will give you a letter before you
leave, Mr. Secretary, the funding levels for the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in H.R. 1 is $4.4
billion. This amount is $456 million or 12 percent above the
fiscal year 2008 level but $410 million or nine percent below
the fiscal year 2010 level.
Between fiscal year 2008 and fiscal year 2010, NOAA funds
increased by 22 percent higher than any other program in this
bill. NOAA's base funding for tsunami warning network has been
about $28 million since fiscal year 2008.
In addition to this base funding, following the Indonesian
tsunami in 2004, NOAA received three supplemental
appropriations to improve its tsunami warning programs and
activities. The Congress provided $17.2 million in Emergency
Supplemental Appropriations Act for Defense, the Global War on
Terror, and Tsunami Relief, 2005. That was Public Law 109-13
for NOAA to enhance tsunami warning capabilities and
operations.
NOAA received another $50 million in the Deficit Reduction
Act of 2005, Public Law 109-171, for tsunami warning and
coastal vulnerability programs.
Finally, NOAA received another $10 million in the Security
and Accountability For Every Port Act of 2006, Public Law 109-
347, for outdoor alerting technologies in remote communities.
I have been, and we are going to put a copy of the letter
in, involved when frankly not many people did very much. We
wrote--I believe you were governor. Were you governor in--when
were you governor?
Secretary Locke. From 1997 to 2005.
Mr. Wolf. Yes. We wrote you. We wrote every governor all
along the East Coast and the West Coast. We called the UN. And
we are going to submit a copy of the letter we wrote urging the
governors to act on tsunami activities, because many were not
doing what they should have done, to move ahead aggressively
with tsunami preparation.
So I will personally tell you we did everything possible
and the staff did, Mike and the staff, to make sure, because
when I saw the scenes of what took place in Indonesia, we
forced governors and we forced administrations and forced
localities not only on the West Coast but also on the East
Coast from all the way to Maine all the way down to Miami to
aggressively move ahead. So we have been involved in tsunami
funding issues for a number of years. And we will submit the
letter in the record.
And I believe very strongly in the need for this program
and I personally will assure that these important life-saving
programs such as the NOAA Tsunami Warning Network and
associated programs are not cut.
But I want you to take the letter. And if you would go back
and check your files--if you have access to your files--you
will probably find the letter that I sent you urging you as
governor, because the governors were not doing a very good job,
to move ahead aggressively.

NOAA SATELLITE BRIEFS TO CONGRESS

The other thing I want to raise before we get into the
questions, we have been told by the staff for the record no one
from NOAA, and this is with regard to satellites, no one from
NOAA or the Department of Commerce has spoken with the
Republican side about funding for the satellites.
We run this subcommittee hopefully in a bipartisan way. I
was chairman of it in a different life for six years. We never
made these issues partisan. We just did not.
Now, I will tell you last year, there are many times the
Democratic administration would not even come up and talk to
me. I mean, I was really not approached. There was an election.
It changed. Some people like it. Some people do not.
But if we are going to have a bipartisan--really to go up
and just talk to one side, which is very appropriate, and not
talk to the other, it is inappropriate.
So I am just asking you, and you ought to tell the head of
NOAA, if they are going to come up and go to one side, they owe
it to the Republican staff and if they are going to talk to the
Republican staff, they ought to talk to the Democratic staff.
But they ought to treat this in truly a bipartisan way.
So for the record, and you are welcome to comment, no one
for NOAA or the Department of Commerce has spoken to the
Republican staff about funding for the satellites. The
subcommittee with the allocation we receive for H.R. 1, the
House passed year-long supplemental, provided anomalies to
three only accounts, the Bureau of Prisons, the Broadband
Technology Opportunities Program, and the NOAA satellites. So
much for people even thinking about that.
I must also point out that the Senate CJS Subcommittee,
which received a higher allocation than we did, did not
provide, and the last time I knew the Democrats were
controlling the Senate, Mr. Reid, a person who I know and like,
a good person, controls the Senate, and they did not provide
any additional funding for the satellites in its failed CR
bill.
So if there's going to be integrity on this thing, your
office and your CFO and the people in congressional relations,
when they come up to talk to the Republican side, I urge them
to tell Mr. Fattah exactly what you told us. I mean, treat
everybody fairly.
And if you are going to come up to talk to Mr. Fattah's
people, then I would ask you out of respect to come up and do
the same thing to our staff. And why didn't they do that?
Secretary Locke. Are you asking for----
Mr. Wolf. Yes, sir.
Secretary Locke. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I was not aware that there has not been reciprocity and I
certainly would encourage our staff to talk with all sides
because we need as many members of the congressional committees
to understand the budgets and the programs and the policies of
the Department of Commerce.
Mr. Wolf. And would you not agree that this is not a
political issue?
Secretary Locke. Oh, very much so. I very much agree that
it is a nonpartisan issue. The funding for any agency is a
bipartisan issue.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. And could you let us know what response you
get from the head of NOAA when you talk or to your
congressional relations office about this?
Secretary Locke. I will very much let you know.
Mr. Wolf. Good. I appreciate it very much, sir.
Here is the letter which I will submit for the record.
``Wolf urges Administration to take lead on tsunami early
warning systems. Washington, D.C., Rep. Frank Wolf,''--this is
December 29, 2004-- ``Chairman of the Commerce, Justice, State
Appropriations Subcommittee sent a letter today to Vice Admiral
Conrad Lautenbacher, Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and
Atmosphere, urging the Administration to take the lead in
developing an enhanced tsunami prediction and warning
capability for the U.S. and the world. [ . . .] I am writing
today in light of the recent tragic . . .,'' and we will just
submit it for the record.
But this committee was very much involved and I personally
was because when I saw those scenes, and when I watched what is
taking place in Japan today, my heart goes out to those people.
So we will make sure that that issue will be dealt with.
And if there is anybody that thinks it is not being dealt
with, just give us a call, area code (202) 225-5136. And if
they cannot reach us, just call the Capitol switchboard and
they can track me down. Now, we will just submit that letter
for the record there.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

FEDERAL BUDGET CONCERNS

Mr. Wolf. You know, I think you know, I think we all have
to be careful when we come--I am going to get this--kind of
cleanse this to get this off my chest, too, because I know it
would have come out later on. Any cuts that are coming, some
may be in areas that I do not particularly like. I gave a
statement on the Floor of the House, and I said I worry about
the poor.
In Proverbs, it says when you give to the poor, you give to
God. And I worry about the poor. But this Administration has
failed to come forward to deal with the fundamental issue that
Senator Warner and Senator Durbin and people like that, and
Saxby Chambliss, are trying to do to get control of the
entitlement issue.
And Ruth Marcus from the Washington Post did a story titled
``Waiting for Waldo.'' The President of the United States
appointed the Bowles-Simpson or Simpson-Bowles Commission. I
have said I will support their recommendation. There are some
things in there that I may not completely agree with. Hopefully
it will be done in such a way that we can have an amendment
process to argue these things out knowing that we have to come
to whatever numbers. If you want to change something, then you
would have to offer something.
But the President has failed to come forward, so to say--
and last month in February, the shortest month of the year, we
had the largest, I think, deficit we have ever had for one
month. It is a deficit for one month that we used to have for
years that people used to complain about.
And I think you have done a good job. Personally I was
really sorry, glad because I think you will be tougher in China
than the current ambassador was and maybe the previous
Administration, because we have had conversations, and I know
what you care about, so I was kind of glad, but I was sorry to
see you appointed as Ambassador to China because I think what
you have done at Commerce and the idea of increasing exports,
so you are going to be out of the Cabinet.
But the next time you say, say there is this congressman
named Wolf, maybe it is Fox, Wolf, say I forget his name, but
he is saying the President has to come forward to deal with the
deficit and he ought to do it by the end of this year.
And if we come forward in a bipartisan way, if Tom Coburn
and Dick Durbin can sign that, and I have listened to Mr.
Fattah, he said he could and I could, if we could do that then,
but we really need the President to provide that leadership.
So as we agonize about some of these cuts, and some are
difficult and some I am not anxious about doing, but until you
deal with the entitlements--Willy Sutton, the bank robber, said
he robbed banks because that is where the money is. The money
is in Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security.
And also I hear the President, just to get it off my chest,
talking about how great it was working with the Republicans and
Democrats in September. We got this tax bill passed. It shows
you we can work together. That is like giving candy away.
Anybody can work together to give things away.
In that, and one thing with regard to the payroll tax, with
regard to Social Security, that will cost the Federal
Government $112 billion. You gave Jimmy Buffett and Warren
Buffett a Social Security tax break. Neither of them needed it.
Neither of them wanted it. You would have been better giving it
to the poor or putting it in math and science and physics and
chemistry and biology.
So the President has got to come forward on this issue and
work with Speaker Boehner and work with Mr. McConnell and Mr.
Reid and the Speaker and former Speaker, have everyone come
together in a bipartisan way to get these ideas out. And if we
do that by the end of the year, then I think we can resolve a
lot of the issues that have come up.
And I have taken more time. I am just going to go to
questions and go to Mr. Fattah since he did not have an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT BY REPRESENTATIVE FATTAH

Mr. Fattah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And let me say just so there is no confusion, my office,
you know, because we have not been on the subcommittee as long
as the Chairman has been and we are trying to learn about these
various agencies, so we are asking agencies--and I am
traveling. Like I was out in your district. I visited the
Center for Missing and Exploited Children. I am trying to see
and learn as much as I can about all of the agencies.
So if my staff invited NOAA up to talk to me, it was not as
if NOAA was seeking to somehow just come see me versus see you
or whatever. That was a request made. You know, as we are
making it, I met with any number of people who are affected by
the bill only so that I can be as prepared as possible to work
in a bipartisan way with the Chairman, because I am convinced
that we can have a bipartisan bill.
So I do not want the Secretary to bear the burden for the
zealousness of my staff trying to make sure that I am
adequately informed. And I do not believe that in any way that
NOAA would be seeking to give--if they were going to provide
one side information, you would want to provide it to the
majority because in this House, the majority has its way and in
the minority, we get to have our say.
So I do not think that they would be--they would be ill
advised if they just provide information to me. So I want to
clarify the record in that respect.
And this hearing, Mr. Secretary, has been moved from 2:00
to 1:30 and I was off campus giving a speech and we had some
security issues getting back on campus with some traffic. So I
apologize for being a few minutes late.
I know that the Ranking Member of the full committee is
here, and I know my seniority, so I will be glad to yield to
Ranking Member Dicks first and then we will go on from there.
Mr. Dicks. Let me just say there has been a lot of
discussion about this, and I appreciate the Chairman's
leadership on this issue over the years. And he has always been
extremely fair.
What we are worried about is the level of these cuts in
NOAA and whether that will affect the weather service.

NOAA FUNDING LEVELS

Mr. Dicks. Okay. Here are the numbers. The request in 2011
for operations, research, and facilities is $3.3 billion. H.R.
1 cuts it to $2.8 billion.
Will that have a negative effect on the weather service and
on our buoys and on our tsunami early warning system? I am told
that would be a 28 percent cut.
Secretary Locke. Well, Congressman Dicks, let me just say
that if we are looking at, for instance, just the 2010 enacted
budget and if you exclude all the extra spending that was
associated with the census, first of all, let me just say that
the 2012 President's request for Commerce is roughly $822
million above the 2010 enacted budget of which the President
has requested almost $687 million for JPSS, the satellite
program, which only leaves about $135 million for all other
programs and activities within the Department of Commerce.
Now, if we then look at H.R. 1 and to the operations,
research, facilities portion of NOAA's budget, that is where
the weather service and other programs, tsunami programs are
located, H.R. 1 specifically reduces the level of funding for
that segment of NOAA's budget by 16 percent from the 2010
enacted level and----
Mr. Dicks. And that number is $450 million?
Secretary Locke. I would have to get you the exact figure.
Mr. Dicks. Yes. We do not have your----
Secretary Locke. I do not have that in front of me. But
obviously we can always try to prioritize and we will try to be
as efficient as possible. But you just cannot avoid the math,
16 percent cut, and that includes not just--I mean, if we were
to keep all the tsunami programs intact, we would have to make
those cuts elsewhere, whether it is in hurricane forecasting or
ocean navigation for ships, et cetera, et cetera.
And right now, and I do want to thank the Congress and the
chairman's leadership in the past in the aftermath of the
tsunami that hit Indonesia. As I indicated, at that time, we
only had six buoys in the Pacific and now we have some 39,
thanks to the leadership of the chairman and other Members.
[The information follows:]

NOAA Funding Levels

NOAA Operations, Research, and Facilities account is set at $2.9B,
$454.3M (14%) less than the FY 2010 Discretionary Appropriation of
$3.3B.

Mr. Dicks. Seven of those buoys----
Secretary Locke. But seven of those are down for
maintenance. And under the Continuing Resolution, we do not
know if there is funding or what the level of funding will be
as others come on line for maintenance and will they also have
to go down. What do we do about--you know, tsunami warnings
involve satellites. It involves the research centers, the
stations. It is not just the buoys that have to be maintained
and the interpretation of the data.
If we ensure that nothing surrounding tsunami warning
systems is touched, then we are going to have to take the 16
percent savings or reduction in costs some place else, whether
it be on the hurricane forecasting, and the list goes on and
on.
Just from a math level, there is no way that we can avoid
compromising the programs that safeguard our country. We are
going to have to make some very, very tough choices if that is
the decision of the Congress.
But the 16 percent cut off of current levels and right now
we are not even issuing contracts for the maintenance or the
upgrading of the buoys that are out of commission.
Mr. Dicks. The other account here in NOAA is procurement,
acquisition, and construction. And in 2010, that was $1.3
billion. The President's request was $2.1 billion. And the H.R.
1 amount is $1.4 billion. That does not sound as bad to me,
though it is a cut from the fiscal year 2011 request of $728
million.
So that is another very significant--and does that have any
effect--procurement, acquisition, and construction--on the
weather service or early warning systems?
Secretary Locke. Well, in H.R. 1, there is a slight
increase----
Mr. Dicks. Is that where the satellite is?
Secretary Locke. That is where the Satellite Program
resides. And because the 2011 budget has really not been
enacted or the President's 2011 budget has not been acted on,
there was a substantial increase for the next phase of the
satellites contained in the 2011 budget.
So assuming that there is nothing in the 2011 budget for
the satellites, then that cost is now pushed on to the 2012
budget which is why the President has asked for $687 million
for the phase of the Satellite Program.
But under H.R. 1, we are only basically given $95 million
extra to accomplish that task unless we cut back everything
else in the rest of the procurement, whether it is on ships and
other capital projects within NOAA.
The problem with not moving forward, and we are already
behind schedule on the Satellite Program, and your committee
and other committees of Congress have looked at that Satellite
Program extensively, we have had to cut back the number of
satellites. And even with that reduced number, the costs have
grown.
And that is why a whole bunch of blue ribbon commissions
have called for the complete restructuring of what used to be
called the NPOESS Program, now called the JPSS, in which the
Defense Department is no longer in charge. It is now a
collaboration between the Department of Commerce and NASA.
But we are already behind schedule and there will be a gap
between the existing satellites that provide that weather
forecasting and when the JPSS satellites will come on board.
And our accuracy of----
Mr. Dicks. And that weather forecasting is important to
early detection, right?
Secretary Locke. We are now able to provide forecasting as
far out as seven days, whether it is for hurricanes, major
snowstorms, and so forth, especially over Alaska and other
parts of the East Coast.
Once that gap occurs, for however long it takes until the
satellites are in orbit, our ability to accurately predict with
confidence weather patterns, whether hurricanes or major
snowstorms, will be reduced down to three to five days.
Mr. Dicks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.

GULF OIL SPILL

Mr. Bonner.
Mr. Bonner. Mr. Secretary, I echo the comments made by
Chairman Wolf and the ranking member and others that we are
grateful for your service to our country and we are proud that
the President has asked you to take on this important role as
our next ambassador to China. We wish you good luck during the
confirmation hearings.
I get a little concerned as I was thinking about focusing
on the oil spill because you mentioned it in your testimony,
and I am going to come to that, but I must tell you as tragic
as it is, and it is of epic proportions, the story line that is
playing out in Japan and our collective hearts of the country
and prayers are with the people there, the earthquake, the
tsunami, the nuclear issues that they are dealing with.
And, yet, it is very frustrating to hear that we either
have to support satellites for tsunamis or satellites for
hurricanes because some of us live along hurricane alley.
It is hard to believe Chairman Wolf mentioned this. I mean,
last month, the deficit was $223 billion. And it was not that
many years ago when that would have been the deficit for the
whole year.
And while you said the budget is lean and we have made cuts
to outdated programs, I do not know if that is a part of the
testimony or if you could provide us some of the areas that you
have chosen to cut that are outdated, secretary after
secretary, administrator after administrator comes up to this
committee and other committees talking about the cuts that they
are prepared to make and, yet, they still add up to pennies on
the dollar in terms of what we have.
In many ways, it is appropriate that we are sending one of
our best over to China because you are basically going not only
to represent our country, you are also going to the banker for
us to plead our case as 42 percent of the money that we are
spending right comes from other--not all from China, but much
of it from China. So we are facing serious challenges here as
well.
You know, you know this because you were governor and when
you are governor, you represent the whole state. And I guess
when you are the county administrator or whatever Mr. Dicks
said your earlier positions were, your jurisdiction has
increased and now you represent the whole country. We represent
the country and, yet, we--because of the body that we serve in
and, yet, the people in our respective districts send us here,
give us the privilege of representing them. And I will tell
you, you mentioned it in your testimony about the Deepwater
Horizon, as a Nation, we have a propensity to move on to the
next tragedy, the next disaster, the next hurricane or whatever
it is. But our area, the Gulf Coast is still struggling.
And I hope that if you can speak for the Administration or,
if not, you can carry this message or this request back to the
Administration, I think all of us along the Gulf Coast will
admit that Louisiana bore the largest environmental impact from
the oil spill, but the economic impact, which the Commerce
Department has been very focused on.
My congressional district was Ground Zero. And I hope that
as the different agencies and departments, the Homeland
Security and Justice Department, all your colleagues around the
cabinet table, I hope they understand that as we are looking at
long-term recovery for an area, this is not parochial just to
south Alabama.
You know, a couple years ago, we were all wringing our
hands about what might happen if Greece fails. And Greece is
about a $356 billion GDP a year.
But if you go from the Keys in Florida all the way to the
tip of Texas, the five Gulf Coast states, it is $2.8 trillion
impact one year GDP. So it is a big part of the national
economy.
And I just hope that you can convey the best--I hope it is
something you believe as well, that as you are looking to make
the area whole on the environmental loss, that we do not forget
the economic loss because it has been substantial, especially
in tourism-dependent economies like mine and Congressman
Miller's from Pensacola, Florida, and others.
So that is really not as much of a question as a request.
Please, whatever you can do in your remaining days and weeks as
secretary of Commerce, remind others in the Administration that
the economic loss is critically important to address as well as
the environmental loss.
And the question part of this would be can you give us from
your perspective what has been one of the lessons learned?
I mean, not only are we watching the tragedy play out in
Japan, but with what is going on in Egypt and Libya and the
price of gas shooting through the roof, I know you are not the
secretary of Energy, but we are all concerned about the
fragility of this economy, of this recovery. And here we are.
We have got moratoriums on deep water drilling. Nuclear policy
may be up in question now.
What would you say from your seat as a key member of the
President's cabinet would be a lesson learned from the federal
response to the worst environmental oil spill in the history of
the world last year?
Secretary Locke. Well, thank you very much, Congressman
Bonner, for that.
And let me just say that having been a governor, having
presided over the dot com bust as well as the huge recession
that struck the entire country and the aftermath of September
11th and having been a budget chairman writing budgets for the
State of Washington, we have had to make tough choices. And it
is a matter of setting priorities.
And I very much agree with Chairman Wolf and the other
Members of the committee that we have to make these tough
choices. There is not enough money. There will never be enough
money to satisfy everyone's wish list.
And let me just say that the President is very committed to
trying to reduce our deficits. You know, he did create those
fiscal commissions. And I have heard him speak with Members of
Congress and the governors saying that he is very serious about
trying to tackle the issue of the entitlements.
Then when we talk about the current debates over the
budget, it represents really a very small fraction of the
entire federal spending and that to really get to the deficits
and to get our country on a path of long-term prosperity, we
have to look at those other issues including Medicare,
Medicaid, and Social Security.
And he is very eager to do that in a bipartisan fashion
working with the Members of the Congress. That is why his
budget proposal for 2012 does call for a freeze on
discretionary domestic spending and actually reduces spending
by some $400 billion and as a percentage of GDP would be the
smallest in terms of discretionary domestic spending since
President Eisenhower was in office.
Nonetheless if we are to really focus on making sure that
American companies and the American economy can withstand some
of these challenges from external forces, whether it is
environmental disasters or other economies, we have got to make
sure that our economy is strong and robust.
And that means focusing on innovation, research, and
development. That means, as the President says, we need to out-
educate, we need to out-innovate, we need to out-build the rest
of the world. And that, of course, in this tough fiscal climate
requires some hard choices.
That is why the President has really focused on
enhancements. For instance, keeping the budget flat, making
deep cuts in other portions of the programs, of the budget, the
Federal Government, while having enhancements in other areas,
or whether it is in education, expanded R&D, and making the R&D
tax credit permanent, whether it is in collaborations with the
private sector, to really spur some of the innovations that
will create new jobs and new technologies that will help us.
This includes regulatory reform, to try to simplify and redo
some of the regulations that we have to make sure that they are
not a burden on job creation.
And I think what you see in the President's 2012 budget
request is that balance, holding domestic discretionary
spending flat, not calling for pay raises for federal
employees, making deep cuts in a whole host of different
programs while putting investments in those areas that will
actually create jobs down the road.
And, you know, you talk about the Gulf states. We have had
to put additional funds in there to try to stimulate the
economy and to help the economies adjust to the Deepwater
Horizon disaster. That may not have immediate payoff right
away, but it is laying the foundation for job growth and
economic diversification in the out-years, the same way with
some of the programs in the Recovery Act.
There were some projects that were immediate job creators
and others were laying the foundation for job creation and
competitiveness for American companies two or three years down
the road to make sure that we are turning our economy around so
that as we begin to recover, we are not focused on the same old
industries or the same economic recovery as past recessions
which turned out not to be very smart, focusing on debt and
consumption and focusing on real estate speculation.
And so now we are looking at the better industries of the
future, like broadband, 120,000 miles of laying fiber optic
cable so that people in the rural parts of America can sell
their products and services and market their bed and breakfasts
and their products all around the world and sell to the world
instead of waiting for customers to come to them.
Mr. Bonner. I hope we can count on you to deliver the
message to the President. You know, he is the one who made a
commitment to the Nation that they were going to stand by the
people in Gulf Coast. And we are going to hold him to that
commitment. And it includes economic loss as well as
environmental loss.
And I hope that we can also count--I mean, it is great to
say we are concerned about the deficit and we are going to work
with this there. It is good to have you reiterate those words,
but I think Chairman Wolf, I think Mr. Dicks and others have
said we really are going to need the President to step in that
ring with us. It is going to require strong leadership from the
White House as well as from Congress.
Thank you very much.
Secretary Locke. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Before I go to Mr. Fattah--do you want me to go
to you, Mr. Fattah? No. I am going to go to you.
When are you leaving? When do you expect to be going to
China? When are you stepping down?
Secretary Locke. That is up to the Senate.
Mr. Wolf. Oh. But, I mean, as soon as they confirm you, are
you off and then----
Secretary Locke. Well, we are trying to work that out.
Mr. Dicks. You cannot hold two jobs at once.
Mr. Wolf. What is your expectation?
Secretary Locke. We really do not have a date yet. The
paperwork has not been filed, has not been completed. Plus I
may be going to China before the rest of the family. The kids
are in school in the Montgomery County school system until the
third week of June.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. But, I mean, you will be, as soon as you
are confirmed to be ambassador to China, you will be gone and I
think that will be controversial. So it would be within the
next month or two do you think?
Secretary Locke. I cannot give you a time frame,
Congressman. I really do not know what their schedule is and
how soon their processes will take.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Mr. Fattah.

U.S. MANUFACTURING

Mr. Fattah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I wish you well in whatever position you are
in and going to. And I know you will represent our country
well.
Let me start here on manufacturing. What is the leading
manufacturing country in the world?
Secretary Locke. The United States is.
Mr. Fattah. There is a belief that somehow we are not, that
there are Members of Congress, there are people who write
editorials who believe we do not make anything in this country.
Now, I have over 5,000 manufacturers in the Philadelphia area
alone. We were able and honored to have you visit one of our
companies, Penn Reels. They make world-class fishing reels and
have no competitors anywhere in the world that can compete with
them. It is in my district. But we also have--I mean, we have
great manufacturers, but all over the country.
And now the Department has a program called the
Manufacturing Extension Partnership Program working with
manufacturers in states like Michigan; I have heard from and
all over the country.
And I know that the President's budget in fiscal year 2012
makes a request of, is it $140 million? And if you could just
talk a little bit about the work of the Department to assist
American manufacturers continue to lead the world in making
products, that would be my first question.
Secretary Locke. Well, first of all, we are very, very
proud of the MEP Program, the Hollings Manufacturing Extension
Partnership.
And it has been shown that for every dollar of federal
investment, we actually help generate some $32.00 in new sales
growth. We actually helped some 34,000 manufacturers last year
and more than 17,000 jobs were created.
What we do is go in and partner with the states and look at
the processes of manufacturing facilities to help them reduce
their costs, to be more efficient, to be using less inputs,
whether it is electricity or chemicals so that they are more
lean and mean and, therefore, more viable and competitive. And
then we also help them sell their products around the world. So
the President has asked for a 12 percent increase in that
particular budget.
But the other things that we are doing to help American
companies is, for instance, the Patent and Trademark Office. We
are on a mission to get the--now it takes almost three years to
get a patent. I mean, if you are a really small inventor, that
is unacceptable. You cannot raise capital. You cannot get
people to invest in your new idea, your invention. It could be
a life saver.
If you cannot prove to them and show them that you have a
patent, it is like going to the bank and saying give me a loan
to remodel the house, but I cannot prove to you that I have
title to the property and you are going to have to wait three
years. You are just not going to get that financing.
So starting next month, we are starting a program in which
we will virtually guarantee that for a small extra fee that we
will issue a patent or make that patent determination within
one year and that----

U.S. MANUFACTURING--EXPORTS

Mr. Fattah. Mr. Secretary, I am sorry. Is it true that only
one percent of American companies export?
Secretary Locke. That is true. Only one percent of U.S.
companies export and exports make up only about 12 or 13
percent of our GDP. It is significantly much lower than, for
instance, countries like Germany which have high wages and
strong unions and, yet, they export a lot more.
One percent of U.S. companies export. And of that one
percent, 58 percent export to only one country, typically
Mexico or Canada. So 58 percent of all U.S. companies that
export export to only one country.
And through our efforts of the International Trade
Administration and working with the Export-Import Bank, Small
Business Administration, Department of Agriculture, and other
federal agencies, we are on a mission to especially help small-
and medium-size companies export to two or three extra
countries.
Mr. Fattah. Well, in my early life in the Congress a few
years ago, we had all of these entities come together in
Philadelphia to meet with some of our manufacturers. Peanut
Chews are made in Philadelphia. They are the best candy in the
world. And now they are sold in 45 different countries because
of the work of some of these agencies.
So it is something that all of our manufacturers need to
learn about, these services that are provided. You know, we
have the Overseas Private Investment Corporation. Export-Import
Bank, I met with a manufacturer this morning from my district
whose company was involved in providing the drill that got the
Chilean miners out, but needed a loan guarantee to do some work
in Iraq and got it done, got the insurance and the bonding
through the Export-Import Bank.
So these are entities that are available and we need to
make sure that they have the kind of support that they need.

NATIONAL DEBT

Let me move on. I do want to make some comments about this
debt. Because I have been here for a minute. I was here when we
voted to balance the budget under the Clinton administration. I
voted to balance the budget then. We raised some taxes. We cut
some programs. It was a bipartisan vote of Democrats and
Republicans and Republicans were in the majority. And in the
waning days of that administration, we were very proud of the
fact that we were paying off the national debt. We had Alan
Greenspan testify at the beginning of the Bush administration
that at the end of that eight years we could pay off our entire
national debt, and what that would mean for our economy.
But the Bush administration took a projection of a $3
trillion surplus, it is like a weather forecast, and they
decided they wanted to do a tax cut and gave away $1.5
trillion. And then we went to war. Two wars we have been in for
a decade. And unlike any other time in our country's history we
did not pay for it. We did not have a war bond, or a war tax.
We just added that to the debt. And then we increased domestic
spending.
So when President Obama was sworn into office the national
debt was over $10 trillion. We were losing 800,000 jobs a
month. So this is not a partisan, there is no partisan
ownership of the debt. This is the United States of America's
debt. We should pay it off. We should not leave it for our
children. We, and it is not just entitlements. We should reign
in entitlements, but that is really about future obligations.
That is not about the debt. The debt is already here and now.
And we have the lowest tax rates, the lowest since 1950 because
we have a generation of adults who decided that we want to have
all of this and we do not want to pay for it. And that is why
we are in debt.
So even when we reign in entitlements, and I am for doing
whatever we have to do, I can support the President's
Commission, I can support the Chairman's Commission, it is not
going to do anything about the debt. The national debt, this
mortgage on our country that is, when Bush came into office it
was $5 trillion. When he left, when the new President was sworn
in, the one that they want to heap this blame on, it was $10
trillion. All right? And now we have to address it. That is our
job. And as a Congress I have never heard this fidelity to a
President's budget. It has always been known to me that the
President proposes a budget and we dispose of a budget. That is
what we do. That is our committee. We decide what we are going
to spend money on.
And so I just want to, I want to thank you for your
leadership. We have had twelve months of net increases in jobs.
We need to get out of the partisan foolishness and focus on our
responsibilities. One is to pay our bills rather than when you
go over to China. I do not want you visiting our bankers, all
right? Because we need to have a much stronger discussion with
them. When I talk to manufacturers in my district they say that
every time they get a product into the Chinese market they
reverse manufacture it and before you know it they, because
there does not seem to be a lot of adherence to this
intellectual property notion, right?
So we have to think about what we are doing as a country. I
agree with the chairman on this, that whatever we have to do on
NOAA we should do, and to make sure that we can deal with
warnings. But we do not have to wait for a buoy out there to
tell us about the debt. We do not have to wait for any NOAA
satellite to tell us. We know what the debt is. We know how we
got it. And we know that at the end of the day we have to pay
the bill for it or our children and our grandchildren have to
pay the bill. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Fattah. Mr. Graves? Mr. Yoder.

DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE FUNDING LEVELS

Mr. Yoder. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, thank
you for being here today. I appreciate the opportunity to ask
you a few questions. I was listening to your testimony at the
beginning and was trying to understand your request for your
2012 budget submission through the President's 2012 request.
You say that was $822 million greater than your 2010
expenditures?
Secretary Locke. That is correct.
Mr. Yoder. Okay. And----
Secretary Locke. That is if you take out the unusual
spending for the Census that was part of that 2010 budget. So,
I mean obviously, the 2010 Census is over and we are not going
to be continuing that to the same degree that we had. So if we
back out a lot of those extraordinary one-time costs so that we
are not really comparing apples and oranges the President's
budget request for 2012 is roughly $822 million above the 2010
enacted budget.
Mr. Yoder. And how much is the 2010 enacted budget?
Secretary Locke. The 2010 enacted budget, if you take out
the 2010 Census, was $7.9 billion.
Mr. Yoder. Okay. So you are asking for, what is that? What
percentage increase are you asking off of your current
expenditures?
Secretary Locke. I would have to do the math on that. I am
sorry.
Mr. Yoder. But $822 million off of roughly $8 billion?
Secretary Locke. Correct.
[The information follows:]

Department of Commerce Funding Levels

The proposed FY 2012 Budget request of $8,761 million is $822
million more than the 2010 enacted budget level ($7,939 million) when
the $6 billion is excluded for the Decennial Census. To clarify, the
percentage increase is roughly 10.4% over 2010 levels.

Mr. Yoder. So about a 10 percent increase, just----
Secretary Locke. Yes.
Mr. Yoder [continuing]. Roughing it here? And I, in
entering into this conversation we have had----
Secretary Locke. Of which the vast majority is for the JPSS
Satellite System. $687 million, almost $700 million of that
$822 million is for the satellite work.

DEPARTMENTAL EFFICIENCY

Mr. Yoder. Okay. Well in light of particularly some of my
colleagues comments prior to my questions in relation to this
horrible debt burden that we have, and many of the speakers
have already laid this out, and I know you understand it and I
know you are concerned about it as well as every American is, I
am troubled by departments and agencies that come forward in
light of these conversations asking for additional spending.
And so I am wondering, instead of asking the Congress to borrow
another $822 million from the next generation, have you done as
a Secretary, or have you had your heads of departments, look
for efficiencies? We all know businesses and families across
this country have cut spending. They have had to do more with
less. Most of our constituents are getting by with less money.
And many of them would love a 10 percent increase, even if it
was for a major project, a satellite project. Or in their
regards, you know, some home improvement project. They would
love to be able to increase their discretionary spending in
that regard.
So I guess my question is, what is the, what work have you
done to try to find that $822 million internally? And do you
feel that there is waste and inefficiency in the Department of
Commerce?
Secretary Locke. Well first of all let me just say that we
are very proud of our emphasis on efficiency and trying to save
money. As I indicated in the very beginning, we returned or
saved the American taxpayers almost $1.9 billion on the 2010
Census. Some of that, of course, was because of reserves that
we did not have to tap into. We did not have hurricanes or
major natural disasters that impacted the Census. That was
money that had been set aside in case of those catastrophes
that did not have to be used.
Also the 2010 Census was written up by the GAO and the
Inspector General as perhaps the project most likely to fail in
the federal government. It indicated that we had to set aside
reserves to really look at things like the computer systems
that were cobbled together because the previous administration
had let out a contract for hand held computers. We paid out
virtually all the money and got absolutely nothing in return.
Absolutely useless for following up with households that did
not mail back the Census form. And so we had to scramble and go
back to a paper and pencil system and cobble together a new
computer system. It had never been completely tested so there
was a great fear that it would not work. And thanks to the
incredible management of the folks at the Census Bureau, the
system held together. We had to make a lot of adjustments in
how we use the computer system but it held together and it
worked.
Then we embarked on an emphasis on management, and
emphasized to the American public with advertising campaigns
the need to send back the questionnaire. Virtually half the
savings was from that, having a very successful effort of the
American people to return the questionnaire so that we did not
have to hire people to go door to door. And that is how we were
able to achieve the $1.9 billion savings, or returning it to
the taxpayers.
In the Economic Development Administration we have cut the
time it takes to process an Economic Development Grant, whether
for a scientific park, an industrial park, or wastewater
treatment facility, or even a port project, from six months to
one month without spending extra money.
Our Patent and Trademark Office, has been able to reduce
the backlog by 10 percent even though patent applications have
gone up.
And on program after program we are achieving savings. We
are embarked on a major acquisition reform that we believe will
save some $50 million in the next budget cycle. We have made
savings of some, $255 million. Which includes, for instance, IT
eliminating programs that we do not think really work. And for
instance, on international trade we can help American companies
grow, sell more of their products around the world, by focusing
on international trade and export promotion. But the President
has also asked for an enhancement so that we can staff some of
these offices, foreign offices, where the people's sole job is
to find buyers and customers for U.S. companies. We are also
proposing to close down and pare down some of the staff in
those areas that are not areas that would see great growth or
have great potential for exports.
So we are trying to prioritize. We are really trying to go
to our strengths and cutting back on those things that are not
as productive.

FREE TRADE AGREEMENTS

Mr. Yoder. Mr. Secretary, I appreciate that answer and
appreciate your thorough response and the work that you have
been doing to try to find reductions. I just think it would be
difficult to go home to constituents and tell them I know you
having to cut back, and you have lost your job, but we have got
to continue to increase spending. And so while it sounds like
you have done a number of things in the right direction, my
encouragement would be to continue to try to find that $822
million from additional savings. It sounds like you are heading
down the right track. It just appears we need to go further.
And I would find it difficult to support additional spending
given the state of the debt and the state of many of our
constituents who are some of them struggling to survive. So I
appreciate that.
My next question relates to trade and I noted in your
testimony that you have expanded the amount of goods and
services that have been exported, and you have taken some good
credit for some things that you are doing in that regard. I
guess my question would be, how much of the expansion in
exports is related to our currency, the dollar value in the
global marketplace, and in terms of when we are trading with
other partners how much of that export is related to
undervalued currency, such as in China? And how much is related
to programs that we are doing as a Department of Commerce? And
then with that as a follow up, where are we on the free trade
agreements and why are those taking so long? A lot of folks ask
me at home why those thing continue to lag within the
administration.
Secretary Locke. Well I cannot give you, I do not think any
economist could actually attribute the growth in exports to the
movement of the currency, the Chinese currency, to the various
programs, or to just changing world conditions. I can tell you
that, for instance, when the President was in India he was able
to help land over $11 billion worth of trade deals and sales
resulting in supporting some 50,000 American jobs. We have led
a record number of trade missions bringing hundreds of
companies with us and immediately they were able to report $1
billion of increased sales.
But the federal agency and all the federal government's, or
all the agencies within the federal government are working at a
very intensive and collaborative fashion to really help promote
exports, helping especially small- and medium-sized companies.
And we are not trying to do it using just federal dollars. We
are actually partnering, for instance, with the National
Association of Manufacturers, letting them identify their top
companies that they think would benefit from assistance from
the Department of Commerce finding buyers and customers for
them. We were actually working with UPS and FedEx, where they
are identifying their customers that they feel are most likely
to take advantage and benefit from our programs to sell to more
countries. It is in their economic self-interest because the
more their customers are shipping, the more revenues for those
private sector companies. This enables us to meet our goal of
helping double exports without having to use scarce federal
dollars.
These are all part of a collaborative effort. But we can
tell you that we are on track to meet the President's goal of
doubling U.S. exports over the next five years. When the
President first announced that there were many who were
skeptical that it could be done. All it takes is a 14 percent
increase in exports every year, and when you compound that, add
that on top of the previous year, over five years you will be
able to achieve that goal. Last year we were up 17 percent.
Exports to China were up 32 to 34 percent. Agricultural exports
are the second highest in U.S. history and we have a trade
surplus there. Tourism, foreign tourists coming into the United
States is considered an export. It is foreign money buying
American products and services. Instead of occurring let us say
in Germany it actually occurs on American soil when those
German visitors come to America. Those were up 11 percent last
year over 2009 and expected to grow an additional 7 or 8
percent this coming year. So all of these things are having an
impact.
That is why the trade agreements are important and that is
why we are very pleased that we were able to reach an agreement
with Korea. You know, the President did set an initial
timeframe, a deadline, a goal of concluding the Korea Free
Trade Agreement in November in time for the G-20 meeting that
was being held in Korea. But he walked away from that deal
because he did not feel it was good enough. And thankfully he
turned down what was then on the table because it enabled him
to go back in a stronger position and get a deal that both the
auto workers and the auto dealers support. And so it was a much
better deal. And it shows that if we are not bound by an
arbitrary deadline, or a linkage with other trade deals, that
we are able to negotiate from a position of strength. And that
is why the President wants to conclude an agreement with Panama
and Colombia but does not feel that we should be tied to a
particular deadline because that just gives those on the other
side of the negotiating table greater strength. If they know
that we have to reach a deal by a certain time frame then they
will hold out and we will not get the best that we can get.

TELECOM SPECTRUM

Mr. Yoder. Well I appreciate that very thorough answer as
well, and many have made the deadline argument as well in the
issue over the Middle East and our military efforts there. And
so it is interesting in some regards deadlines are useful and
in other cases they are not. And so the next question I have I
guess relates, and one more, Mr. Chairman, and then I will
yield back, relates to just an issue with GPS.
Recently the FCC allowed a waiver for a company to
repurpose satellite spectrum immediately neighboring that of
GPS for use in extremely high powered ground based
transmissions. And I just want to, I know you have, I think it
is the NTIA that manages the telecom spectrum, I want to sort
of put this in your radar so to speak and see if you could help
us with this. Because there are some companies that produce GPS
products in the GPS industry that have serious concerns that
this planned use is incompatible with existing GPS use. And I
want to know if you are familiar with that, and if you have any
comment? Or maybe you could get some information back to us?
Secretary Locke. As I understand it, Congressman, that
relates to a specific company.
Mr. Yoder. Yes.
Secretary Locke. And I understand that the FCC did grant a
provisional authorization in the issue at hand, provided that
some of those technical issues could be worked out. And I do
know that our folks at NTIA are working with that particular
company to address that issue so that that provisional
authorization can move forward.
Mr. Yoder. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.

WORLD MANUFACTURING LEADER

Mr. Wolf. Thank you. Before I go to Mr. Serrano? Mr.
Serrano is not there? Okay, I think he came in, am I wrong? Or
who should I go to? Okay. I was right? All right, I just wanted
to, I have a comment here, on the manufacturing. Earlier this
week the Financial Times reported that China officially has
displaced the U.S. as the world's leading manufacturer, the
first time a country has topped America in 110 years. So you
might want to take a look at that Financial Times report. And
what we will do is get a copy of that and put it in the record
at this point.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

TSUNAMI WARNING NETWORK

Mr. Wolf. Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to bring you
back for a second. Let me join my colleagues in wishing you
well. I know it is a great honor when any President calls on
you to represent our country. And certainly for China that is
a, it is not just any appointment. And it is a very important
appointment to us at this time in our history and in their
history. And so I congratulate you for your past service and
what I know will be excellent future service.
Let me take you to the Caribbean for a second. You know,
for years I have been talking to folks about the possibility of
creating a tsunami warning center in the Caribbean,
specifically in Puerto Rico. And as recent as yesterday a 5.4
earthquake hit the northern part of the Caribbean creating
tremors in the Virgin Islands, Dominican Republic and Puerto
Rico. Also a center of that nature would serve not only to deal
with the issue of the Caribbean but certainly in our coastal
areas of the fifty states, the southern part, and the Gulf
Coast.
So to be very brief, the state government, the local
government of Puerto Rico, has already allocated half of the
dollars it would take to build the center. And yesterday
Resident Commissioner Mr. Pierluisi, along with myself and Dr.
Christensen from the Virgin Islands, put in legislation to try
to accomplish this. So my question to you is, what are the
chances that--on one hand we have been talking about cuts,
cuts, and cuts, and I understand that--but I am asking you to
spend a little money. What are the chances that within the
existing budget we could find the dollars to pay for the second
part that the state government has already allocated to create
the tsunami warning center in the Caribbean and Puerto Rico?
Secretary Locke. Congressman, I have to tell you that I am
not familiar with that request or a proposal by that local
entity to contribute half the cost of an additional tsunami
warning center. I would be happy to look into it.
[The information follows:]

tsunami warning network

NOAA currently manages a Caribbean Tsunami Program. The overall
improvement strategy to enhance local response to local events is the
following:

Accelerating the TsunamiReady Program for Puerto
Rico (PR) & the U.S. Virgin Islands (USVI) by hiring an
outreach manager for the Caribbean (accomplished in FY10);

Achieving TsunamiReady status for 46 communities in
PR and USVI by FY14; improving Tsunami Detection and
Forecasting by upgrading seismic networks, sea-level stations
and communications by FY13, and accelerating Tsunami Inundation
Mapping/Modeling for PR/USVI--to be completed by FY13; and

Working to improve forecasts and warning products,
which are issued in three and half minutes (avg.) from seismic
events for Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands, and eleven minutes
(avg.) from seismic events for the Greater Caribbean.
NOAA will further improve the Caribbean Tsunami Warning System
based on recommendations cited in: 1P.L. 109-479 (Tsunami Warning and
Education Act of 2007); and the National Academies of Science (NAS) and
NOAA Tsunami Program Assessment Reports.

Improve tsunami detection, forecasting, warnings,
notification, outreach, and mitigation to protect life and
property in the United States; and to enhance and modernize the
existing Pacific Tsunami Warning System to increase coverage,
reduce false alarms, and increase the accuracy of forecasts and
warnings, and to expand detection and warning systems to
include other vulnerable States and United States territories,
including the Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean Sea, and Gulf of Mexico
areas.

From NAS Report: NOAA should explore further the
operational integration of GPS data into Tsunami Warning Center
TWC operations from existing and planned GPS geodetic stations
along portions of the coast of the U.S. potentially susceptible
to near-field tsunami generation including Alaska, Pacific
Northwest, Caribbean and Hawaii.

Mr. Serrano. Okay. Are you at least familiar with past
requests to look at that area as a possible tsunami warning
center?
Secretary Locke. Yes. I am familiar with a request for
additional tsunami warning centers throughout many parts of the
country and parts of the region.
Mr. Serrano. Well after praising you so much I cannot take
that back and I will not. So let me just say that I would love,
before you leave, to put things in motion just to at least to
have the discussion with the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, with
members of Congress, with this committee, as to the possibility
of having this warning center. Because what we have seen in
Japan and what we have seen in other parts of the world it is
no longer a luxury. And as our chairman said, it is a necessity
everywhere we can set on up. And that part of the world is
really not taken care of, that part of the country. So could we
at least set in motion some conversations?
Secretary Locke. I am more than happy to have those
conversations. But again, it all depends on the level of
funding for the budget. Because if we enhance, you know, if the
funding is under H.R. 1 then it is very difficult to make
enhancements in certain parts without making deeper parts in
another part. Even protecting one area of the operations
research facilities budget portion of NOAA which is where the
tsunami and weather forecasting and National Weather Service
all reside. Under H.R. 1 it is a 16 percent reduction from the
2010 enacted level. So if we keep one part completely whole it
means deeper cuts in other aspects of our weather and
operations programs.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you on that. Mr. Chairman, I see your
hand on the----
Mr. Wolf. I was going to say, yes, that is an area. And
when we did the letters, too, we checked in the East Coast. And
it is a problem down in the Caribbean, and particularly because
the beaches are flat, they are not up on bluffs. And so there
is a problem there. And I was going to, but I am going to save
it for some other time, to kind of comment a little bit more on
that. But I would second what the gentleman says of having you
take a look at that.

POVERTY MEASUREMENT

Mr. Serrano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Rather than read my
statement here to the question, let me just ask you to comment
on the new poverty measure that has been discussed at the
Commerce Department. That is a continuing issue in this
country. We find everyday that in the greatest economy in the
world we still have areas of folks with issues of food
availability and poverty in general. What can you tell us about
this new way to measure, if you will?
Secretary Locke. Well that is something that is under
discussion and just trying to inform the American policy
makers, whether it is state, local, federal level, to even
nonprofit organizations, just trying to understand and look at
different ways in which we understand the impact of poverty and
what it means and how to measure that. I think it simply gives
policy makers more ammunition in making very tough decisions.
We are looking at defining what is considered poor in America,
and revising a one-size-fits-all formula that was actually
developed in the 1960s. It could change the estimates, actually
lowering the estimates or even raising the estimates. So it is
not with any prejudged determination or particular outcome, but
just really having a more accurate way in which we understand
what poverty constitutes.

2010 DECENNIAL CENSUS

Mr. Serrano. Right. Mr. Chairman, I know we are on close to
some votes and I want my colleagues to ask some questions. Can
I just ask you a quick question, Mr. Secretary? H.R. 1 and the
cuts that are included in H.R. 1, could that in any way impact
on the rest of the Census information coming out? I know that
is already underway, or was that included in past dollars that
we allocated?
Secretary Locke. Well no, work is already underway for the
2020 Census. Our goal is to make sure that the cost of
administering the 2020 Census per household is lower than it
was for the 2010 Census. So that really means that we have got
to look at the greater use of technology, and we need to start
some of that planning. We need to start with the private sector
on the viability of these technologies. We cannot get into the
position like we were for the 2010 Census when we contracted
for handheld computers, and they did not work, and then we had
to scramble to really make up for it. And that actually added
to the cost.
We also need to look at other ways of trying to get
reliable information. And we also need to test some of these
theories. And on the American Community Survey, that is
something that the business community relies on heavily. And we
want to be able to use some of the theories and methodologies
and almost test them during the annual American Community
Survey in preparation for the 2020 Census.
Mr. Serrano. Right but I was, very briefly, I was referring
specifically to the fact that you probably have the rest of the
year to give out information on the 2010 Census. If H.R. 1
becomes law, heaven forbid, sometime soon, does that affect
that? Or was that information included in dollars that have
been allocated before? In other words, can you finish the work
of the 2010 Census or will H.R. 1 impact that?
Secretary Locke. Well actually what would be of greater
impact would be if a continuing resolution were not passed. As
long as we are continued at the existing levels then we quite
frankly should be able to disseminate the information from the
2010 Census to the states for the redistricting purposes and
for the reapportionment purposes.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Honda.
Mr. Honda. Thank you----
Mr. Wolf. There is a vote. It just began. Mr. Honda.

TSUNAMI WARNING NETWORK

Mr. Honda. Thank you. Let me also add my congratulations to
you, Secretary Locke. I am sure that, the community is very,
the Asian American community is very proud of you. I am sure
your family is too, and I acknowledge that your dad, he is
watching and he is probably feeling real proud about you, too.
So I just want to add that.
And you have done a great job. You are going to do a great
job as Ambassador, not because I am saying so, but because in
Silicon Valley there was quite a few articles after the summit
that had indicated that finally, they said, that we have a
Secretary of Commerce that gets it. Meaning that the Secretary
of Commerce gets what is going on in technology, and the
businesses, and specifically in Silicon Valley. But I think in
general across this country. And I think Congressman Wolf's
district is also a very similar district as mine in terms of
technology.
The question I had, Mr. Secretary, was around Census and I
guess I just want some sort of a quick answer on to be able to
be prepared for 2020 will there be a chart that is going to be
used as a benchmark where we can pace ourselves and look at all
the points that we need to hit before 2020? Having gone through
the 2010 the Administrator had to bear the brunt of the
criticism on things that had not occurred prior to him being
appointed. So I want to avoid that, and be assured that someone
in the Department will lay out a, something like a PERT chart,
program evaluation review chart. That is one question.
The other one is about the tsunami detection. I appreciate
Chairman Wolf's letter that responded to the Indian Ocean
tsunami, but also anticipated the future. And I think that that
is a good thing to do. And I understand that there are thirty-
nine buoys out there now?
Secretary Locke. About thirty-nine, yes.
Mr. Honda. Yes. Seven down to be----
Secretary Locke. Seven or nine that are down for
maintenance.

2020 DECENNIAL CENSUS

Mr. Honda. The question I would have is in order for us to
provide the additional coverage globally and provide that early
detection, do you have any numbers that would reflect the costs
of doing that in order for us to be able to anticipate and
avoid great costs to other countries and ourselves? And that in
my mind is not cutting for savings, but it would be investing
for future cost avoidance. I was wondering whether you had any
sense about that?
Secretary Locke. Well let me just first answer the question
with respect to the planning for the 2020 Census. Planning is
already underway and we are already trying to stand up advisory
committees to really look at what needs to be done for the 2020
Census, what lessons can be learned from the 2010 Census? How
do we really reduce the cost per household from what we spent
on the 2010 Census? And how do we really use technology,
whether it is the internet, and other technologies to reduce
the costs? So that planning is underway and I am sure that they
are developing a timeframe or a time schedule of various
deliverables and projects and we would be happy to share that
with you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Honda. Thank you.
Secretary Locke. That would be used as measurements or
metrics. With respect to tsunamis let me just say that, while
it is on a lot of people's minds in light of the tragic events
in Japan, we know that it is not just the West Coast but as
Chairman Wolf indicated it is also on the Eastern Coast as
well. And as Congressman Serrano indicated, not just the north
but also down in the Caribbean. And we need obviously more
buoys and more detection facilities, more centers. It is all a
matter of budget. And we do know that obviously from what we
saw, and thanks to Chairman Wolf's leadership after the
Indonesian tsunami, that when you have more buoys we were able
to have faster response. We were able to issue the warning
within nine minutes after that earthquake struck Japan last
week.
But it is not just buoys. It is not just the centers. It is
the satellites. It is all the technology that goes with it and
making sure that everything is maintained and up to date and
all linked together. That is what makes the tsunami warning
system effective, and helps save lives.

IMPACT OF BUDGET CUTS

Mr. Honda. Thank you. And I think the line of questioning
here on this panel is along the lines of looking at deficits
and debts. But I think my sense is in this committee,
subcommittee, that there is also a sense that there is going to
be a great return on investments if we make it properly. And
with the current cut again on a 2011 that will have a major
negative impact not only on jobs that I am sure that the
Department of Commerce is set and can create if we continue the
2011 without the cuts. I was just curious about if there is
anything off the top of your head as to the impact on job
creation and the kinds of things that we have talked about
here. Not only saving lives and avoiding future costs, but the
kinds of jobs that we would be looking at that we could be
losing just because we are looking at cuts for cuts sake.
Secretary Locke. Well I think that first of all with
respect to the public safety aspects of the weather service,
whether it is the satellites, predicting hurricanes or
tsunamis, or just snowstorms, it is like a police department or
a fire department of a local community. When you make cutbacks,
there will be consequences. You cannot foresee those now, but
you know that your response times will be down. You will have
less police officers on the street to respond to incidents or
reports of crime. Those are the consequences when you make
those cuts. These are tough choices. And obviously you all as
members of the Congress, the House and the Senate, in
deliberation with the White House have to make these tough
calls.
Let me just say that that is why the President's budget,
2012 budget, is focusing on laying the groundwork and the
conditions for job growth. So many of the economists have
indicated that the Recovery Act did have an impact in creating
jobs, or at least avoiding more layoffs of people and losses of
jobs. And whether it is in farming, or in manufacturing, or in
business sometimes you have to spend a little bit more in order
to prime the pump and get more revenues and increase your
business. You advertise a little bit more to get more market
share. And what the President's budget for 2012, while holding
discretionary spending constant and freezing domestic spending
over the next several years, does put selected enhancements and
increases in programs that he believes will actually
incentivize job creation and get our economy back on its feet
faster.
Programs in R&D, research and development, things that the
private sector is not able to do on its own but with government
assistance will create those next products and technologies
that can be commercialized that can then create more
businesses, help existing businesses grow, and create jobs, to
investments in education. You know, you look at the number of
engineers that other countries including China and in Asia are
producing. Where are the engineers for America? And not every
job requires a four-year degree. Some of it is community
college education, which is why we have more investments in
community college programs. Because for instance, when the
President visited Silicon Valley he talked to some companies
who said that they would be more than glad to move their
manufacturing facilities back from China to the United States
if they had engineers. Not four-year degree engineers, but the
kind of the engineers that work on the assembly line that can
help in the innovation and the production and the lean
manufacturing of those products.
So that is why the President is calling for investments in
education, in R&D, including making permanent the R&D tax
credit and expanding it. To encourage more manufacturing and
more innovation here in America to create jobs. And I think a
lot of the economists have indicated that many of the programs
in the Recovery Act did in fact make a difference in avoiding
further job losses and in fact creating jobs.
Mr. Honda. Thank you. And Mr. Chair, I appreciate the time.
Mr. Wolf. Sure. Mr. Schiff may have to, if you want to ask
another question, because you may have to leave to go back home
to his district. So why do we not, go ahead.

WEATHER SATELLITES

Mr. Schiff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary,
congratulations also on the new post. And I would just urge you
as a representative of a district that relies heavily on
intellectual property to urge the Chinese government to step up
its enforcement particularly in the criminal law area on
intellectual property theft.
But what I wanted to ask you about today, you mentioned the
central importance of the new JPSS in developing National
Weather Service forecasts. The satellite will replace
satellites currently in orbit that are aging fast. Due to
problems in previous programs and delays in getting JPSS
funding because of the continuing resolution we are likely to
be going without this coverage for a year or more. Accurate
long-term weather forecasts and storm warnings are such an
integral part of so many sectors of our economy that this is
truly worrying. What is the chance we will be able to maintain
this coverage? And what will happen to our weather forecasts if
we do not have a budget with the needed funds this year?
Secretary Locke. Well, there will be a gap. I mean, even
with the 2012 budget there will be a short gap. Even if it were
funded at the full level there will be a short gap. And if it
is not funded that gap will lengthen. And what does that gap
mean? We have certain satellites in orbit now that are
degrading. That will basically cease being operational. And so
until the new satellites are launched and operational we will
not have the information that we need to provide as accurate a
forecast as we now provide.
Mr. Wolf. Excuse me, Mr. Secretary? We are down to three
minutes. So if you might, will you call Mr. Schiff, too?
Secretary Locke. Yes.
Mr. Wolf. Next week? And go through this. And then if you
will come back, we are coming back.
Mr. Schiff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Thanks. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. We will be back
in about twenty minutes.
Secretary Locke. Okay. Thank you.
[Recess.]

CYBERSECURITY

Mr. Wolf. The hearing will begin and we will not be
interrupted since they were the last votes. And we will try to
move, you know, fairly fast. And I am going to jump around a
lot because there are a number of budget issues. You know, we
can work with your staff and get some answers, too. But your
Bureau of Industry and Security is responsible for controlling
the export of dual use goods and technologies. At the same time
other countries are attacking Department computer systems to
get similar types of information. Has the Department ever
conducted a strategic analysis of where these breaches, like
for instance China, and export control issues, are coming from?
And who is trying to acquire what technologies, and why? And if
you have not, and I sense that you have not, and I sense that
the previous administration has not, would you do that? Would
you do a study for us and report it to the committee, and maybe
classified? And we would, you know, however you told us to
treat it we would treat it. But if you could do that for us,
but have you ever done one like that?
Secretary Locke. Mr. Chairman, I believe that we actually
have done a lot of analysis of the attacks on not just BIS but
many of our other sites throughout the Department of Commerce.
And--
Mr. Wolf. And why they are doing it? Why they are going
after, what they are going after, government-wide?
Secretary Locke. Well I am not sure that, we could indicate
to you, perhaps privately, all the research that had been
assembled by all the federal agencies with respect to who is
doing what, and perhaps what their motives are. But obviously
it is of concern to us, the frequency of the attacks against
our systems. Which is why the President's 2012 budget does call
for significant enhancements in cybersecurity.
Mr. Wolf. But I mean, we are also looking at it as a way of
knowing what they are targeting. Not only the cyber issue, but
what they are targeting and what technologies they are trying
to gain.
Secretary Locke. That might, with respect, be more
appropriate for other agencies that actually have technical
information that others might want. We are understanding that
the attacks against our systems are simply to understand and
get all the information that we have, in terms of whether it is
policy and----
Mr. Wolf. But are you, but is it, well let us, let us give
you a letter and let us----
Secretary Locke. Sure.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. You know. But we would like to see
you do a study to see why they are going after. I mean, are
they going after NASA because they are trying to do something?
I mean, obviously they may just be using a vacuum cleaner on
certain occasions. But other occasions it is targeted. And what
countries are doing the targeting? And we will also deal with
the FBI, too. But what countries are doing the targeting? And
what they are actually targeting, and why are they targeting it
with regard to technologies?
Secretary Locke. I believe that information does exist. It
is not a study that has been initiated by the Department of
Commerce with respect to why people are attacking the systems
of, let us say, NASA or defense agencies. But I am sure, we
would be more than happy to share whatever information the
federal agencies have with you on that regard?

MANUFACTURING AND THE ECONOMY

Mr. Wolf. Okay. General Electric CEO Jeff Immelt was
recently appointed by the President to chair his Jobs Council,
has publicly stated that for the U.S. to have a sound economy
at least 20 percent of U.S. jobs should be from manufacturing
yet we have less than half that number today. What level of
manufacturing do you believe is healthy and necessary for a
sound economy?
Secretary Locke. Well I do believe that we do not
manufacture as much as we can and that we should. That is why
there are a host of initiatives within Commerce and the other
agencies and throughout the federal government focusing on
that. The President has called for, for instance, increasing
the R&D tax credit and expanding that, making that permanent.
Mr. Wolf. But do you have a percentage? Immelt said 20
percent of our workforce should be in manufacturing.
Secretary Locke. I do not have that percentage.
Mr. Wolf. Could you look and see if you can think about it,
and----
Secretary Locke. Yes, we would be more than happy to get
back to you on that.
[The information follows:]

Manufacturing and the Economy

The U.S. is the world's dominant manufacturing economy. One reason
the U.S. has a lower share of workers in manufacturing compared to
other nations is because U.S. manufacturing labor productivity has
outpaced that of our competitors. In February, U.S. manufacturing
employment was 10.8% of total private employment. Expanding employment
in the manufacturing sector is a top priority of the Administration, as
evidenced by the National Export Initiative.

Mr. Wolf. We understand that the Director of National
Intelligence has commissioned a classified study on the state
of the U.S. manufacturing base. Are you working with him on
this effort?
Secretary Locke. Our folks at the Department of Commerce
are working with the not only, well, we are part of a
collaborative effort on all of these assessments on
manufacturing, including working with, for instance, Ron Bloom,
who is the Special Advisor to the President within the White
House, on manufacturing policy.
Mr. Wolf. And will that be classified or not?
Secretary Locke. I do not know.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Can you tell us, or----
Secretary Locke. We would be more than happy to report
back. I do not know that off the top of my head if that
assessment will be classified.

HUMAN RIGHTS TRAINING

Mr. Wolf. Previously this subcommittee directed the
Department to provide human rights training to ITA employees.
The program lapsed for several years. What is the status of the
human rights training program now? And how many employees got
training last year?
Secretary Locke. I believe that program is ongoing, and I
believe that we have in fact stood up a 24/7 online training
component as well. I believe almost two-thirds of our employees
last year received that training and participated in those
training efforts. But I could get you the exact training. Oh,
actually I have it here. More than 600 commercial service staff
were trained out of about 900. And these were in commercial
missions to fifty countries. And they participated, we had some
twenty-six worldwide training events. But again, we also now
have, for not all who can attend these training sessions, we
now have a 24/7 access, an online learning module that all
employees, that we are making available to all the employees.
Mr. Wolf. Available, or is it mandatory?
Secretary Locke. Well we do have comprehensive training
protocols. And if they are not able to attend the in-person
then we are making those online learning modules available as
well.
Mr. Wolf. But available, or mandatory? That was the
question.
Secretary Locke. I will find out for you there.

Human Rights Training

During 2010 and early 2011, 603 client-facing CS staff were trained
(target for this timeframe was 300), representing 50 countries at 26
worldwide training events.
To ensure global, 24x7 access to the content and to reach those
that could not attend an instructor-led session, an online learning
module was developed. ITA is requiring that all CS client-facing staff
who have not taken the instructor-led course take the online module
this fiscal year.

DEPARTMENT REORGANIZATION

Mr. Wolf. There have been press reports that the White
House will be proposing a major reorganization at the
Department of Commerce and some related agencies. The committee
has not seen any proposals so we are unsure exactly what will
be included. However, one of the proposals is to move the U.S.
Trade Representative into the Commerce Department. Some have
voiced concerns about doing this. Would you tell us about the
proposed reorganization? What are the goals? And what can you
tell us specifically about it?
Secretary Locke. Well there is actually no proposal yet.
The individuals conducting the effort, Jeff Zients, who is the
Deputy at OMB, is still talking to people and meeting with the
various agencies and meeting with stakeholders. The
reorganization is focusing on the export and trade promotion
agencies of the federal government at this point.
Mr. Wolf. Do you expect a legislative proposal will be sent
to Congress this year?
Secretary Locke. I cannot speak for Mr. Jeff Zients. I do
know that the President has asked, or signed an executive order
asking, that the results and the recommendations be delivered
to him within ninety days.
Mr. Wolf. And that would take legislation, is that correct?
Secretary Locke. It depends on the extent of the
recommendations and the proposed reorganization.
Mr. Wolf. How do you, can you explain?
Secretary Locke. Well there are some things that are
executive agency. For instance, the Trade Representative's
Office. I mean, if nothing happens, if it is moving other
things within the Office of the Trade Representative, that
might be done by executive order. If it is dealing with the
statutory agencies like Commerce or other agencies then I am
sure that would require congressional action. But nothing has
yet been produced. Nothing has been shown to any of the
agencies now involved in export or trade promotion. Right now
Mr. Zients and his team are simply talking to people and
gathering facts and assessing people's viewpoints.

BIS FUNDING LEVELS

Mr. Wolf. Now the Department is, this is the Bureau of
Industry and Security, the Department is requesting $111
million for the Bureau of Industry and Security. This amount is
about $11 million higher than the 2010 enacted level. The
increase of about $11 million will support thirty-seven
additional positions on the Office of Export Enforcement. Of
this amount $10 million will support counterproliferation and
export enforcement activities with respect to their work with
sensitive U.S. dual use goods and technologies. An increase of
$3 million will support an increase in the number of staff
involved in counterproliferation, counterterrorism, and
national security programs. Both of these increases are in
response to the recommendation of the 2000 Report of the
Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the U.S. To what
extent can you tell us in this open session what worries you
more, rogue states or lone terrorists?
Secretary Locke. Let me just say that we need to make sure
that when U.S. companies export, they are not exporting to
inappropriate destinations. And that even if they export to
destinations that are deemed friendly to the United States that
those exports are not reexported to countries that wish to do
us harm. And that is why the President has called for enhancing
our security measures to make sure that any items that might
have military application do not go to those ultimately who
wish to do the United States and our allies harm.

U.S. PTO PLANNED FUNDING CARRYOVER

Mr. Wolf. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office is again
proposing language to allow it to spend fees in excess of
appropriations, so-called buffer language. PTO is also
requesting authority to collect $2.7 billion in fees while at
the same time their spending proposal is for only $2.6 billion.
The difference of about $107 million is being proposed by the
PTO as a reserve to be carried over from fiscal year 2012 to
2013. PTO anticipates carrying over $342 million in fiscal year
2013. Please explain why PTO is expecting to carry over this
level of funding? Why would not PTO spend these funds to work
now, and work down the backlog?
Secretary Locke. We are trying to expend as much money as
we can as fees come in. But we need to try to maintain a steady
state, just like any company would have, to have a steady state
of operations so that if the following year we suddenly have a
drop in applications we do not want to rely on that money
coming in the door at that point. Because we need to make sure
that we have people and the staff available to handle all those
applications that came in a year ago, two years ago, three
years, and four years ago. So it is really trying to have an
even flow of revenues and expenditures so that we can gradually
ramp up and hire additional staff and use more technology to
process all of these patent applications that have been waiting
in a much faster timeframe.

U.S. PTO PATENT AUTOMATION

Mr. Wolf. In 2005 GAO reported that PTO had spent over $1
billion between 1983 and 2004 for patent automation activities
which did not achieve a fully integrated electronic patent
process. Between fiscal year 2006 to October of 2010 PTO spent
another $47.9 million on another IT modernization effort on a
system that has not been effective. So PTO is now developing
its new end-to-end patent system and its budget includes funds
to continue these efforts. And we understand that Under
Secretary Kappos, he said that he is confident that PTO is on
the right path with this. The arrangement might be fine with
him at PTO, or it might not. But if it is, what happens when he
leaves?
Secretary Locke. Well that is why we have undertaken a
completely comprehensive review and change is how we are doing
everything, focusing on both the line staff and career
managers. The career staff who, you know, basically are the
heart and soul of the Patent and Trademark Office. And the
politicals come and go but we need to make sure that we have a
highly energized, committed, dedicated career force that are
people to sustain things.
Mr. Wolf. But do you have the technical expertise? Because
the same thing happened at the FBI on their computer system.
They would bring somebody in, they would go. The cost overruns
were very, very high. Are you confident? Have you the
absolutely confidence in people that if he leaves, or should he
leave, that it will continue? Because you have had these
occasions where the money was pretty much not giving you what
you thought you were going to get for it.
Secretary Locke. And that has always been a concern of
mine, and that is why we are embarked on a Commerce-wide review
of our entire acquisition programs. Making sure that the people
who design these and make these requests are actually realistic
and that the people who go out and do the procurement are able
to ask the questions as well and not just accept the wish lists
of those seeking the systems.
But going back to the Patent and Trademark Office, there
has been a substantial change in the entire leadership, the top
leadership at the Department, or the Patent and Trademark
Office, with career people in place. We are very confident,
very pleased with the caliber of people that we have. And if
you look at it it is not just David Kappos but the line staff
and the managers who have been really responsible for driving
the organizational management changes that have resulted in a
dramatic reduction of the backlog even as the number of
applications has increased dramatically as well.
We believe we have this new culture of career and line
staff and even political appointees who are united in the
mission of reducing the backlog, making sure that our
investments in technology really work and pay off. So I am
confident that even if Mr. Kappos were to leave that the
reforms that he has initiated, with the support of line staff
and labor and the management teams, will survive.
Mr. Wolf. I want to go a few more, and Mr. Fattah will go
over. But the PTO and China, I believe we are putting ourselves
at a disadvantage by making U.S. patent applications available
online. I understand that making applications available online
is required by law. But I think we should be publishing
abstracts only. Please provide me with the underlying authority
whereby U.S. posts its patent applications online.
Secretary Locke. I will have to get back to you and get you
that legal authority, sir.
[The information follows:]

U.S. Patent and Trademark Office

Congress provided for publication of patent applications at
eighteen months from their filing date in the Domestic Publication of
Foreign Filed Patent Applications Act of 1999, Sec. 4502(a), now in
statute as 35 U.S.C. 122(b). This publication requirement is consistent
with other major Patent Offices around the world.

Mr. Wolf. What thoughts do you have? How can we stop China
from counterfeiting the products that they copy from the patent
applications that are available online?
Secretary Locke. Well I think that intellectual property
violations in China and other countries is a major concern.
American companies are losing billions of dollars of lost sales
and opportunities as a result of piracy, counterfeiting, and/or
lack of aggressive enforcement of intellectual property rights.
It is a high priority for the Department of Commerce with
respect to China and other countries. It is obviously going to
be a major issue for the next ambassador to China. And we do
have ongoing programs between the Department of Commerce, our
Patent and Trademark Office, our General Counsel Office, in
trying to improve the rule of law with exchange programs in
China. But----

TRADE ENFORCEMENT WITH CHINA

Mr. Wolf. But Mr. Secretary, President Obama had a state
dinner for Hu Jintao when he had the 2010 Nobel Prize Winner in
jail. And his wife was not even allowed out of her apartment.
She was under house arrest. So I hope you do not go there with
a pollyannaish viewpoint that, you know, that we have these
exchange programs, and we are doing this, and we are doing
that.
I mean as of now, two years ago when I was there, there was
one person working on human rights and these issues in the
embassy and they had fifteen people working on trade. To think
that you can trust the Chinese just because you have a program,
I mean, I hope you are going to go over there with a more
hardheaded approach with regard to that.
Secretary Locke. Well I think if you look back at
everything that I have done at the Department of Commerce with
respect to our negotiations, our actions against China in terms
of the trade enforcement cases, to the sanctions against China
on tires, all that we have done with respect to trying to get
the Chinese successfully to back off on their government
procurement contracts that favor their homegrown innovation, to
our discussions at the Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade.
I mean, we have not been pollyannaish at all.
Mr. Wolf. Have you been successful?
Secretary Locke. I think we have had success. Is it as much
as we would like? No. Do we want more progress in China, and do
we want faster progress in China? Obviously, yes.
Mr. Wolf. Do you trust the Chinese government on these
issues?
Secretary Locke. It will always require constant vigilance
and monitoring, sir.
Mr. Wolf. Was that a yes, or no, or maybe?
Secretary Locke. Well we are seeing progress in some fronts
from the Chinese. Is it as much as we would like, no. Is it as
fast as we would like, no.
Mr. Wolf. Does it raise the little question if the Nobel
Prize winner is in jail, and they have all the Catholic bishops
in jail, and the Protestant pastors in jail, and they are doing
that? That there is an element of concern with regard to what
they are doing on economic issues?
Secretary Locke. Well that is why we have consistently
pressed the Chinese on these issues. That is why we have
various forums by which we can raise these issues. We are
making progress. Again, it is not as fast and as much as we
would like. But that doesn't mean that we give up. And
certainly we go in with a very realistic eye and view of what
is happening and what needs to be done.
And, of course, that includes human rights. And you and I
have chatted about this before. And the policy of the United
States is very clear. We very much support more openness and
democracy and respect for human rights, including people's
ability to worship.
Mr. Wolf. I think you are going to get more letters from me
in China as ambassador than you get as the Secretary of
Commerce on these issues. Will you go worship at a house church
when you are there?
Secretary Locke. I look forward to the opportunity of
worshiping in China.
Mr. Wolf. But I said at a house church, at a non-
recognized, not a government run but a house church. Will you
go worship at a house church?
Secretary Locke. That is something that I will consider,
sir.
Mr. Wolf. But why can't you just say--I mean, can you
imagine if you were to say yes, how that would inspire the 50
million house church Chinese who are yearning? I wrote the
previous administration. Nobody there would go. Why wouldn't
you go to worship at a house church? You can worship at all
churches. But why wouldn't you at one Sunday go with a house
church?
Secretary Locke. Well, again, how I practice my religion is
not something for the American people to examine.
Mr. Wolf. It isn't for the American people. It is to stand
with those who are being persecuted, who are being hauled away.
And the American embassy in China ought to be an island of
freedom.
And if the American ambassador won't even--I will go to
different denominations just to show up to be there. Woody
Allen says up to 90 percent of life is showing up. Just in
showing up and being there, particularly in a church where they
are cracking down, and taking people away, and putting them in
prison.
It doesn't raise my comfort. I am surprised. I knew it was
a home run. You would have said, yes, I would be glad to
worship at a house church when I go. So by your answer I get
the indication that you will not worship at a house church.
Secretary Locke. That is not what I am saying, sir.
Mr. Wolf. What do you think your chances are, 50-50, 75-25?
Secretary Locke. It is not something that I think I should
be stating in public.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Ambassador, if you don't publicly identify
with the persecuted in China, then more people will be
persecuted. To say that you raise this issue privately but not
publicly is a copout.
If you are a Catholic bishop in jail, you want the American
ambassador to publicly speak out, not whisper privately in a
private meeting. If you are in Tibet and you are in Drapchi
Prison being tortured and you are a Buddhist monk or nun, you
want the American embassy and the American ambassador to speak
out publicly. If you are being persecuted as a Uighur you want
the American ambassador to speak out publicly.
What you have said raises serious concern with regard to me
now for you going to China, because if you won't stand publicly
with the dissidents. Ronald Reagan said, ``The words in the
Constitution were a covenant with the people of the entire
world.'' The people in Tiananmen. The words that were in the
Constitution in 1787 really were the same words with regard to
what should apply in China.
But now if you are going to be politically sort of well I
am not going to do this, I am shocked. I am shocked to say that
you would not even go and attend a house church. Particularly
when we know a particular house church is being persecuted.
Secretary Locke. I did not say that, sir.
Mr. Wolf. Well I am asking you. Will you go and attend? I
take out the word ``worship,'' attend, show up, be there in a
house church, one of the house churches that is being
persecuted where they crack you down.
Secretary Locke. That is something that I will seriously
consider.
Mr. Wolf. Will you advocate for the persecuted in China?
Secretary Locke. Yes.
Mr. Wolf. Will you visit the people that are picked up in
prison? People who are dissidents who are picked up, had you
been the ambassador now, would you have advocated for the Nobel
Prize winner's wife?
Secretary Locke. I am not the ambassador now.
Mr. Wolf. I said had you been the ambassador.
Secretary Locke. That is something that I would have to
consider.
Mr. Wolf. That is weak. That is very, very weak. If you
were in prison, if you were a Buddhist monk, if you were a
Protestant pastor, if you were a Catholic bishop, you would
want the American embassy to advocate for you. And if the
American embassy doesn't advocate for you.
Your embassy ought to be an island of freedom. And if it is
not an island of freedom, your time in China will have been
wasted. It will be a failure. And this administration does not
have a very strong record of advocating, speaking out for human
rights and religious freedom in China and in other places.
And I would hope, when I saw that you were appointed there,
I thought well, you know, I think he understands that. I think
he will be somebody who will advocate and speak out.
Secretary Locke. I believe that the position of the United
States government with respect to human rights around the
world, including China, is very clear. We very much support as
a government greater religious freedom, including the house
churches. And we encourage people to attend those house
churches and all forms of worship within China.
Mr. Wolf. I am going to go to Mr. Fattah now. But, you
know, during the Reagan administration, when the Secretary of
State or people in the Reagan administration would go to
Moscow, they would meet with the dissidents. They would invite
the dissidents in to the American embassy. They would then
visit the dissidents, the families of the dissidents who were
in prison. They would even attempt sometimes to visit the
dissidents that were in prison.
Do you think that is a good model?
Secretary Locke. I think that what others have done has
been very commendable.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Fattah.

WORLD MANUFACTURING LEADER

Mr. Fattah. Thank you. I want to revisit something from the
hearing before the break. Frank Vargo, the leader at the
National Association of Manufacturers, says that, ``The United
States remains the manufacturing leader in the world. We are
the largest manufacturer in the world despite the inaccurate
reports that were referenced in the  Financial Times.''
And I am sure the Chairman was not aware of this when he
referenced it, but that report in the Financial Times is built
off inaccurate data. The United States still outproduces,
substantially, China in manufacturing. We have 21 percent, they
have 15 percent. And there is no possibility, even though there
is some months of gap in the data, that they could overtake the
United States.
So I want to start here, because this is about the United
States winning. We have been winning as has been the case for
110 years in manufacturing. And the objective here and the work
of your Department, which has been extraordinary on behalf of
manufacturers, has helped position us to continue to win.
And I don't mean win in a relative sense. I am not
interested in 300 million Americans doing as well or better
than 300 million of some other country. I mean no matter the
size of the country. China is a much larger country. We still
lead them. And we still lead the world. And we lead India with
a billion people.
Now this is, you know, a competitive circumstance. And, you
know, competition is great. But winning is the most important
issue when we are talking about quality of life and wealth.
And so I want to make the record clear that even though
this inaccurate report was made, that not only is it inaccurate
in that we lead but we lead substantially. And that the United
Nations statistic division compiles global data on
manufacturing and verifies that we have 21 percent of all
global manufacturing output. And that when compared, for
instance, in this matter to China, they have 15 percent.
So what we want to do is we want to--I said this in the
hearing the other day, and I will restate it now that the
Manufacturing Extension Partnership program is my number one
priority in this bill. And all of us have priorities.
My Ranking Member is very interested in a lot of issues.
But he is very interested in the salmon and, you know, the $65
million that is being allocated there in terms of the work that
you are doing in a state that you are quite familiar with in
terms of salmon. And you heard my other colleague talk about
the Gulf and the importance there.
So, you know, we all have our priorities. And the Chairman
has his, which is admirable in the passion that he brings to
the question of human rights in China. But if you are in the
role of the Ambassador for the United States, you will be
carrying the official position of the United States Government,
which is set by the Administration.
And we understand that you would not--you would at all
times adhere to that responsibility as previous ambassadors
have done. And I would also note that previous ambassadors have
gone on to do great things. President Bush was the former
ambassador to China. He became President of the United States.
And I note that we have another ambassador who may be headed at
least into the competitive realm for that. So great things for
those who are ambassadors to China after they move on from
their post.
But notwithstanding all of this, I want to walk--go back to
the issues of the Department relative to American business and
commerce. It was reported in the Wall Street Journal in
December that American businesses had their largest profits
ever in the history that they have been recorded.
And I want to commend the Department for your work. And I
want to give you a chance to outline some of the things that
have been done under your leadership to help American business
do business, not just here at home but abroad.
Secretary Locke. Well first of all let me just say that
America still is the most productive manufacturing country in
the world. When you look at the hundreds of millions of people
in China that are involved in manufacturing and how we are able
to have that same amount of output value of manufacturing with
just a fraction of the employees, it speaks volumes about the
productivity and the ingenuity of American workers. And that if
on a level playing field we can outcompete just anybody else.
Nonetheless, we need to focus on increasing manufacturing.
And we need to focus on exports. And that is why the
President's National Export Initiative seeks to double U.S.
exports just in the next five years, creating several and
supporting millions of new jobs in the process. And we know
that jobs related to export on average pay 15 percent more than
the typical wage in America. So it is a source of good paying
jobs, family wage jobs.
The President is looking at corporate tax reform. He is
working with many of the top people within Treasury and his
economic council on corporate tax reform that would address
some of these issues and create greater incentives for
company's to bring their foreign earnings back to the United
States.
But as the President indicated, he wants to do this without
adding to the deficit, which means lowering the tax rate, and
closing--expanding the base, and eliminating a lot of loopholes
and various exemptions.

COMMERCE REVENUE OPPORTUNITIES

Mr. Fattah. Well I want to commend both you and the
President for the appointments to the Competitiveness Council,
because obviously Brian Roberts from Philadelphia was appointed
and also Ellen Kullman who is the CEO of DuPont, which is our
neighbor right there in Delaware. So I know you got two great
people from our region of the country. And I know that the
Competitiveness Council is really drilling down on some of
these issues.
You have done a lot of work on--the Administration has done
a lot of work on helping small businesses. You have done 17
separate tax breaks, tax cuts for small businesses. And we see
a real increase in small business activity.
And so I think that there is a lot more that we can look to
in terms of the work that has been done to really position this
very significant increase in profits. Now we have had 12 months
of net increase in private sector jobs. And today's job numbers
in terms of unemployment claims were very, very good, well
below 400,000. So there is a lot of work that is being done.
I want to say that in terms of the questions of the
appropriations, your overall budget is less than three-tenths
of one percent out of every dollar that we are going to spend
as a Federal Government. And yet it is the--it is the kind of
seed corn, if you would, for the world's greatest economy.
That is, at the Commerce Department you are really at the
very forefront of trying to make sure that our ability to
continue to generate well over 130 million jobs and have the
kind of profits that we have seen really is, in many ways, you
know, we are making a small investment as a country.
But I want to ask you this question. Much of the services
of the Department help business. Obviously it is the Commerce
Department. I mean so even when we talk about the weather
service, two thirds of our economy is weather dependent. I
mean, it is very important about whether or not we invest in
these satellites, because it is very important that we are able
to forecast what is going to happen.
I am interested as you are doing some of your portfolio
inside the Commerce Department, whether there are opportunities
to gain revenues from some of the services that you are
providing and ways in which the Department can still provide
the immediate help to businesses, as you do, for instance, in
the patent office revenues.
And whether you think that is a direction that we should
move at least in terms of examining or given the fact that it
is such a small amount in the federal budget, that that is
really not something that we should focus a lot of our time on.
Secretary Locke. There are a variety of fee-for-service
programs within the Department of Commerce, even within our
International Trade Administration on Export Promotion. There
is a highly valued and very well spoken for gold key program
that is a very intensive matchmaking service where our foreign
trade specialists will actually go find and line up eight,
nine, or ten potential buyers or customers for a U.S. company.
We will actually do the pre-investigation due diligence
work and make sure it is a reliable potential buyer or customer
for that U.S. company. Then that U.S. company will let us go to
the U.S. consulate or trade office in Belgium or in Budapest,
Hungary, and sit there. We will bring those eight or nine or
ten pre-vetted companies to that American company. It is almost
like what we call speed dating. Many companies have said that
their revenues and their sales have come from the matchmaking
services that we provide.
Now that is a fee-for-service program. And, in fact, it is
so highly thought of that both UPS and FedEx are helping pay
for that service for companies, some of their customers that
they identify are really ripe for more exporting from the
United States. And so those are some of the programs that we
have.
Now we, for instance have a lot of weather and other
information and statistical data that we provide. And that is
something that we are more than happy to look at and consider
as to whether or not some of those should be on a fee for
service.
But, you know, some of the information that we also provide
is very valuable to the public and is used not just by
commercial purposes. That very same information might be used
by independent researchers or scientists. And so how you draw a
line between public safety purposes, independent researchers
versus those who might want to use that to make a profit, that
is certainly an area that should be considered.

DEPARTMENTAL BUDGET CUTS

Mr. Fattah. But it is not an area that I think we should
rush into. But I do think that to the degree that we can make
a--you know, that we can analyze it and that it makes sense.
Now, again, I don't think that the argument is that we are
doing too much. I think that there is an argument perhaps that
we should be doing more. I think we should be doing a lot more
to help manufacturers.
I think we should be doing a lot more looking at the
demographics of the country to make sure that women and youth,
all we are seeing over here two years is a significant uptick
in the number of women going into business. But we have, you
know, other demographic realities in which we have had sectors
in African-American and Latino communities and Native American
communities in which they have not always had the access to
capital and the opportunities presented. But that could be a
significant part of our economic base.
So I think that we need to be doing--you know, we at least
need to look at it. But I think we ought to be careful. You
know, we don't want to--you know, we have to take care of the
goose. And American business is the most profitable ever. We
have the lead in manufacturing in a substantial way over
countries with much larger populations. The administration has
set in place more than a dozen and a half tax cuts for
businesses.
So you have done a great deal. And with the Competitiveness
Council, it has opportunities to do even more. I think that the
regulatory reform that has been put in place will or at least
they will look at regulations is an important one.
I want to ask you this question. The President, and you sit
in the cabinet, has asked for two rounds of cuts earlier in
this process. He first asked for the departments to look. And
you came back with some $20 billion in cuts. And then there was
$119 billion in cuts found by the cabinet members.
And even though Senator McConnell, at that point said that
that was a paltry amount of cuts, I guess in comparison to the
efforts that we are engaged in now, it was a very significant
amount of cuts.
I want to know in those earlier rounds when the--under the
President's direction, you know, rather they were--you already
kind of cut some of the edges around at the Department. And now
we are really getting ready to cut into very important areas.
We are trading off tsunami warnings versus hurricane
warnings from satellites. We are in a touchy area. And we do
have a responsibility to the public that is beyond the question
of whether we cut a dollar here or a dollar there. So if you
could respond about the earlier round of cuts that were dealt
with in the administration.
Secretary Locke. Well let me just say that from day one the
President has impressed upon all of us the need to really be as
efficient and effective as possible, to be wise stewards of the
American taxpayer dollars. And it is something that I have
prided myself on as a former governor of the state of
Washington where we had to go through some very painful budget
exercises and make these tough, tough decisions. So I
understand the dilemma that you all face.
I think that we cannot ever take the approach of making
across the board cuts. There are some things you want to
enhance while you make deeper cuts someplace else. And you go
to your strengths. And those things that are not as efficient,
as effective, not really providing the results, those perhaps
ought to be eliminated as opposed to across the board cuts.
And I can tell you that in this 2012 budget we have made
difficult decisions. But we have come up with almost a quarter
billion dollars of cuts, of efficiencies through acquisition
reform, taking advantage of IT but actually eliminating
programs. And the proposal is to, for instance, on the Malcolm
Baldrige Award to eventually move that off to the private
sector and the foundation. But we are going to do that over a
period of time.
So we are willing to make those tough decisions. At the
same time, I think that it is important that we, as the
President has called for a freeze, a five-year freeze, on
discretionary domestic spending. In that freeze there are
enhancements. But those are offset by deep cuts elsewhere.
And I think that what the President has proposed by way of
focusing on education, research and development, innovation,
working with the private sector to hasten the discovery of new
technologies, oftentimes technologies that they are not able to
do on their own or the research that they are not able to
embark on their own. We are able to incite, excuse me, incent
that discovery, hasten it, which leads to new products,
benefits to our quality of life and creation of jobs.
That is why I think that the President's 2012 budget is
very strategic, very focused. And his motto is we want to out
build, out educate, and out innovate the other countries,
because we know that our competitors are very focused.
And that is why the President has also called for corporate
tax reform that will lower the tax rate and provide the
incentives for more manufacturing and economic growth to occur
in this country.
Mr. Fattah. Well I am glad that we have moved away from the
notion that we can have--you know, there were earlier
administrations and opinion leaders who were trying to convince
us that we were going to have an information-based or service-
based-only economy and that manufacturing was somehow better
done elsewhere.
So to have an administration that is focused, and that is
excited about manufacturing here in America, and is celebrating
it, and that understands that it is connected to our long-term
viability as a country. It is also connected obviously to our
national security. I mean we can't just give away all of our
manufacturing capability.
I think the work that you are doing is important. And I
want to thank you. And, you know, I think that the work you
have done both at the county level and as governor and
obviously you have distinguished yourself as Secretary of
Commerce. And I wish you well in your future endeavors.
Secretary Locke. Thank you.

WORLD MANUFACTURING LEADER

Mr. Wolf. I am going to read you something. And just
because Mr. Fattah said he calls the NAM and he gets somebody
to say something, it doesn't make it true. And so we are going
to check on this and put this in the record.
Financialtimes.com, Financial Times, Peter Marsh, and we
are going to get the full study. And I want it to be opposite.
That is why I think this administration--we are looking for
things where we differ. I think we differ strongly on this.
This administration has not done a very good job with regard to
manufacturing. This administration has done a miserable job
when it comes to the debt and the deficit.
But I read the article. It says, ``China has become the
world's top manufacturing country by output, returning the
country to the position it occupied in the early 19th century
and ending the U.S.'s 110-year run as the largest goods
producer.''
I don't want it to be that way. I have a manufacturing bill
that we are trying to move through this Congress. It goes on to
say that, ``The change is revealed in a study released on
Monday by IHS Global Insight, a U.S.-based economics
consultancy, which estimates that China last year accounted for
19.8 percent of world manufacturing output, fractionally ahead
of the U.S. with 19.4 percent.''
China's return to the top is the ``closing of a 500-year
cycle in economic history,'' said Robert Allen of Nuffield
College, Oxford, a leading economic historian.
Deborah Wince-Smith, chief executive of the Council on
Competitiveness, a Washington-based business group, said the
U.S. ``should be worried'' by China taking over a position that
the country has occupied since 1895.
And then it goes on to say the figures were derived from
data gathered by national statistic agencies around the world
and have been published several months ahead of the equivalent
comparative figures that will come out for government bodies
such as the UN and the World Bank.
So just because a guy at the NAM says it, I mean, we are
going to put this in the record. So, Mr. Fattah and Mr.
Secretary, you may not be right. I want you to be right, but
you may not be right. And just because something is said at a
Congressional hearing based on a telephone call does not----
Mr. Fattah. Mr. Chairman, if you would yield for one
second.
Mr. Wolf. I will, but I want to finish.
Mr. Fattah. I didn't make any telephone call. This is a
statement that was made on March 14th.
Mr. Wolf. Well maybe----
Mr. Fattah. It had nothing to do with our hearing.
Mr. Wolf. Maybe he was wrong.
Mr. Fattah. And I am just saying, I don't want you to think
that I went and made a phone call when I didn't.
Mr. Wolf. Well I did. But I don't think it now if you tell
me. Also I think the gentleman lives in my district, and he is
actually a friend of mine. But he may very well be wrong on
this.
Also we having Rising Above the Gathering Storm, which I
was involved with helping set up and working with Norm
Augustine, is as United States share of global high-tech
exports dropped from 21 percent to 14 percent while China's
share grew from 7 percent to 20 percent, so high-tech 21
percent to 14 percent drop. China goes from 7 percent to 20
percent.
It says the national debt grew from $8 trillion to $13
trillion. Federal debt per citizen increased and then it goes
on. China then talks about graduating more engineers, 700,000.
We only graduated 70,000.
For the last five years, we have been working on this
issue. And as chairman of this committee, we reversed the
decline with regard to the investment in math and science and
physics and chemistry and biology, and all that.
But the Gathering Storm indicates that really what the
Secretary said may not be right. And we will get the full data
that comes with this.
But, Mr. Secretary, if you are the Secretary of Commerce,
we don't want China to be number one. But they may have
surpassed us. And there is a Simon and Garfunkel song, The
Boxer, that says ``a man hears what he wants to hear and
disregards the rest.''
We cannot disregard that. If somebody has a problem, you
don't want to go whistling through the graveyard saying, well,
it is not a problem. We are always number one when we are
falling. I don't want to see us in decline. I want to see us
ascend. I want us to be the dominant power for economic reasons
and for freedom and liberty.
So Mr. Vargo from the NAM may very well be wrong. And we
will submit that in the record.
Secondly, we will also submit points from the Gathering
Storm with other data showing, expressing my concern with
regard to the manufacturing base. I have a bill in. We have
asked the administration to comment. We get no answer, so we
are going to try to move ahead. Mark Warner is going to
cosponsor it with me in the Senate.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. I have even raised it with you. We want a
repatriation program to put a policy in to bring these jobs
back. I can't get anything out of the administration. I heard
you talk about jobs, but I can't even get a comment on it. I
can't even get anybody to write back. And then I will hear the
President roll out and talk about jobs.
We have a bill in. And finally Mark Warner is going to--we
are going to push this bill. And we are going to try to pass it
to bring real manufacturing jobs back.
Secondly, on the deficit and the debt, the President has
failed. Period. And I want to read for the record a letter that
Senator Coats put in. Senator Coats today led a group of 23
Republican Senators in sending a letter to the White House
calling on President Obama to show ``strong leadership, address
the financial crisis, and entitlement programs.'' This letter
comes on the heels of Coats' return speech.
In the letter to the President, the senators wrote,
``Federal expenditures on Social Security, Medicare and
Medicaid are expected to double over the coming decade and
represent an unsustainable portion of total government
spending. In order to ensure the long-term viability of this
program, it is imperative that you lead a bipartisan effort to
address these challenges.''
And then it goes on to say, and I will quote at the end and
put the full letter in the record, ``last year's National
Commission on Fiscal Responsibility,'' which I have said that I
will support. I didn't set it up. This idea came from Jim
Cooper and Conrad and Gregg. And I hailed the President when he
established it. But he has walked away from it.
``Last year's National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility
and Reform marked an important first step in identifying a
potential path forward.'' Durbin and Coburn together, ``Strong
leadership is needed now to advance possible solutions to
ensure that our entitlement programs can serve both current and
future generations. Without action to begin addressing the
deficit, it will be difficult, if not impossible, for us to
support a further increase in the debt ceiling. House Speaker
John Boehner this month offered to partner with you in a
nonpartisan effort. We join in the Speaker's offer, and urge
you to lead.''
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. It is time for the President to lead this
Congress and this Nation in the critical efforts to strengthen
our country's long-term fiscal security. And the President has
not led. And by not leading, he has abandoned the fight. He is
walking away. He is walking away from the fundamental issue
that will have an impact on our children, and our
grandchildren, and all of us alive.
And then lastly, and then I want to end this hearing,
because I am going to submit the rest for the record. What I
want to tell you I am disappointed in your answer with regard
to whether you would go to a house church or not.
China is the number one supporter of the genocide, the
genocide in Sudan. I was the first Member of the House to go to
Sudan and saw with my own eyes the genocide, what was taking
place and still takes place against women, and men, and
children in Darfur.
China, the country that you are going to be the ambassador
to is the number one genocidal supporter of the Darfur
government. And Bashir, the head of Sudan, is under indictment
by the International Criminal Court. The Congress in the
previous administration said what is taking place in Darfur is
genocide. Genocide.
I am going to write you a letter after you get the
ambassadorship. I am going to ask you where you are going. I
will get a guy to call you. I don't know if you will take his
call or not, but his name is Bob Fu, to call you and invite you
to go to a Catholic church, a non-recognized church, a church
connected to where maybe a bishop is in jail or under house
arrest, for you to show--to start to show up. And if you don't
want to worship, just to be there, to stand there, to identify.
I am not Buddhist, but I go with Buddhist monks. And when I
went to Tibet, I went back into the monasteries to identify, to
let them know that I cared enough. I cared enough so I went. So
we are not going to ask you to worship. And I am not going to
ask you what your language is, what your religion is. But I am
going to ask you to go to Tibet and stand with the Buddhists
who are being persecuted. And go into a monastery in Tibet.
And then I am going to ask you to go with the Muslims, the
Uighurs, and go ride a triath of that area and stand with them.
And then I am going to ask you to go to a Catholic church where
there is a Catholic bishop in jail to stand with them. And then
I am going to ask you to go to a house church. Where there is
house church leaders who have been tortured, who have been
taken away and are in prison.
And then I am going to ask you to visit the Nobel Prize
winner's wife, to go visit her. And then I am going to ask you
on the 4th of July to open up the doors of the embassy and let
the embassy be an island of freedom where dissidents can come
to stand with the American ambassador.
And if you do that, I will hail you. But we are going to
give you the opportunity. And we are going to wear you down. We
are going to write you day in and day out. We are going to ask
you when the dissidents come back from here to send people out
to the airport to meet him. We are going to ask you to go into
the jails, because if you don't, you will have failed. If you
do, you will be the most successful Ambassador.
And lastly, and I am not going to ask you--embarrass you to
ask this question. But I hope when you leave, you won't do what
many of the other American ambassadors do. I hope you won't go
out and represent the Chinese government.
The hearing is adjourned.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Wednesday, March 2, 2011.

U.S. PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE

WITNESS

HON. DAVID KAPPOS, UNDER SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY AND DIRECTOR OF THE U.S. PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE

Opening Statement by Chairman Wolf

Mr. Wolf. The hearing will begin. We welcome Secretary
Kappos. In fiscal year 2012 PTO estimates it will collect $2.7
billion in fees. Of this amount, $2.4 billion is from base fee
collections and another $263 million represents an estimated 15
percent surcharge on patents that PTO would like to collect to
address the current backlog. The spending estimate is about
$819 million, or 43 percent, higher than the 2010 level. Your
fee collections will in part support 11,137 FTEs, including
1,500 new hires in fiscal year 2012 to address the backlog. PTO
anticipates that it will need to hire about 3,400 patent
examiners between 2011 and fiscal year 2013 to address the
backlog.
The PTO is clearly a driver for the economy but you
certainly have some challenges ahead. We understand that as of
February 24, 2011 the backlog of applications that have not
been touched is 718,000 applications. We have a number of
questions but before that I recognize the Ranking Member, Mr.
Fattah.

Opening Statement by Mr. Fattah

Mr. Fattah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And let me thank you
for convening this very important hearing on a subject that is
critically important to our economy and to the President's call
to focus on innovation. Obviously it is intertwined in its
connections to the patent, and to having the Under Secretary
here to testify. And I am very pleased to see that there is a
compromise in the works around authorization, and moving
forward, there probably are still a few hiccups down this road,
and maybe even some questions that we will have about it. But
it seems like it is essentially a growing consensus that what
you have argued for, as people are not coming to grips with
that. We need to move forward. And even in this time of
discussion around cuts, I think there is broad bipartisan
agreement that this is an area where we need to invest in terms
of additional resources. And since it is a fee-generated
operation, and those who are paying the fee are even for doing
more. So it is a great day for us to come together and get into
the details of this. And I know the Chairman is very
interested, and I am interested, in your testimony. So I will
yield back. And I thank the Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Fattah. Secretary Kappos, you can
proceed as you see appropriate.

Opening Statement by Undersecretary Kappos

Mr. Kappos. Well thank you, Chairman Wolf, Ranking Member
Fattah, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for this
opportunity to discuss the USPTO's operations and our programs
and initiatives, and the President's 2012 budget request to
support those efforts.
Innovation continues to be a principal driver of economic
growth and job creation in the United States. We at the USPTO
are proud of the role that we play in serving America's
innovators and granting the patents and registering the
trademarks they need to secure investment capital, and to build
companies, and to bring new products and services into the
marketplace. The work that we do at USPTO directly contributes
to strengthening our economy and creating jobs, and it helps us
move forward toward the President's goal of winning the future
by out-innovating our economic competitors.
To effectively carry out our mission, the USPTO must be
well-run and appropriately funded. Consistent with the
directive from Secretary of Commerce Locke, our overriding goal
is to focus our resources more effectively on improving overall
operations and reducing the time it takes to get a patent.
Now I am pleased to report that during last year the USPTO
has increased patent production, reformed key processes, and
improved quality. During this time we also developed and issued
a metrics based strategic plan to strengthen the capacity of
the USPTO to ensure that our resources are appropriately
focused on our strategic goals. And these accomplishments have
helped us to begin to reduce the significant backlog of pending
patent applications.
Mr. Chairman, the President's fiscal year 2012 budget
provides the USPTO with the funds we need to reduce the patent
application backlog and pendency levels, improve patent
quality, and make necessary investments in our information
technology infrastructure. The budget requests authority to
access the $2.7 billion in user fee collections currently
projected for fiscal year 2012 to execute our multiyear
operating requirements. This results in an appropriation of
zero dollars budget authority. As a fully user fee funded
agency, the USPTO's requirements are addressed at no cost to
the taxpayer.
Our performance commitments for fiscal year 2012 assume
enactment in March of the fiscal year 2011 President's budget
for the USPTO, including the interim fee increase on patent
fees. Availability of these budget resources will promote
America's economic growth and competitiveness by enabling
investments that are essential for reducing the current patent
application backlog and pendency levels, maintaining trademark
pendency at current levels, and moving to 21st century
information technology systems, and helping improve IP
protection and enforcement around the world.
These goals briefly are supported by hiring 1,500 patent
examiners, establishing a nationwide workforce focused on
hiring from around the country, telework, and hiring patent
examiners with previous IP experience, enabling patent
applicants to fast track their most important applications,
facilitating work sharing arrangements with foreign IP offices,
updating patent and trademark IT systems, and enhancing our
international programs.
Fee collections are running very strong at USPTO as a
result of an improving economic outlook, stronger patent
renewal rates, and our increased production. We are getting
more done and collecting more fees in doing so. As you know, to
enable these efforts the President's fiscal year 2011 budget
proposes that the USPTO be permitted to spend all of the fees
it collects and proposes a 15 percent surcharge on patent fees.
Despite our strong fee collections, the USPTO has been forced
to implement spending reductions as a result of the terms of
the current continuing resolution, and these include delaying
critical IT projects, slowing down hiring, and restricting
examiner overtime. Should the continuing resolution be extended
beyond March 4 and March 18, and hold the USPTO to its fiscal
year 2010 spending authority level, we will be forced to halt
all hiring, overtime, and IT improvements. This would
unfortunately reverse many of the gains we have begun to make,
and such continued restriction in appropriations would also
result in almost $200 million of user fee collections being
unavailable to support USPTO operations this year.
Mr. Chairman, in conclusion, ensuring stable funding for
the USPTO will continue to be a critical component of our
success in serving America's innovators. We wish to work with
you to ensure that the job creating, deficit neutral work
conducted at USPTO for the benefit of our Nation's innovators
is supported in whatever final spending package is enacted for
the remainder of fiscal year 2011 and, of course, into fiscal
year 2012. Thank you very much and I am happy to take
questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

OPERATING RESERVE

Mr. Wolf. Sure, thank you. We want to ask you a couple of
questions about your operating reserve. The supporting budget
materials show the PTO's operating reserve or carryover
balances going into fiscal year 2012 are about $213 million.
PTO carryover balances have increased significantly over the
last several years, growing from about $72 million in 2008,
$119 million in 2009, and $223 million in 2010. Most come from
trademarks. Would that be accurate so far?
Mr. Kappos. Yes, I believe it is.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. A portion of the current carryover balances
are a result of the fiscal year 2010 $129 million supplemental
that PTO received in 2010. We understand that you have hired
350 additional patent examiners with this additional funding.
Your operating reserve is essentially a carryover, or funds
that you do not spend in one fiscal year which are carried over
into the next year. PTO estimates its fee collection to be $2.7
billion. Your budget request, however, is built toward a $2.6
billion funding level. Would you please explain the differences
between the $2.7 billion in fees you anticipate collecting and
the $2.6 billion that you anticipate spending? Is the
difference about $107 million to fund another operating
reserve? I am waiting, yes.
Mr. Kappos. Okay. Well thanks, Chairman Wolf, for that
question. The difference, about $107 million, would go into our
operating reserve. It is absolutely required, it is imperative
that we carry that reserve going into 2013. And the reason is
because our hiring in 2012 is going to increase our examiner
count so that we will have to carry on our payroll throughout
all of 2013. Those additional examiners are going to take time
to come up to full production capacity. As a result, we are
going to need that $107 million carryover in order to fund
their pay during 2013 while they are coming up to production
capacity. By the time we get into 2014 we will no longer be
hiring anymore, and those people will be up to production
capacity, so we will have the full benefit of their production
producing income. But in 2013, it is a very critical year for
us. We will be carrying our maximum head count in that year and
many of those people will not quite be up to production
capacity yet. So we do not anticipate that our fee income,
unless we are able to have that carryover, will be adequate in
order to enable us to carry through on all of our plans. So
that is why we need that $107 million reserve carrying over.
Mr. Wolf. The PTO end-of-year operating reserve will be
about $342 million, will it not, when you add them both
together? And I do not quite understand the importance of not
spending every last penny at the end of the fiscal year and
allowing a bit of a cushion, but if PTO has such a backlog why
do we have such a large carryover? Most Federal agencies do not
have a carryover. Why do you differ than the Department of
Defense? Or the IRS? Or some agency like that?
Mr. Kappos. Well a couple of points. Number one, Chairman
Wolf, as you pointed out before, a tremendous amount of that
carryover is on the trademark side. And by statute we have what
is a statutory fence----
Mr. Wolf. Would you rather not have the fence?
Mr. Kappos. No, I am comfortable with the fence.
Mr. Wolf. Why would you not spend the funds on overtime and
hiring to reduce the backlog now, and not have such a large
carryover for the following year? So if you broke the fence
down, took the fence away, could you not do that?
Mr. Kappos. Well, I cannot do that. It would require a
change in the statute.
Mr. Wolf. I understand that. But I said if that were done,
if the statute and the law were changed. The Park Service takes
money in from collections if somebody is going through a
National Park. They also take money from other venues. They
kind of merge them together, and the Director of the National
Park Service can use it for whatever. Would it be helpful if
that fence did not exist? And you could then deal with the
backlog as soon as possible?
Mr. Kappos. You know, I actually do not think that it would
be helpful. I think Congress did the right thing by erecting
the fence in the first place.
Mr. Wolf. Why?
Mr. Kappos. Because it enables us to operate the trademark
side of the office, which is extremely efficient, extremely
well-managed, and operating right in its appropriate pendency
zones. It enables us to preserve the operating efficiency of
that part of the office and never run into, what I consider to
be not good management discipline, of breaking the working part
of your business in order to fix the part that is not working
so well, which in our case is the patent side.
Mr. Wolf. But are you the only agency in the government
that that is the case, that has that? Are there other
agencies----
Mr. Kappos. Well, that I do not know. I only know that the
USPTO, so long as I can remember, has had this trademark fence.
And I think on policy, and business-wise, it really is the
right thing.
Mr. Wolf. I am not so sure. You are again requesting a 15
percent surcharge on patent fees. You anticipate that this will
provide the PTO with an additional $263 million. What do you
anticipate that this additional revenue will enable the PTO to
accomplish?
Mr. Kappos. Well the additional revenue is absolutely
imperative to reaching the President's and the Secretary of
Commerce's mandated goals of bringing our backlog down to an
appropriate inventory level of about 350,000 cases in
inventory, which requires cutting in half from where it is now,
and bringing our pendency level down to the industry benchmark
standard of about twenty months from where it currently is,
which is about thirty-four months or so.
Mr. Wolf. When is the last time it has been at twenty
months?
Mr. Kappos. Actually, it was at twenty months, I want to
say about 1987, something like that. So it has been a while,
but it has been there before.

REVENUE PROJECTIONS

Mr. Wolf. According to a December, 2010 Commerce IG report,
PTO does not have a documented process for projecting patent
fee collections. This same view, however, also found that
between fiscal year 2006 and fiscal year 2009 PTO overestimated
certain fee collections by as much as 30 to 55 percent, while
another fee collection was under PTO's estimate by 35 to 42
percent. Were those figures accurate? And would you explain?
Mr. Kappos. So far as I know, what you have said is
accurate.
Mr. Wolf. And? Why the incompetency in projecting patent
fees, what do you think the reason for that overestimate and
underestimate was?
Mr. Kappos. Well, projecting fees at an agency like the PTO
is like projecting the future. It is like trying to anticipate
what the stock market is going to do tomorrow. And, I am quite
serious about this, there is no business in the world, and I
have worked in business for twenty-six years, there is no
business in the world that can project the future. We are
making estimates about what is going to happen in technology
investments as much as several years down the road here. We are
making estimates about what patent filers in the U.S. and in
other countries are going to be doing. There is absolutely no
way we can be 100 percent accurate about those. We cannot
anticipate financial downturns, like the one that happened a
few years ago. And when those occur they are a surprise to
everybody. They certainly were a surprise to me. I do not know
if anyone else in this room was able to predict those
downturns. They affect USPTO fee incomes. They are very
dynamic. We do our best to anticipate. We actually are quite
accurate overall. I think in the last couple of years we have
been accurate to within about a percent, which is an amazing
accuracy, actually. But we are never going to be perfect.

PATENT INFORMATION

Mr. Wolf. Last summer you announced a new policy whereby
PTO would provide China with full access to our entire patent
database, including regular updates with new patents. Your own
white paper you said as follows: ``Under the new arrangement,
the Chinese will have easier access to full text public
documents, including the bulk back file of U.S. full text data
on tapes followed by regular updates.'' This decision will
undoubtedly expedite Chinese state sponsored cyber espionage. I
mean, why would you give the Chinese this?
Mr. Kappos. Well that last part is not a quote from me.
Mr. Wolf. No, that is my quote. Why would you give this to
the Chinese?
Mr. Kappos. China, like all other countries, already has
access to all of that same information.
Mr. Wolf. But why should they have any of the access to it,
period? China is doing espionage against us, cyber attacks
against us, stealing from us. We have had IGs from different
committees, Commerce, NASA telling us about the cyber attacks
by the Chinese government. Why would you cooperate in any way
at all? I mean, your comment was, ``Under the new arrangement,
the Chinese will now have easier access to full text public
documents, including the bulk back file of U.S. full text data
on tapes followed by regular updates via file transfer
protocol, all through the most comprehensive search system.''
Why would you do that?
Mr. Kappos. This is all public information.
Mr. Wolf. But why should it be public information is the
question I am asking you? Why should we give that to the
Chinese government? The manufacturing base of this nation is
eroding. What they are doing, and different small companies
tell me, they are going in and seeing what ideas are out there,
and they are taking them. Why would you make it easier for the
People's Liberation Army to access that material whereby that
industry or that idea could be taken and used by the Chinese?
Mr. Kappos. So patent files----
Mr. Wolf. You know what I am talking about. I think you,
were you not in the meeting that we had before? We had some of
your people come up to meet with Pat Choate and some other
people with regard to the problem. Do you remember?
Mr. Kappos. I actually do not recall that.
Mr. Wolf. Did your people not tell you?
PTO Staff. We did, the Director was not in that meeting.
Mr. Wolf. Excuse me?
PTO Staff. He was not in that meeting.
Mr. Wolf. Did you tell him about the meeting?
PTO Staff. We did about the publication and your bill that
you introduced.
Mr. Wolf. And did that register with you?
Mr. Kappos. I am not sure what the question is. Did what
register?
Mr. Wolf. Did you give him the full update of what Pat
Choate said, the meetings, and the concerns? What were the
Director's comments based on the meeting that you had telling
him about the meeting that we had?
PTO Staff. I will let the Director----
Mr. Wolf. But he does not remember.
Mr. Kappos. I am happy to help if you could just explain
the question a little bit more fully?
Mr. Wolf. I think you ought to come by. One, I do not think
you ought to give the Chinese anything, period. And we are
going to officially ask you not to give the Chinese anything.
China is taking jobs from the United States. The manufacturing
base is eroding in the United States. As the manufacturing
moves offshore, the research and development and innovation
moves offshore. The Administration has said they want jobs here
in America, not jobs in China. This material should not be
given to the Chinese in any form, in any way. Do you have a
comment? Or is this----
Mr. Kappos. Well, if you have a question, I would be happy
to answer it, but I did not hear a question.
Mr. Wolf. You do not understand the concern that I have----
Mr. Kappos. Well look, it is----
Mr. Wolf. Look?
Mr. Kappos. We are required by law to----
Mr. Wolf. You are not required by--what law requires you to
give this to the Chinese?
Mr. Kappos. 35 United States Code, Federal patent law
mandates that patents get published when they are granted. It
is part of the original bargain in the Constitution based on
the constitutional exchange of a patent for a publication. We
publish all of that information. It is all made available on
the internet. If we do not make it available on the internet,
others will make it available on the internet. There is a large
industry that does that. That information all becomes instantly
available everywhere in the world. And it is just a fact of,
frankly a fact of life in the 21st century. I do not see any
way we can go back to not publishing patents and not having
them become instantly available, full text searchable, to
anyone in the world on the internet.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. And, well, we will take a look at that. Mr.
Fattah.

PATENT APPLICATION FILINGS

Mr. Fattah. Let me thank you. Let me go to the, what
appears to be the compromise about how to reform the patent
operation. And let me start from the generality and move to the
specific. First and foremost, can you tell us about the level
of activity, we know a little bit about the backlog, but the
number of applications on whatever basis, quarterly or
annually? And whether it is on the uptick or the downtick? And
who is applying for patents?
Mr. Kappos. Thanks for that question Ranking Member Fattah.
Indeed, patent filings are increasing. They increased by over 4
percent last year. They are increasing so far this year by a
rate of about 7.5 percent. And to the question of USPTO's
ability to make predictions, we predicted patent application
rates would be up about 5 percent or so this year. They have
exceeded our expectations. I do not know of any way we would
have anticipated that they were going to be up as much as they
have been so far this year. But it is causing fees to run quite
strong because application filings are up so much.
Mr. Fattah. And who is applying? Who is making applications
for patents?
Mr. Kappos. Everybody is applying more. Americans are
applying more for patents, and filers from outside of the U.S.
are applying more also.
Mr. Fattah. Can you quantify the percentages in those two
groups?
Mr. Kappos. You know, I do not have exact percentages. I
would be happy to go back and provide those. We have got all of
those statistics back at PTO.
Mr. Fattah. Can you provide a general sense? I mean, are
half of the patent applications Americans and half from
overseas?
Mr. Kappos. Oh, yes. A little more than half originate from
overseas now. The last statistics I saw were somewhere around
51 percent or so originating from overseas.
Mr. Fattah. Is this not a rubicon that has never been
crossed before in the country's history, in which now we have a
majority of the patents being applied for by people overseas?
Mr. Kappos. It is, yes.
Mr. Fattah. So this is correlated to the President's goal
of trying to put innovation at the forefront of our efforts to
restore the American economy, and the fact that this whole
effort of the Administration, the focus on education, and
science, and the like, so that we can return to a point at
which perhaps the majority of patents being sought in our
country were from American citizens?
Mr. Kappos. We would love to see that happen. And as you
say, Ranking Member Fattah, STEM education is a key enabler to
increasing Americans' patent filings, and also the education
that we do at the USPTO is a key enabler.

HIRING

Mr. Fattah. So that is the general context of which, now we
get to this question, one of the challenges in your shop is the
backlog. And you have got a program in which I think there is
bipartisan consensus that unlike the other discussion about
cutting, that we actually want to hire more people over, was it
1,500? 1,100 new, right?
Mr. Kappos. Yeah, about 1,500 this year.
Mr. Fattah. Total, but some of that is to replace people
who are retiring?
Mr. Kappos. Correct, attrition and retirements, yes.
Mr. Fattah. About 1,100 are new?
Mr. Kappos. Correct.
Mr. Fattah. Patent examiners, right?
Mr. Kappos. Correct.
Mr. Fattah. Now this will allow us to do what relative to
the backlog over what period of time?
Mr. Kappos. Well this will allow us to cut the backlog over
a period from now, 2011, through 2015, when we will reach our
optimum backlog level. So patent examining, at the end of the
day, is enabled by information technology systems. It is made
more efficient by good management, and we are working on all of
that. But at the end of the day, it is intellectual work.
Watson cannot examine patent applications. It takes human
beings to do that. And so we are going to get to an optimal
backlog and pendency level. It is clearly going to require more
examiners and that is why we are hiring aggressively.

REDUCING FEES FOR MICRO ENTITIES

Mr. Fattah. Well I think there is agreement that we should
hire more. And it is good to know that we can focus on what we
need to do. Now there is going to be, in the compromise, there
is a discussion about reducing fees for small and newly defined
micro-entities. Can you illuminate, provide any information
about what that might mean?
Mr. Kappos. Ranking Member Fattah, that goes back to your
question about enhancing the access to our agency for small and
micro-entities, independent inventors, and very small
companies. We already provide a 50 percent discount on many of
our statutory fees for small entities. If we get this
legislation, we would very much like to provide a 75 percent
discount for individual filers who meet certain income levels,
and for very small companies having very small numbers of
people in them. This in turn will lead to greater access to the
USPTO, and we hope and believe, greater numbers of filings by
Americans in the infant stages of businesses--Americans who do
not have any business but have a great idea, and Americans with
very small businesses.

PATENT APPEALS TO USPTO

Mr. Fattah. Now there is, in the adjudication process, the
agreement would replace the Board of Patent Appeals and
Interferences with the Patent Trial and Appeal Board. What,
other than the semantics, does that mean?
Mr. Kappos. We have a Board of Patent Appeals and
Interferences. It actually would stay in place. Those people
evaluate about 20,000 appeals we have currently pending in our
agency, appeals from the patent process. In addition, if this
legislation goes through we would be creating this new board
that you talk about. In terms of management discipline, it will
be managed under the same roof, if you will, and under the same
set of management disciplines as our current board. It will be
more Administrative Law Judges (ALJs), of course, attorneys
trained and skilled in the patent law. Their job will be to sit
in panels of three and very expeditiously decide these new
post-grant reviews and inter partes reviews that are called for
by this legislation.
Mr. Fattah. And now I think the real difference is that the
appeals will go directly to the U.S. Court of Appeals?
Mr. Kappos. Well that is a difference. But right now our
post-grant processes are managed in what is called our Central
Reexamination Unit (CRU) at the USPTO, which is comprised of
examiners and not ALJs. So it is a big difference to move much
of that work from the CRU, to this new board. We are going to
need a lot more ALJs as part of that board in order to handle
that workload, which will be moving from the CRU into the
board. As you mentioned----
Mr. Fattah. Do the ALJs get any particular training?
Mr. Kappos. Yeah, well----
Mr. Fattah. Other than that they are lawyers?
Mr. Kappos. You could think of them as judges.
Administrative Law Judges----
Mr. Fattah. But other than being a member of the bar is
there some particular training?
Mr. Kappos. Yes. They are trained essentially as judges. So
they are not examining patent applications, they are
adjudicating.
Mr. Fattah. Right. So when Kodak says that BlackBerry or
someone did, you know, misuse matters that they had on the
patent to create cameras on the BlackBerries, they come before
them and they have a big argument, trials and whatever? And
they make a decision, right?
Mr. Kappos. Yes, exactly.
Mr. Fattah. I got you. I was just trying to understand
whether they got any particular training relative to patent
issues.
Mr. Kappos. Oh, of course.
Mr. Fattah. And the answer is no, right?
Mr. Kappos. No, the answer is yes. Yes.
Mr. Fattah. Okay.
Mr. Kappos. Oh yes.
Mr. Fattah. All right. I got you. Well, it would seem to me
that we would all be concerned if now the majority of the
patents being requested in our country were no longer American
citizens. Then we have a lot of work to do, this subcommittee
under our chairman is going to be doing a lot of that work in
the area of STEM education, and science. And so hopefully there
will be future projections that are off base in terms of the
percentage of applications filed. And maybe many more of them
will be American citizens.
You know, there is this overall issue of intellectual
property in terms of our international competitors. And it is
not just China. You know, others are involved in industrial
espionage and other activities. And these are very significant
issues as we go forward, particularly in terms of rebuilding
our manufacturing base. I know it is above your pay grade
actually about what our relationships are and how we conduct
international affairs. But hopefully you can appreciate the
Chairman's passion on the matter. And I think it is logical for
us as a country to think about, think anew about how we
interact with those we are competing with. So I thank the
Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Schiff.
Mr. Schiff. Mr. Wolf, I think Mr. Honda was here first.
Mr. Wolf. Okay, Mr. Honda.
Mr. Fattah. See how gracious my side is? You know, they
want to get the order right.

PATENT AND TRADEMARK OPERATIONS

Mr. Honda. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it. And
let me add my words to Congressman Fattah in terms of the
passion of our leadership here. But let me start out with this
question. What is the prime, core mission in terms of the
concept of having a patent and patent offices?
Mr. Kappos. Do you mean multiple patent offices? Or the
Patent Office in general?
Mr. Honda. What is the purpose of the patent?
Mr. Kappos. Well the purpose----
Mr. Honda. It was conceived, it was conceived to do what?
Mr. Kappos. The purpose of the patent system is to provide
an incentive to innovation. It is a jobs clause, if you will,
in the Constitution as originally written. It is about
incentivizing Americans to innovate.
Mr. Honda. And then once you file for a patent, and you
receive a patent, are there certain things that can be expected
from holding a patent?
Mr. Kappos. Yes, absolutely. The constitutional quid pro
quo to get a patent is you have to disclose your invention and
permit it to be published for the whole world to see.
Mr. Honda. And the inventor or the innovator, do they have
protection on that?
Mr. Kappos. Absolutely. You get twenty years of protection
from the date of filing.
Mr. Honda. Against whom?
Mr. Kappos. Against the whole world as to activities that
occur in the U.S. So any other party making, using, selling, or
offering to sell anything that infringes your invention, you
have the right to prohibit them from doing that.
Mr. Honda. And if you violate that provision, are there
sanctions to that?
Mr. Kappos. Yes. A party who infringes a patent is liable
to pay damages to compensate the patentee and is also subject
in most cases to an injunction to prohibit further
infringement.
Mr. Honda. And trademarks, are they different in nature?
Mr. Kappos. Trademarks are very different in nature.
Trademarks protect brands. So think Coca-Cola, think Microsoft,
think Kodak brands. And trademarks have no time duration on
them, so a trademark can persist forever. The Coca-Cola brand
has been around more than a hundred years, I think.
Mr. Honda. And to process trademarks versus applications
for patents, are there distinctions in the timelines?
Mr. Kappos. Very different timelines.
Mr. Honda. Which----
Mr. Kappos. Trademark applications are very complex also,
but they are processed much more quickly. The trademark
applicant community wants a processing time of between two and
three months for trademark applications, and a total of
thirteen months processing time to final completion. We are
right on those numbers at the USPTO.
Mr. Honda. And so the firewall that is created allows you
to continue to do that work in spite of that fact that as far
as budgetary concerns may lag a little bit this, this gives you
the cushion to not fall behind and stay on top of the demand
for attention in the trademark area?
Mr. Kappos. Right, that is exactly right. You know, I think
Congress appropriately wanted the USPTO to protect the
trademark part of the operation and to keep its funds separate
and that is the nature of the fence.

REDUCING THE PATENT BACKLOG

Mr. Honda. Now on to your reform, in I guess Senate 23,
there is provisions for IT and other things like that. How will
these things help the backlog? And what is your anticipation of
cutting down the backlog time? I mean, can you give us a
ballpark figure of what it might look like?
Mr. Kappos. I can actually be quite precise about that. The
backlog is currently a little bit over 700,000 applications on
the patent side. The appropriate inventory level in the USPTO,
in other words think like a factory. You have to have parts on
hand for people assembling new things going through the
factory. Similarly in the patent process you want each examiner
to have an inventory of cases that they are working on. If you
multiply out the appropriate inventory levels for all of our
many, many areas of technology what you come to is about
350,000 total applications in inventory with the number of
examiners that we will have in 2014-2015.
So that is our optimal inventory. We are on a trajectory to
actually get there. To get there in the timeline the President
has asked for, 2014-2015, requires us to hire a lot of people
this year and next year especially. So that is why we are in
this big hiring bubble.
Mr. Honda. Right. So in the hiring of new folks, and the
backlog, the backlog has been created by what, what factor? Is
it lack of staff? Was it lack of technologies? Is it a change
in technology that is more complicated so you need more time to
figure it out? You know, what are, what are some of the factors
that are involved in the backlog?
Mr. Kappos. That is a great question. Like with all complex
problems there were, in my estimation, a number of issues, some
on the management side, some on the technology side, that have
contributed to this backlog gradually building up over the last
decade or so. And part of the problem was that we
underestimated the growth rate of filings, which meant we did
not have enough examiners in place to handle that accelerating
growth rate. And to give you an example, this year alone at a
7.5 percent growth rate, we will have over 30,000 additional
applications. We are going to get over half a million, in fact
528,000 applications this year. That is an enormous amount of
work coming in.
Mr. Honda. So that change, that steep increase, and the
increase in backlog, is that based upon the new technologies
and the lack of skills, technical skills, that the folks have
to be able to process it? They have to have knowledge of what
they are looking at, is that correct?
Mr. Kappos. Well yes, they do have to have a lot of
knowledge of what they are looking at. Patent examiners require
a lot of training.
Mr. Honda. How will you address that? In what way will you
address that?
Mr. Kappos. Well, we are addressing that in a number of
ways. Number one, one of the changes that I have made at the
agency is to move as much as we can to hiring people who have
intellectual property experience when they start at the agency.
We are hiring lots of attorneys, patent attorneys, patent
agents, and even patent engineers--within weeks are able to
start actually examining applications. They require nowhere
near the amount of training time that a fresh graduate out of
college requires when that person has no IP experience.
Mr. Honda. It seems to me that the technical training in
terms of the law is one thing. The scientific understanding of
what you are looking at in order to provide the patent and
being able to distinguish between different applications would
be a critical piece where you end up with lawsuits. And in San
Jose when we had the first lawsuit against Microsoft there were
no judges that understood technology. What is it, what is the,
is there a ramp up time for your staff to be able to come up to
snuff? Or are you hiring to that issue in terms of your
staffing?
Mr. Kappos. We are not what I refer to as skating to where
the puck is going rather than skating to where the puck is.
This is basic business discipline. We are using projections of
the number of examiners we are going to need and factoring in
the amount of training time that is needed, and calibrating our
hiring to that number rather than to the number that we might
have needed in the past. That is why we are starting to get on
top of the backlog, even though the number of applications is
increasing.

SATELLITE OFFICES

Mr. Honda. Well having satellites, you have one in
Michigan?
Mr. Kappos. We have announced, we have not yet started it
but we have announced----
Mr. Honda. What satellites are you looking at?
Mr. Kappos. Well we do not have any firm plans to have
additional offices yet. But I will share that in my view we
need more than one satellite office. We should be experimenting
a little bit, this is a pilot program after all. I have in
mind, and would like to be able to subject to appropriations,
have three satellite offices using slightly different models at
each office, in different parts of the country, with different
demographics involved and then test our results in terms of
efficiency, retention, quality of the work that we are doing,
ability to attract the workforce that we need, satisfaction of
the applicant community, all of those criteria, and judge what
is working well and then evolve our model.
Mr. Honda. I would probably anticipate there will be a lot
of applications coming out of the chairman's district because
of the activities there, and my district, and possibly in Adam
Schiff's district. But I guess I would like to know----
Mr. Schiff. I should get priority.
Mr. Honda. It is going alphabetically and by power. But I
was just wondering what your metrics would be in order to
determine where are you going to be placing this? You know, you
call them satellites, and satellites we use them to geoposition
ourselves and figure out where we are going to be. I was just
curious, will it be the number of patents? The complex, or the,
what is the, the convenience of people being able to get to a
satellite? Because I think that unless technology takes over
and collapses the distance, so I would be interested in it.
Because it does create activities in the area, and----
Mr. Kappos. The factors that we have been looking at, and
the factors that we used in making the decision to put our
first satellite office in Detroit, included indeed the number
of patent applications originating from the area. Of course
places like the valley, you know, Northern California as well
as Southern California, and many other places score well
against that metric. We also considered the number of skilled
patent practitioners practicing in the area. Because after all,
they are not only our candidate workforce since we are trying
to hire experienced professionals into the agency, but they are
also the practitioner group that is going to be wanting to come
in and interact at the agency. So we considered those folks. We
also considered the presence of universities in the area that
would supply graduates that would want to come and work at the
USPTO, plus would be available to help with training and other
interactions with the agency. We considered cost of living, we
considered housing prices, we considered access to major
transportation hubs because we have to fly people around
occasionally.

INDEPENDENT INVENTORS SUPPORT

Mr. Honda. My last question, Mr. Chairman. Given this is
fee based, how do you prevent criticism on the fee based
process where large companies who may have the wherewithal to
apply for many patents, do they get special consideration? Do
they have ways to get involved in the process of moving the
patent through? Do they, or are, is it a fair fee system where
you can create a firewall between those who are applying and
the timelines and the attention that they get? Is my question
clear?
Mr. Kappos. It is a good question. We actually provide a
tremendous amount of assistance for independent inventors and
small inventors. We do not provide any breaks really at all for
the large entities. The large entities pay full fees and they
are expected to interact at a highly professional skilled level
with the agency. Independent inventors get a 50 percent
discount and as was asked before, I think by Ranking Member
Fattah, if we are able to we are actually going to give
independent inventors a 75 percent discount. We also have
extensive assistance programs for them. We have an Independent
Inventors Assistance Center. We train our examiners to help
what is called pro se, or independent inventors, to get through
the agency. We have a range of outreach and programs that are
designed to help small parties, independent inventors, I will
say people who are not familiar with the patent and trademark
system, to help them get into the system. We provide those
services to them for free. We do not provide any of those
services to large entities. They are expected to fend for
themselves.
Mr. Honda. Thank you. And Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your
patience on my series of questions.
Mr. Wolf. Sure. Mr. Austria.
Mr. Austria. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I apologize for
walking in late. Director, thank you for being here. If I could
just follow up with Mr. Honda on his question about the
backlog, just so I better understand, Mr. Director. What is the
backlog now? Is it, I thought I read somewhere where it was
maybe twenty-two months behind as far as the backlog on patent
approvals?
Mr. Kappos. Well that is pretty close. We are currently
running with a backlog of a little over 700,000 applications.
What that translates into in terms of the time it takes us to
process an application is approximately twenty-four months. I
think it is twenty-three and change, but in that range, until
we are able to first respond substantively to a patent
application. And then about another year after that, I think
thirty-four, thirty-five months we are currently running, until
we finally finish work and grant the patent.

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

Mr. Austria. And that is one of the concerns that I hear
back in Ohio, is the delay or the timeframe of this process.
And we talked a little bit about technology. Have you put a
plan forward where we can help speed up using resources and
understanding the budget that we are going through right now to
be able to advance this technology, to be able to speed up that
process?
Mr. Kappos. Yes, absolutely. So technology, especially
information technology, is clearly a key driver to efficiency
at the USPTO. And I am on record as saying that our information
technology system at USPTO is moribund. I came from the
information technology industry. I am an electrical engineer. I
have twenty-six years of experience in that industry and worked
on some of the biggest projects every conducted. I know a
broken IT system when I see one, and the USPTO system has major
problems.
We are on a multiyear program right now to completely
reengineer the USPTO's IT infrastructure. It started with the
most basic building blocks. We literally did not even have the
right power coming into our buildings. We did not have the
right bandwidth across the fiber optical network that we use to
run our what is called VOIP, or voice over internet protocol.
We have gotten all of that basic work done so we have gotten
the foundation laid. And we are now beginning to deploy new
single work stations to our examiners, universal laptops, which
is another key building block to basically enable people to be
effective. We are building up the layers on top of that. It
will take several years, but we are on the path now.
Mr. Austria. And you feel comfortable, considering the
budget process that we are going through right now, that you
will be able to remain on target with that, and have the
resources necessary to complete that? I know that is hard to
predict that in the future. But based on your projections right
now?
Mr. Kappos. Well that is a great question. So far we are
doing okay. So far we are on our plan. We have had to slow down
some of our information technology efforts. But I will tell you
I feel pretty good about where we are and we have been able to
keep the most critical ones going. If we get our 2011 funding
here fairly promptly, like in March, we will be able to keep
going, running at pace. We are being extremely careful about
spending money. The thing I am the most proud of is I stopped
about $300 million in IT spending that was being considered,
that was in plan when I started at the agency. So we are being
very careful about our spending. But if we get our resources
this year we will, no question, we will be able to continue on
our plan.
If we do not get our resources here in the month of March I
am going to have to stop all of my IT improvement programs
because I will just not be able to afford going forward with
them any further that will start to have an impact.
Unfortunately the impact is more than month by month because
what I have found in working for the government is that when
you stop projects the restart time is tremendously long. So,
unfortunately, we are very much nearing a critical point here,
where we either need to get our money, the fees that we are
collecting, or I am going to have to stop the IT efforts and we
are going to suffer a pretty considerable setback.

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY THEFT

Mr. Austria. I appreciate that. One other area, and I
apologize if this has already been asked, that is brought up to
me a lot is intellectual property, the theft of that. And I
know you have worked very hard to strengthen both domestic and
international intellectual property protection. But when we
look at what is happening, both in the United States and
internationally, as far as intellectual property theft costs
that continue to go up. U.S. businesses, the numbers I am
looking at, $200 billion to $250 billion annually. And we can
go right on down the line, counterfeit merchandise is
responsible for the loss of more than 750,000 American jobs.
These are substantial losses to our economy. And I just would
like to get your comment, or how you are proceeding as Director
to try to deal with this issue? Because I know it is very
important back in my state, and when I am talking to folks
regarding this issue.
Mr. Kappos. That is a great question. IP theft,
counterfeiting, piracy is a huge problem. It is a problem in
the copyright area. It is a problem in the branding area,
trademarks. It is a problem in the patent area. So the USPTO
has an overseas attache program that has been very, very
successful. We place employees in key embassies. We have got a
couple in China, and I would like to put another one in China.
We have got Southeast Asia covered. We have got Brazil covered.
We have got Russia covered, and some other countries. What
those people do is they work with U.S. businesses in the
region, coordinating with U.S. business here in the U.S., to
look for ways that we can strengthen the enforcement regimes
overseas. So that is something that we are investing in and I
think we need to invest more in that.
On the U.S. side, it is our agency that leads in developing
policies on a global basis that help our trading partners, in
fact in many cases, that push our trading partners into
adopting IP laws and enforcing them in a way that helps to
counter piracy and counterfeiting.
Mr. Austria. Well and I will just close by just saying that
I think it is very important that we be dealing with this issue
and taking on this war against intellectual property theft.
Because the substantial losses to our economy, I mean, it is a
trickle down effect. It impacts, because of the loss of tax
revenues, it is impacting our schools, our hospitals, our local
public departments, and other public services. So I think it,
you know, there is a trickle down effect here and it is
important that we do get a handle on that and we deal with that
issue. And I appreciate your comment, and thank you Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you. I am going to go to Mr. Schiff, but
that is what I was talking about and we will get back to it.
Mr. Austria is right. I think you have a Pollyanna viewpoint to
think that your person in Beijing has any impact on this
Chinese government. If you think so it is naive. It is
absolutely, positively, categorically naive.
They have the Nobel Peace Prize winner in jail today, in
jail today, and his wife cannot even get out of their apartment
for house arrest. Does that trouble you, that maybe your person
in Beijing may be having a difficult time? And we will get to
it when I come back to the questions, but how successful have
you been with regard to the Chinese government? And it is sort
of a Pollyanna thing here with regard to that. They are spying
against us. There are cyber attacks. My computer was stripped
by the Chinese. How many times has your computer been hacked.
We are going to ask you how many cyber attacks? But you just
sort of speak in Pollyanna terms. They are stealing us blind.
They are stealing us blind. They are taking jobs from Ohio,
from all over this country. Mr. Schiff.

USPTO RESOURCES

Mr. Schiff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Director,
for being here. And I wanted to follow up with you on questions
about the patent backlog, which I have had a long interest in
as you know. I think it really is key to our efforts to get our
economy moving again and competitive that we reduce this
backlog to an acceptable level. I want to make sure, though, I
understand the fee diversion a little further, because this has
been a particular point of interest of mine. I know there has
been an issue in the past in terms of the appropriation process
where if you come in and you estimate that the fees you are
going to generate are going to be less than they turn out to
be, the fees that come in above that amount, above the amount
that we appropriate, end up getting diverted to the Treasury so
the Patent Office loses the use of that money. On the other
hand, if you overstate how much you will need and you come in
under that, then not only do you not have the advantage of
those resources but the subcommittee then cannot allocate them
for other purposes. So I know that has been an issue. But I
want to make sure I understand one thing about it in terms of
the account you mentioned at the outset of the chairman's
questioning. And that is, if you estimate fees at $1 billion,
let us say. And the subcommittee authorizes you to use $1
billion worth of revenues. And let us say that your actual
expenditures are $900 million, and the actual fees coming in
are $1.1 billion. Do I understand it correctly that the amount
between the amount you use and the amount that is authorized,
which would be $100 million, can go into a reserve for future
years, for the use of the Patent Office? But the $100 million
above that was generated by fees that was not within the
authorized limit, that would go back to the Treasury? Is that
right?
Mr. Kappos. Exactly right.
Mr. Schiff. Okay. There have been a couple of things we
have looked at over the years. One has been ending fee
diversion, such that you could use whatever revenues come into
the Patent Office until you get to a point where you have
eliminated the backlog. There has been another proposal where
the Patent Office would have the capability of setting its own
fees. And then of course there is the third proposal, which
would be to have Congress approve a 15 percent increase in
fees. I know that among the stakeholders there has been concern
with giving the Patent Office fee setting authority, that, or
even the 15 percent increase. They are willing to pay more.
They are willing for you even to have the authority to set
fees. But they do not want to do it if they are going to be
subsidizing somebody else. If you are going to raise fees and
those fees are going to go to some other purpose. And, you
know, I wonder in connection with the trademark question, which
I think was a good question by the chairman, is some of the
reservation that you have about using the trademark, the
surplus in the trademark fees, is that owing to a concern that
the trademark community, those that use your office for
securing trademarks, are going to have the same concern that
the patent users have? That they are paying fees for trademarks
that are in excess of what you need and they are not going to
want to do that if they see those fees going on the patent
side. Is that part of the issue?
Mr. Kappos. That is exactly right.
Mr. Schiff. And how much are the users of both different
users? I mean by and large are the trademark users not also
patent users? Or is there heavy overlap between them?
Mr. Kappos. There is some overlap, but you would find
significant distinctions. I will give you an example. Louis
Vuitton, I do not know if they have gotten any patent
applications in the USPTO. They probably have hundreds of
trademarks. You know, there are many, many other entities that
have no patent filings and lots of trademarks. And then on the
other side if you look particularly at the independent inventor
community and small businesses they would have no trademarks or
maybe one trademark and many, many patent applications. So
clearly there is some overlap. But there is an enormous amount
of distinct community between those two groups.
Mr. Schiff. And the trademark fee is when they are in
excess and you are able to carry them over. What has happened
in the subsequent year? Is it a situation where the committee
will reduce the appropriation the following year? Because you,
let us say you had a $100 million surplus in trademark fees and
that gets held over to the following year. And you normally get
let us say $500 million for trademarks from the committee. Will
they then give you $400 million the next year because they see
you have $100 million more that you can use? What generally
happens in those circumstances?
Mr. Kappos. You know, in my experience that has not
happened. What is going on on the trademark side is that the
reserve is obviously money paid by trademark applicants that is
being used as part of our trademark next generation system, an
IT project that requires substantial investments that we are
making right now, although we are at the early stages of it,
that is designed to very substantially upgrade the capabilities
of the trademark community to manage trademark portfolios.
We believe cutting management costs for U.S. businesses and
significantly advantaging them over time, but it requires an
investment on our part. That is what the trademark community
wants done with the funding that they have paid in and that is
what we are using it for.
Mr. Schiff. Getting back then on the patent side of things,
where was the backlog--how long have you been now director?
Mr. Kappos. Eighteen months.
Mr. Schiff. Eighteen months. And where was the backlog when
you began, where is the backlog now, and how does that compare
the trajectory you need to be on to eliminate all but the sort
of acceptable norm by 2015?
Mr. Kappos. When I started, it was somewhere in the 765,000
range. It is now in the low 700s. We expect to go below 700
later this month. We expect to be down to about 655,660 by the
end of this financial year.
We actually are on trajectory despite the fact that we have
been constrained in our spending this year and we were
constrained most of last year. We are on trajectory to get down
to the appropriate levels of 10 months to first action and 20
months to final action in 2014 and 2015. So if we get our
funding, we will be able to make those targets.
Mr. Schiff. Now, you have had an excess of applications in
terms of what your expectations were. How much are you able
each year thus far or every six months to not only keep up with
the incoming but to reduce the backlog of those that are
pending? Do you need to reduce the backlog 100,000 a year to
meet your target? And it does not sound like you have been
reducing it 100,000 a year. I mean, if you are at 700,000 now
and you want to get down to what is it, 200,000?
Mr. Kappos. Three hundred and fifty.
Mr. Schiff. Three hundred and fifty. That means you need to
reduce it by 350,000. 2015 is only 14 years away, so----
Mr. Kappos. Four.
Mr. Schiff. What's that?
Mr. Kappos. Four years away.
Mr. Schiff. Four. What did I say?
Mr. Kappos. Fourteen.
Mr. Schiff. Fourteen. Oh, God. Okay. So what does that mean
in terms of how much you need to reduce it each year and are
you on that pace?
Mr. Kappos. Yes. We really are. So the requirement that the
President and the Secretary of Commerce gave me was to get the
patent pendency level to the right amount by 2015.
To do that in that amount of time as a businessman----
Mr. Schiff. Right.
Mr. Kappos. I have to resource up in the early years to get
those folks trained, get our examiners trained and productive
so that in the out-years, which in this case is 2013 and 2014
and then finally in 2015, those extremely productive examiners
are taking the backlog down rapidly.
So if you look at our projections, we have a model that
projects given the number of employees we have and their
seasoning, the GS levels they are at, the technologies that
they examine, and how that backlog is going to move, if you
look at it, it is going to go this year to, as I mentioned,
about 655, 660,000 or so by the end of this financial year. By
the end of the next financial year, that would be 2012, end of
financial year, it will be down about to 550,000.
You can see, Representative Schiff, the rate of decrease
accelerates over time, but it is not a surprise because more
examiners are coming online and they are more highly trained
and they are more seasoned.
So we get 60,000 off this year, 100,000 off next year,
something like 150,000 off the year after that, and that is why
you see in our plan that we stop hiring. After 2013, we stop
hiring altogether. We want to start attritting some examiners
off so that we come in and have a smooth landing at about
350,000.
Mr. Schiff. Isn't the big variable in all this, though,
that you have, I mean, what, 100 percent more applications this
year than you thought? I mean, that is higher. But you had a
substantially greater number of applications this year than
anticipated. Someone has got to handle those.
You know, hopefully, the recovery will continue to gather
momentum, which I assume will mean more applications. How can
your strategy take into consideration that growth if it was
unanticipated?
Mr. Kappos. Well, that is a great question. So we are
experiencing about a 7.5 percent increase in filings this year
which indeed has exceeded by about two and a half percent our
projections. As the manager of the agency, that makes me
nervous because it puts all of my plans at risk.
Obviously we are going to have to recalibrate over time as
we learn things, and we will come back to this committee with
recalibration. I think it is a good thing, in fact, and a great
thing that our patent application filing rates are going up. It
shows that innovation really is where the action is. So I am
very comfortable with filing rates going up.
But clearly we are in a dynamic environment. We cannot
perfectly predict the future. As things change, we are going to
keep skating to where the puck is going. If we find out it is
going to a little different place, we are going to start
skating there. So I will readily agree with you that that is
going to require recalibrating over time.
Now, so far, it is looking like we are able to absorb the
increases because, of course, other factors are working out a
little differently too. We are hiring some of these experienced
people. They are getting online quicker.
We increased our efficiency by 20 percent last year. That
is helping us considerably. The new IT systems are helping us
somewhat or we think they will as they start coming into play.
Mr. Schiff. In the scale of things, what would be of most
value in terms of having the consistency of resources to stay
on track with decreasing the backlog? Would it be a flat 15
percent increase? Would it be the capability of setting your
own fees or would it be a policy here in the Congress to ensure
that there is no diversion of fees because you could set fees
all you want, but if we do not appropriate the money generated
by those fees, then you just become a cash cow for someone
else? What would be the most useful in terms of making sure
that that downward trajectory stays on track?
Mr. Kappos. The answer is all of the above. We really do
need fee setting authority for the USPTO. We need to set and
keep our fees reasonably in line with what is going on and the
cost to deliver our services. Right now our fees are, I would
have to describe them as arbitrary and bizarre relative to the
cost to perform our services.
So we need to set our fees in a rational way. We obviously
need to keep that money. I would be very uncomfortable changing
USPTO fees, increasing them in any way at all, if I was not
able to assure the people sitting behind me here that I am
going to be able to use that money to do what the American
people are paying into the patent system for. So the ability to
retain fees, to spend them on decreasing that backlog is
extraordinarily important.
The 15 percent surcharge is simply a financial vehicle that
gets an infusion of money coming into the agency quickly so
that we can continue to embark on the programs that we are on,
the IT improvements, the hiring programs, et cetera, during the
period of time until we are able to have a really thorough
process with good oversight from this committee and others and
the IP community to set fees at much more rational levels.
Mr. Schiff. Do you have the authority within the current
fee structure to set differing fees based on the complexity of
the application or based on the multiplicity of applications
filed by a single party? In other words, a massive user of the
Patent Office that files a tremendous number of applications or
tremendously complex applications, do you have the capacity now
to discriminate in terms of fees for those?
Mr. Kappos. The answer for the most part is no, we do not.
We charge the same fee for an application that is three pages
in length as for one that is 3,000 pages in length. That is one
of the problems that we have.
Mr. Schiff. Well, I mean, do you need authorization to do
that and if you had the authorization, would you utilize it?
Would it be good policy to do that?
Mr. Kappos. We would need authorization in order to change
those fees. We certainly would consider this is something where
we need to consult with the intellectual property community,
but we certainly would consider differential charges based on
things like complexity and length of application. But those are
perfectly rational criterion to consider.
Mr. Schiff. Are you embarking on a new plan to allow
companies to pay extra to have an expedited patent application?
Mr. Kappos. Yes, we are. It is called Track One and----
Mr. Schiff. Was that authorized by Congress? How are you
able to do that, but not differentiate--how can you
differentiate fees that way but not based on complexity?
Mr. Kappos. That is a regulatory fee and we are actually
permitted under statute to set regulatory fees. So that is the
way we did that one. The basic filing fees are set by statute
and those fees we are not able to set.
Mr. Schiff. And tell me the difference between the
statutory fees and the regulatory fees.
Mr. Kappos. Well, some number of our fees, I want to say 15
percent of them, something like that are regulatory and those
are the ones USPTO can adjust. Some of our fees relative to
continuing practice, what is called continuation applications,
are regulatory. But most of our fees, a large majority of them
and the most important ones are statutory.
Mr. Schiff. And the last question, Mr. Chairman.
Is there an independent agency like GAO, for example, who
is currently overseeing the quality of the patents such that in
the zeal to reduce the backlog we are not sacrificing the
quality of the patent examinations for quantity?
Mr. Kappos. There is not any such agency. We do, however,
have our own quality metrics that we use at USPTO that are
published, freely available for anyone to look at. And using
those metrics, our quality actually increased last year because
we started giving examiners more time to examine applications.
Our quality metrics went up about a percentage point each.
Mr. Schiff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Yoder.
Mr. Yoder. No.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. I am sorry, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. We will come back.
Mr. Serrano. No, no, no. I just walked in. And we had a
long hearing, so I am just glad to be here.
Mr. Wolf. We are glad you are here too.
Mr. Fattah. Did you have a good hearing?
Mr. Serrano. It was wonderful.

PUBLICATION OF PATENT APPLICATIONS

Mr. Wolf. Let me just put something right on the record. I
am really disappointed that you did not get in detail and you
did not understand. It almost seems like we were in the
minority last year and you literally blew us off. You just did
not really care. And I do not think that is appropriate.
And, frankly, we had a good meeting. We brought a lot of
people in. I thought you would be ready and, frankly, you are
not prepared. And this is a big issue. It is an issue I am
going to drive on, I am going to push on, I am going to force
on until they tackle me and take me down. We are going to deal
with this issue. And you did not even know anything about it.
And so maybe this office ought to be abolished or you ought to
get a new person in the office. And I am kind of disappointed.
Now, if you can give me a list of when PTO did not have a
backlog and when PTO did have a backlog each and every year up
until current time. And, secondly, if we can get a list of how
many patents per examiner are completed each year, also how
many applications are examined by those who are at the
headquarters and those who are now doing telework.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Would you please explain why the PTO makes patent
applications available online some 18 months after they are
filed and as they continue to wait in the backlog queue? Is
that by constitution, by law, or by regulation?
Mr. Kappos. That is by law.
Mr. Wolf. By law. What year was that law passed?
Mr. Kappos. That was in the AIPA, I believe 1999. It might
have been the previous law in 1996 that instituted it.
Mr. Wolf. What we were talking about in the meeting that
you never heard anything about or either forgot about is,
should there be an exception with regard to a national security
issue or a dual use issue whereby when the person or company
files it, they may say this may be something that somebody may
want to make a nuclear bomb or the Chinese may take this and
develop an industry?
Has there ever been an exception whereby at the time, there
could be an exclusion based on that?
Mr. Kappos. Well, we already have that very system. A
number of U.S. security agencies look at all patent
applications filed at the USPTO and make that very judgment
about national security risks and they do.
The U.S. security agencies take some of the applications
out of our agency and put them under what is called a secrecy
order and that happens. Every single application that is filed
at the USPTO goes through that process. So we are actually
quite sensitive to that issue, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Is that by the patent person who files it or is
that by the National Security Agency and do they also look at
economic issues in addition to national security issues?
Mr. Kappos. It is the----
Mr. Wolf. If a plant closes in Ohio or a plant closes in
Virginia, that is an economic security area because the company
has left. We do not make any more television sets here in the
United States. They are made in China and in Mexico. So it is
an economic security issue.
Is there a category for economic security?
Mr. Kappos. Not that I know of.
Mr. Wolf. Would it be a good idea if there were?
Mr. Kappos. I would need to see what that looked like. I
would be concerned to understand what such a category looked
like before I tried to comment on that.
Mr. Wolf. Well, so we do not take too much time, maybe you
should come by the office and we can talk about it if we can
get an appointment with you.
I want to see us doing something like that. I think the
jobs that are being taken out of this country and going to
places like China both from the national security perspective
with regard to a threat, but also the economic security
perspective is very, very important.
Do other countries make their patent applications available
online?
Mr. Kappos. Yes, many do. In fact, if not all----
Mr. Wolf. Give us a list of those who do and those who do
not.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Kappos. Oh, absolutely. Sure.
Mr. Wolf. Does China?
Mr. Kappos. To my knowledge, they do. In fact, U.S.
examiners have access to all Chinese patents and published
applications at 18 months. China, in fact, requires all patent
applications to be published at 18 months. They have no carve
out and we get----
Mr. Wolf. What about Russia?
Mr. Kappos. Russia requires all applications to be
published also.
Mr. Wolf. And what about France and Germany?
Mr. Kappos. Oh, of course. They long since have.
Mr. Wolf. Does the PTO provide this information in a
regular weekly update to China?
Mr. Kappos. You mean----
Mr. Wolf. The information.
Mr. Kappos [continuing]. Information about U.S.
applications?
Mr. Wolf. Right.
Mr. Kappos. I believe that it is provided, that information
is provided. Well, yes, in the sense that we publish patents on
a weekly basis. Every Tuesday when patents issue, we publish
them on the internet and American information providers publish
them on the internet. So they are available to everyone in the
world then.
Mr. Wolf. Does it concern you that maybe China is taking
them and using them for certain purposes?
Mr. Kappos. I do not know what purposes you are thinking
of. I think that every person in the world has access to our
published patents at the same time and is able to use them for
the disclosures that they contain.
Mr. Wolf. And for taking ideas from them?
Mr. Kappos. Yes. That is the purpose for the patent system.
Mr. Wolf. Whereby they can then violate the patent?
Mr. Kappos. No, not to violate the patient, right, but to
learn from them.
Mr. Wolf. Has there been any enforcement against China with
regard to any violation of patents?
Mr. Kappos. I believe in the U.S., there has been
tremendous enforcement of infringement of----
Mr. Wolf. In China, have there been any sanctions with
regard to activity in China?
Mr. Kappos. Well, I am not, you know, an expert on the
daily details there, but the Chinese do have patent laws that I
would characterize as----
Mr. Wolf. Of course, they also have laws of freedom of
speech and freedom of religion. It is in their Constitution.
But there are 30 Catholic bishops in jail today. There are
several hundred Protestant pastors in jail today.
If you need a new kidney, for $55,000, you can go over to
China, stay in a four-star hotel, and they will take your blood
type and they will go into the prison and they will then take
the blood type of the prisoner. It may be a Catholic bishop or
it may be a pickpocket.
And so they have what is in their laws and regulations, but
have there been any enforcements with regard to any violations
of patent infringements by China in China?
Mr. Kappos. Yes, I believe there has been enforcement.
Mr. Wolf. Well, can you give us a list of them?
Mr. Kappos. Yes, we can certainly provide what we know.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

TELEWORK

Mr. Wolf. Let's move to the telework. How many PTO
employees are participating in your telework program and how
many are eligible to participate?
Mr. Kappos. Okay. I might need some statistics on that. We
have I want to say as many as 7,000 of our employees are
teleworking at least one day a week now. We have all of those
statistics though. And if you want to bear with me, I
probably----
Mr. Wolf. I definitely want it because I was the author of
the law to bring about telework at the Patent and Trademark
Office.
Mr. Kappos. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It has been
enormously successful for us.
Mr. Wolf. But you do not have those numbers available?
Mr. Kappos. Well, I may have them here. Bear with me just a
second. Let's see here. IT improvements. Okay. Let's see. I
think I have--okay. So you are looking for total numbers of----
Mr. Wolf. Participating and eligible.
Mr. Kappos. Yes. I am going to turn for a second to my CFO
and see if he has got those exact numbers with him.
Tony. Okay. No. That is the same document I have. And it
does not have the exact numbers on it. It is thousands though.
We have----
Mr. Wolf. But I wanted the exact number. Do you know how
many were participating and how many were eligible?
Mr. Kappos. We can get you the exact numbers.
[The information follows:]

As of the end of the First Quarter, 2011, Telework Statistics are:
7,396 Eligible Positions
6,119 Eligible Positions Teleworking (83% of eligible positions
teleworking)

Mr. Wolf. I thought you would have had that for the
hearing. That is just a thought that I had.
Those who telework outside of this region, how often do
they have to return or do they have to return to Washington?
Mr. Kappos. They currently still do have to return to
Washington.
Mr. Wolf. And how often per year and why?
Mr. Kappos. Well, they have to return, if I recall right,
once per biweek which means once every other week, they----
Mr. Wolf. So if they are in Montana or California, they
have to come back?
Mr. Kappos. Yes. And that is a problem for me too.
Mr. Wolf. And what is the reason for that?
Mr. Kappos. Well, the law as it was written until it was
just recently changed last December statutorily required every
employee to report to their duty station once per biweek. Now,
thanks to your leadership, that law was changed.
We are currently aggressively in the process of going
through the steps that the law, that the new law required us to
go through in order to waive that requirement for all of our
employees. And I intend to pursue that and I am pursuing it
extremely aggressively.
Mr. Wolf. Have you conducted any studies to determine if
productivity has improved or sick leave usage has gone down?
Mr. Kappos. Yes, I have. And that information I have right
in front of me here. And would you like me to----
Mr. Wolf. Sure.
Mr. Kappos [continuing]. Share some of that information? So
what we have learned from surveying our employees and looking
at our own data is that the amount of examining time is
approximately 3.5 hours per examiner greater per biweek for
examiners who are on our teleworking programs. And the reason
for that is that they use less leave, less sick leave and less
other kind of leave because of the flexibility involved.
We also know that our GS14 and 15 employees, which are our
most productive examiners, average nearly 10 percent more
examining time, those examiners who are working at home versus
those examiners who work in the office. So that is an
incredible increase in efficiency, 10 percent increased
efficiency.
We also have measured the rate of successful ratings of
examiners who work at home versus examiners who come into the
office and we have measured 15 percent higher rate of
outstanding performance for examiners who work at home versus
those who come into the office which means that 26 percent more
work gets done by those people with 78 percent fewer hours.
So statistically the legislation that you passed, Mr.
Chairman is what we call a no-brainer from a business
viewpoint. It pays.
Mr. Wolf. With all the new employees you are seeking to
hire, do you currently have the office space to absorb the new
employees?
Mr. Kappos. The answer is that we do to a limit, but we are
dependent, very dependent on further expansion of our telework
programs to be able to permit employees who qualify for
telework to go work at home and then reuse their offices for
some of the new examiners coming in.

SATELLITE OFFICES

Mr. Wolf. I am going to go to Mr. Serrano in a minute or
two. But on the issue with regard to the office in Detroit, why
did you choose Detroit?
And by having these regional offices, you are in essence
arguing against the very purpose of the telework. There are
many in Congress who very vigorously opposed this telework
bill. And one of the arguments that we used is we said there
would be less office space. We said it would do exactly what
you said it would do. And now you are anticipating establishing
a satellite office, what seems to work against the very purpose
that we argued why we needed telework.
What are your thoughts about that?
Mr. Kappos. Well, the answer is that no, not at all. In
fact, establishing satellite offices is not only consistent
with teleworking, my vision is it is going to accelerate
teleworking.
What you get when you establish a satellite office is a
place for people to go in to, applicants who want to conduct
business with the agency and our examiners who need to conduct
business with applicants there, especially to conduct
interviews, and to meet with their managers and do the other
things that you occasionally need to go into an office to do.
Having an office in Detroit is like opening a giant door to
new teleworking. It is going to enable us to employ potentially
many hundreds of people if we are successful in Detroit,
skilled IP professionals that we would never get to move to
Washington, D.C. for the time that they need to spend training,
then let them work at home in Detroit or in Montana or wherever
else they want that is proximate to Detroit. They will be able
to then commute into there when they need to do interviews with
applicants but work at home other times.
So I see having satellite offices as not only consistent
but an accelerant to getting more qualified examiners in our
agency and giving them the flexibility to go work at home but
have a place to come into without having to get on an airplane
when they need to do an interview with an applicant or conduct
other business.
Mr. Wolf. So currently now they have to come back into
Washington to do the interview?
Mr. Kappos. Yes, in many cases. Applicants on the patent
side have a statutory right to have a face-to-face interview
with an examiner. And the only way we can live up to the law is
to require our examiners to come here to--well, to Alexandria
to conduct those interviews.
Mr. Wolf. You could not have a cooperative arrangement with
a couple other Federal agencies? For instance, I am sure there
must be an office of Department of Housing and Urban
Development whereby a collocation, where you could use that
because that takes place in a Washington, D.C. office. There
are some telework centers whereby they have joined with other
Federal agencies and that is basically a telework center in
essence in another agency where they come and use the
conference room. And you cannot do that?
Mr. Kappos. We can. In fact, that is exactly what we are
doing. One of the reasons among all the other reasons that I
mentioned, one of the reasons we chose Detroit is because there
is a Commerce Connect there which is a sister component of the
Department of Commerce. We are able to capture efficiencies by
having other parts of the government, especially other parts of
Commerce there.
So over time establishing these offices in conjunction with
other Federal agencies to cross-use floor space, to capture
efficiencies is entirely natural, entirely businesslike and
completely in the plan.
Mr. Wolf. How many satellite offices do you plan on
establishing?
Mr. Kappos. Well, I do not know. As was asked previously,
there is not a plan. There is not a budget currently to
establish more offices. In fact, we will not even be able to go
forward with the Detroit office if we are stuck under the
current continuing resolution. We are not going to have the
funds for it.
But my view is that we should establish several initial
offices, three is the number that I have been discussing from
time to time, in different parts of the country, very different
areas so that we gain experience with different models.

USPTO'S IMPACT ON INNOVATION

Mr. Wolf. Okay. Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
One of the things that President Obama said in his State of
the Union which has stuck with me and I think is the challenge
for the majority party as it sets out to have some very
dramatic budget cuts and also a challenge for us as we decide
to go or not go along with some of those cuts is how do we at
the same time keep investing enough money so that our
scientists and other folks can create and invent things. And he
said that and I feel strongly about that.
So as far as patents go, and I do not know and forgive me
if you have already asked this question, is there a sign, is
there a history in the last couple of years of where we are
going? Are Americans inventing more or are most other people
inventing and we are not?
I mean, that was part of our strength. That has
traditionally been part of our strength as a county. And,
again, he said a couple of hundred things at that State of the
Union. For some reason, that one stuck with me, the fact that
as we go out to cut these budgets, we have to keep investing
here and creating whether it is a new medicine or a new Velcro
or a new Tang or whatever it is. I am giving credit to all
these things NASA did, right? But, you know, let's go out and
be innovative again and be the world leader.
Any signs in your office of where we are going?
Mr. Kappos. So the good news in that regard, we did talk
about it a little bit earlier, the good news is that Americans
are innovating like crazy. They are every bit as innovative.
Our country is every bit as innovative, if not more than we
have ever been. We are getting more patent applications
including more applications from Americans.
As Ranking Member Fattah I think pointed out earlier, we
are also getting more applications from overseas, so we are
just getting more applications from everywhere.
The indications that I get from both the statistics and the
inventors that I talk to, thousands and thousands of them, is
that there is no shortage of invention in this country.
The thing that is in shortage right now is the other
resources, access to capital, the mentoring that is needed in
order to transit great ideas through the Valley of Death and
into products and services.
Mr. Serrano. And is there a tie-in between people on their
own being innovative or are universities still playing a major
role?
Mr. Kappos. Universities are playing a more important role
all the time.
Mr. Serrano. More?
Mr. Kappos. Absolutely. If you look at the statistics, you
see university patent filings have increased very
substantially. If you look at seminal inventions or what is
called breakthrough inventions, many of them originate from
universities. Universities are playing statistically a much
increased role in technology transfer, in diffusing technology
from labs into communities. Universities are playing an
enormously important role. The Bayh-Dole legislation----
Mr. Serrano. Right.
Mr. Kappos [continuing]. Passed by Congress several decades
ago was absolutely instrumental and it is, in my view,
substantially responsible for our country's economic
leadership.
Mr. Serrano. I remember about 15 years ago, I was talking
to some folks who were visiting the Hill from Virginia Tech and
I said wouldn't it be nice if we had a car that would park
itself. And they said we are working on that.
Mr. Kappos. We do.
Mr. Serrano. You know, and so, I mean, that is exciting
when you see that happening which leads me to kind of a fun
question. I do not know if you got into the details, but what
are Americans inventing?
We spend so much time on the iPad 2 coming out and the new
nano iPad which will probably, you know, bring the singer out
into your living room or whatever. And, you know, and you can
then kick him or her out of your room. But what are we
inventing that the American people do not know about?
Mr. Kappos. So American innovation is up across the board.
We measure it at the USPTO and we are, you know, lucky in that
we are the first stop on the line for innovation. Every new
invention first comes to the USPTO. So we see them all.
We are seeing increases in patent filings across the board.
So everything from the mundane, believe it or not, new ways to
make wheels, still getting invented. We see those patent
applications.
Mr. Serrano. The wheel is being reinvented?
Mr. Kappos. Believe it or not. Composites that are used to
make wheels, new manufacturing processes, those kinds of
things.
But the places where we are seeing the biggest inventions
are in nanotechnology, you know, really serious materials
technology, green tech innovation, think windmills, wind
turbines, you know, gas, electric, those kinds of things. We
are seeing big increases in, as we have for years, in the
information technology sector, the iPads and the iPods and the
mobile phone industry. All of the wonderful innovations in
there continue at pace. And our patent filings continue to
increase in those areas.
Then I would point to the bio area as a key area of U.S.
leadership. And, you know, we have a lot of folks from
California here. Think San Diego. Think Silicon Valley. Think
Boston. Think Research Triangle Park. The U.S. far and away
leads in bio innovation and the patent filings show it.
Mr. Serrano. Again, I apologize if this has been asked, but
people come to you. So I invent something and I bring it to you
to get a patent. Do I have to first prove it works to somebody
else? Is part of your role ``get out of here, that does not
work, stop wasting my time with that?''
Mr. Kappos. Well, yes in the sense that you have to
disclose the invention. And this is required by law----
Mr. Serrano. Right.
Mr. Kappos [continuing]. United States Code Title 35. You
are required by law to disclose the invention and describe in
sufficient detail for someone skilled in the area to actually
make it and use it. So, yes, you are required to show that you
know how to build this thing, you know how it works and how to
construct it.
Mr. Serrano. And that it actually does what you claim it
does?
Mr. Kappos. Exactly, yes.
Mr. Serrano. All right.
Mr. Kappos. Yeah.
Mr. Serrano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

TELEWORK

Mr. Kappos. Mr. Chairman, I now have the statistics that
you asked for before, if I can provide them to you.
So USPTO's fourth quarter 2010 teleworking statistics, we
had out of a total of 9,778 employees as of the end of fiscal
year 2010 fourth quarter, we had 5,915 teleworkers. So those
are people actually teleworking, 5,915 teleworkers. And that
represented 83 percent of the eligible employees. So a very,
very high rate of teleworking.
Mr. Wolf. Do you have a patent that you want to----
Mr. Serrano. I have a way that we can vote from our
districts while attending a town hall meeting, although come to
think of it, we might be better off here.
By the way, Mr. Chairman, I say this with great pride and
for the admiration I have for you, not only did you affect the
workforce in the Federal Government with the telecommuting, but
you also set the tone for Congress.
And I can brag about the fact that I was one of the first
Members of Congress a long time ago that set up the ability to
get on my laptop in the Bronx or here on a no vote day in
Virginia and just with the ID, the secure ID, be able to work
as if I was there.
When I used to go to schools and talk to people, I would
say here is the best way to explain it. When I am in the
office, I am sitting in front of a computer. Now I am in my
living room sitting in front of the same computer with the rest
of my staff and they think I am there.
Mr. Wolf. No, I know. I have often said there is nothing
magic about sitting before our computer or strapping yourself
into a metal box and driving 50 miles to work. And you drive 50
miles if I recall.
Mr. Serrano. I did at that time, yeah.
Mr. Wolf. At that time, yes.

PATENT OPERATIONS STUDIES

I am looking here at the patent reform report by the
Congressional Research Service, its patent reform in the 112th
Congress in innovation and ideas report. And the last look, the
last in depth look at this issue shows was the National
Research Council, National Academy of Science, a patent system
for the 21st century which was written in 2004.
We are going to ask the NAPA, the National Academy of
Public Administration, to take an in-depth look at the PTO
operation, your operation. We will ask the staff to also look
at the National Academy and see if maybe they may be the best.
You sound somewhat like many other patent leaders have said
and, yet, conditions continue to be worsening. So we want to
make sure because the one figure that you said to Mr. Serrano,
and you have said it several times, the number of overseas
patents are increasing.
If you could give us the number of patents that have been
filed, let's say from 1988 because we are using that year as
the year of U.S. and foreign in 1988, 1989 right up to present
time. And then if we could get a breakdown as to what countries
they are coming from.
But the conditions may be and based on your answer may be
dramatically changing. So what we are going to do is ask NAPA,
and we would ask you to cooperate with NAPA----
Mr. Kappos. Sure.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf [continuing]. And the National Academy of Science
as they take a look at your operation. Have you seen a trend
that shows a reduction in the number of U.S. patent filings?
Mr. Kappos. No, not at all. In fact, the opposite.
Mr. Wolf. Is it a reduction in percentages or is it a
reduction-- an increase overall as well percentages? As the
foreign ones are going up, are we going up as much?
Mr. Kappos. Foreign filings have indeed increased in
percentage. If you look back a number of years ago, fewer than
50 percent of U.S. patent filings were from or originated
overseas. Now, as I mentioned before, slightly more than 50
percent originate from----
Mr. Wolf. When did you cross that line?
Mr. Kappos. I want to say two, three years ago, we hit the
50 percent point and went over that.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Mr. Fattah, I have a few more. You want to
go back and----
Mr. Fattah. Yeah.
Mr. Wolf. Yes, go ahead. You go ahead.
Mr. Fattah. You want me to go?
Mr. Wolf. Yes, you are next.
Mr. Fattah. Yeah. Within the last year of the Bush
administration, we crossed this rubicon. But part of this is
that basic science research----
Mr. Wolf. Was that a compliment or--I did not get----
Mr. Fattah. Well, no. It is just a fact. It has nothing to
do with----
Mr. Wolf. Oh, okay.
Mr. Serrano. What do you mean rubicon?
Mr. Fattah. Oh, that we crossed to the 51 percent mark. But
it is a very important issue because of so called patents, so
called engineers. But as the chairman has said, when we are
producing 70,000 engineers and China produces 700,000, there is
going to be a differential over time.
Now, we were at a moment where we led the world in
scientific research. We now represent about a third of that.
And, you know, about a third of it is in Europe and a third of
it is over in Asia, in India and China. So it is a very
different world map. And, you know, we could have a small
country like Singapore investing $4 billion in basic scientific
research.
And when we look at the National Science Foundation we are
not--I mean, we are in a challenging situation to find the
resources. And as we all know, until we get to some budget
reform around some of the things that are really driving the
budget, we are not going to be making these investments that we
need to make in STEM. And it is a major issue.
But I want to drill down for a minute. When someone applies
for a patent, do they have to, other than the fact that they
have this idea, do they talk about how they developed the idea?
Do they talk about where they got the initial funding?
Let me give you an example. I met with a 33-year-old young
guy who is the head of material and mechanical engineering at a
school in Philadelphia. He got a $20,000 investment from the
university a few years back and he got, Mr. Chairman, an NSF
grant for, you know, in the six figures. And now he has got a
patent and he has got a company. And he has got about a $600
million product line that is helping make the world a better
place.
And this committee is involved in a lot of issues beyond
patents, but through one of the STEM programs that the
committee has supported in previous years, there is young lady
over at Howard University now who has got a patent disclosure
for a development of an idea to power underwater labs of NOAA
and other entities by using material on the ocean floor.
I mean, we have the talent. We have young people who have
the talent to do almost anything. It is just a matter of
creating the opportunities for them, and that is what we are
interested in.
So the work that you are doing is vitally important, and I
think that we are going to have to work through the issues of
the appropriations. The CR is another matter, but I think the
Senate is acting on the CR today, for two weeks, and they
passed it. Okay. And then we will go into what happens on March
the 18th.
But you are not the only agency to say. The Pentagon came
out today and said if we keep operating under a CR, it is going
to actually cost more money, and it endangers national
security. So we do have to get to a resolution.
And I hope that there is either a budget summit or there is
some kind of resolution where we can get the spending at least
set for the rest of this year and then the Appropriations
Committee can do its work properly about next year's funding
because this is serious business. And we owe it to American
industry that if we are going to have a patent operation, that
it function in real time. And you have international treaty
obligations, right?
Mr. Kappos. Yes.
Mr. Fattah. So these countries, not only do we have
obligations, but other countries have obligations. And we want
to make sure that in order to hold them accountable that we are
meeting the mark that we need to be meeting.
So I want to thank you for your testimony.
And I will conclude on that, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you. Well, I appreciate the comments from
my good friend from Pennsylvania. I am from Virginia but was
raised in his home town in Pennsylvania.
I think there is an answer, but it is a relatively
difficult solution to what is relatively easy. And it is really
to adopt the Simpson-Bowles or Bowles-Simpson Commission,
changing things. And obviously there are things in there that I
did not agree with. And I would have made a sincere effort.
But when Tom Coburn and Dick Durbin can come together, I
think it is going to take a bipartisanship. It is going to take
the President to come forward. There was an editorial in
today's Washington Post, ``Waiting for Waldo'', meaning waiting
for the President to step forward. It is important that we do
this in a bipartisan way.
And until you deal with the fundamental issues of the
entitlements and those issues, you can come up here and testify
all you want to testify, it is going to continue to be a
problem.
Mr. Kappos. Yes.
Mr. Wolf. So I think the way to do it is to come together,
find a rationality. And I think the beginning of it could be
what the Senate is doing is a bipartisan effort. One of the
senators from my State, Senator Warner, Senator Chambliss from
Georgia, Senator Coburn, and Senator Durbin are working on
something to sort of force the Congress and force the
Administration to come together.
Then I think if we can do that and I think we can do it in
a way that is not painful to the Nation, adjusting around the
edges, then I think all these issues to a certain degree free
up a tremendous opportunity for the sciences and math and
physics and chemistry and investments and have a renaissance.
But until that comes you are going to continue to have
budget cuts and you are not going to have the CR be ended
quickly. I mean, I am not so sure, maybe I am wrong, but I do
not know if two weeks will be enough. Who knows what? So you
are going to continue to kick this can down the road. But I
think if we could begin with what Senator Simpson and Bowles
did, I think we can begin to make some progress.

PATENT AUTOMATION

A couple of last questions before we end. In 2005, GAO
reported that the PTO had spent over $1 billion, B billion,
between 1983 and 2004 for patent automation activities which
did not achieve a fully integrated electronic patent process.
Between fiscal year 2006 and October 2010, PTO spent another
$47.9 million on another IT modernization effort on a system
that has not been effective either.
Can you describe PTO's proposed Patents End to End Program
and when do you anticipate awarding a contract?
Mr. Kappos. Sure. I would be happy to do that. So the
Patents End to End Program is designed to take a completely
different approach than the programs that previously failed. It
is designed to start and we have started. We have been spending
the better part of a year now starting without attempting to
make architectural decisions, without attempting to choose
servers or programming languages or any of that, without even
attempting to choose contractors.
Instead we started doing something that apparently is kind
of new in the Federal Government but is actually pretty
straightforward to me as someone who, as I mentioned before,
has been doing this stuff for going on 30 years now which is to
actually talk to your customers. In this case, examiners.
So we put together task forces of examiners. We literally
have engaged over this period thousands of our examiners at the
agency. I mean, you can ask the folks at our unions who will
say management never did that before and they absolutely love
that management is engaging the employees. And we asked them
the question, what do you want your IT system to look like. And
that is where we started.
We spent a lot of time collecting input. We brought three
contractors in, very small contracts, to design the prototypes
of what our user interface would look like. We finished with
that work. We did extensive user input on it. We would love to
show you the results. It is actually very, very engaging. Our
users have chosen what their next system is going to look like.
And we spent very, very little money so far.
But this is about collecting the user input that you need
so that you ensure that you are designing a vehicle that meets
the needs of the people who are going to ride in the vehicle.
In this case, primarily Patent and Trademark Office examiners.
So we finished that initial prototyping work. We are now
engaged in the process of lining up the contracts to get going
on the first set of what is called Sprint using a programming
methodology and a development methodology that again is--that I
have been using for years in the private sector, but is new to
the Federal Government, that is called agile development
methodology. That is the approach that we are using.
And we expect using that approach to have the first but I
will caution initial pieces of programming for our Patents End
to End Project by the end of this calendar year. We are going
to deploy them initially using our Central Reexamination Unit.
I mentioned that before. It is a part of our examiner core that
focuses on patent reexaminations which is extremely important
work but has the advantage that it is not automated at all
right now. They are on totally paper processes.
So there is very little risk in moving them to a new
system. It is a small group of people, but it employs very
similar processes to our large core. So you will see that
rolling out late this year and then you will see the way agile
works, a steady stream of vertical and horizontal improvements,
in other words, filling in functionality on top of the initial
system and more functionality across the whole patent examining
process. It will take several years, though, to get this done.
Mr. Wolf. What sort of technical expertise does PTO have to
oversee the contractors?
Mr. Kappos. Well, we have got a CIO who has many years, in
fact decades of experience in the information technology
industry. I personally, as an IT professional and electrical
engineer from that industry, I personally spend a lot of time
working with my team.
We have now hired as we were requested by the President's
CIO, we have hired a project manager also from private industry
with much experience managing projects to design and implement
complex IT solutions. And so I believe we have actually got a
robust team in place to manage contracts.
Mr. Wolf. Is he an employee or is he a contractor?
Mr. Kappos. Employee of the USPTO.
Mr. Wolf. All right. Okay. For the record, Mr. Fattah, you
have any other----
Mr. Fattah. No.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. With that, we thank you for your testimony.
I hope you will come up and see me. I want to talk to you
because I am going to do something on the China issue.
And, secondly, if you would cooperate with NAPA and whoever
it is to take a look. We will try to get that up and running.
We will try to put language in the bill. But I think we will do
a letter to them early and if they can begin early, I would
appreciate it.
With regard to that, I guess we will just submit the rest
for the record. Thank you.
Mr. Kappos. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Thursday, April 7, 2011.

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY

WITNESS

DR. PATRICK GALLAGHER, UNDER SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR STANDARDS AND
TECHNOLOGY AND DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND
TECHNOLOGY
Mr. Wolf. I want to welcome you to the committee. And in
light of the time, I will not have any opening statement, but
just welcome you, Dr. Gallagher.
Dr. Gallagher, your full statement will appear in the
record. You can proceed as you see appropriate.
Dr. Gallagher. Thank you very much.
And in the interest of the time, I will also try to give a
quick----
Mr. Wolf. Oh, that is okay. Go ahead.
Dr. Gallagher [continuing]. Oral sort of summary of the
written testimony. Chairman Wolf, it is good to be in front of
the committee.
And, Ranking Member Fattah, it is good to see you again.
And it is always great to have an opportunity to talk about
the NIST 2012 budget. The budget request for NIST is best
understood by its mission to promote U.S. innovation and
industrial competitiveness and finds itself very well aligned
with the President's focus on supporting economic growth
through innovation.
The fiscal 2012 budget request for NIST is $1 billion. This
does represent a 17 percent increase over our 2010 enacted
level and I would like to briefly summarize the request. There
are four major accounts in the NIST Program.
For the NIST Scientific and Technical Research and Services
account, which funds our laboratory activities, our budget
request is $679 million which is a net increase of $174
million. These funds are to accelerate the development of
standards, technology, and measurement science in areas as
diverse as advanced manufacturing, cyber security, and advanced
building infrastructure.
The NIST Industrial Technology Services account budget
request is $238 million. This is an increase of $33 million and
also reflects a $1.9 million reduction to the Baldrige
Performance Excellence Program consistent with the
Administration's goal of transitioning that program out of
federal funding.
The budget requests $84.6 million for the Construction of
Research Facilities account. This is a $62.4 million decrease.
The budget request also includes $25.4 million for the
continued renovation of the aging Boulder Building One facility
and funds for needed repairs and maintenance of our facilities
on the two campuses.
And, finally, NIST is requesting $100 million in the new
mandatory account for the creation of a Public Safety
Innovation Fund. This is NIST's component of the
Administration's Wireless Innovation Infrastructure Initiative
(WI3).
So let me touch on a few of the major themes that are in
the request: manufacturing, infrastructure, and education.
The President's fiscal year 2012 budget request for NIST
includes a very strong focus on manufacturing and provides the
measurement tools and other essential technical assistance that
other U.S. manufacturers need to invent, innovate, and
produce--and to do that more rapidly and more efficiently than
their competitors around the world.
With the laboratory budget, there are five manufacturing
related initiatives totaling $85.3 million and these
initiatives will enable NIST to bolster and diversify needed
research and services in areas like nanotechnology,
biomanufacturing, additive manufacturing, and advanced robotics
that will position U.S. manufacturers to be competitive around
the world.
My written testimony includes more details of these
initiatives.
The President's budget request also strongly supports
manufacturing through our external programs: the Manufacturing
Extension Partnership program and the Technology Innovation
Program.
For MEP, the budget request is $143 million, an $18 million
increase. NIST MEP will use the funds to expand capabilities of
its nationwide network of centers located in all 50 states in a
number of critical ways to assist manufacturers to successfully
compete over the long term.
The request for TIP of $75 million will enable the program
to hold a competition to fund high-risk, high-reward research
in critical national needs like manufacturing.
NIST is also requesting $12.3 million for a new program,
the Advanced Manufacturing Technology Consortia or AMTech. This
is a new public-private partnership that will provide grants to
stimulate the formation of industrial consortia to address
industry-driven technology challenges that any one company
would not be able to do on its own.
With regard to strengthening the U.S. infrastructure, the
budget request contains $43.4 million in three initiatives for
cyber security related programs and activities. This includes
activities building upon our core cyber security work in
support of the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative,
to support a national program office to coordinate activities
for the National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace
or NSTIC, and to expand the scope of the comprehensive National
Cybersecurity Initiative on Education.
In the area of interoperability infrastructure, this budget
request proposes funds to support our work in emerging
technologies which includes smart grid, interoperable
electronic health records, and cloud computing standards for
the Federal Government.
The physical infrastructure work in NIST includes work to
increase energy efficiency and reduce environmental impact for
U.S. infrastructure and to improve our research activities in
disaster resilient structures.
This is particularly timely with the earthquake in Japan
and the resulting damage to structures. And we are pleased that
it has been included in this request.
Finally, in wireless infrastructure, the Public Safety
Innovation Fund that I mentioned earlier will focus efforts to
support the development of an interoperable nationwide public
safety broadband network.
The education initiative, the post-doc research program
initiative will enable NIST to offer at least an additional 23
positions per year.
And I want to thank this committee for its support in
eliminating the cap on funding for the NIST post-doc program in
last year's COMPETES Act that makes this opportunity possible.
Beyond those initiatives, there are two areas in the budget
which reflect savings. This budget request incorporates over
$11 million in administrative savings and the proposed decrease
for the Baldrige Program is an additional $1.9 million.
Mr. Chairman, the fiscal 2012 budget request for NIST
reflects the Administration's recognition of the important role
that NIST can play in innovation and the impact of NIST
research and services that it can play in moving this Nation
forward.
And I look forward to answering any questions you may have
about our request.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

HOMELAND SECURITY: INFORMATION SHARING TECHNOLOGIES

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much, Dr. Gallagher.
You know, it is kind of interesting. I think, one, the
subcommittee really, and I know Mr. Fattah shares this, too,
really did everything it can to support NIST even in H.R. 1. I
think you took less of a hit, you and the FBI.
It is interesting. You probably run and have one of the
most important agencies for the future of the country in
manufacturing, education and, yet, I look at this. There are
empty seats here.
How many people here are with NIST? Raise your hand. How
many people in the audience are not with NIST? Yeah. And are
any of you reporters?
Okay. Well, I mean, where is everyone--and, yet, NIST
really is very, very, very important.
I have a bill in that we are going to introduce in a week
or two with Senator Warner of my State to deal with
manufacturing. It puts together an incentive program. It is a
repatriation bill to help bring back jobs from China and
Mexico.
And manufacturing and creating jobs is very, very important
and, yet, you know, there are still empty seats here if more
people want to come.
But we have had other hearings that have been less
important insofar as the future of the country and in an area
that you could pretty much get a bipartisan consensus and, yet,
I guess it is just the way life is.
I would appreciate if you would look into NIST's
involvement in Information Sharing and Access Interagency
Policy Committee and Watch List and Screening Subcommittee.
That is quite a name. I wonder how they will give an
abbreviation for that.
But I understand that the Departments of State, Homeland
Security, and Justice are working together to determine the
requirements each would need before procuring name-matching
software.
As you are aware, NIST is involved in this process. I
believe the agencies are asking NIST to compare and ascertain
what software brings what strengths, weaknesses, capabilities
when it comes to name-matching software.
I understand that the work of the subcommittee is still in
the early stages and that NIST is participating to gain a
better understanding of the requirements. We understand that
each of the agencies has significantly different operational
requirements so achieving consensus will be a challenge for the
subcommittee.
However, as we approach the tenth anniversary of the 9/11
attacks, I think it is imperative for the government to work
together on this program and that NIST should be an active
participant.
I would hope that NIST will be a leader in the effort
considering the good work that NIST has done on a number of
homeland security issues.
And we had Director Mueller up here yesterday and, of
course, on the 9/11 issue, a number of people from my
congressional district died in that attack. And so we were
looking forward to hearing from you of how this thing--you may
not have to get in great detail here, but how we can kind of
bring the three agencies together.
Dr. Gallagher. So thank you.
We are quite committed to this effort. NIST has long
research experience in looking at text retrieval and these
types of technologies. In fact, the Watson computer that
everyone was watching on Jeopardy, some of that underlying
technology that enabled that was actually based on some of that
NIST research.
So this is a very active interagency process. And I think
you characterized the situation well. It is early enough that
what we are trying to do is coordinate and develop a set of
coherent technical requirements so we can turn this into some
definitive actions within the agencies.
And I know we are trying to get our technical people
working with the agencies in that capacity.

RADIATION DETECTION AND MEASUREMENT

Mr. Wolf. NIST's physical measurements lab has developed
expertise in radiation detection and measurement.
Has NIST been asked to perform any analysis of the U.S.
radiation detecting capabilities in response to the disaster
that continues to unfold in Japan with their nuclear facility?
Dr. Gallagher. The NIST program in advancing measurement
science and radiation has been very active. It is one of the
more concentrated efforts of the United States. NIST is very
active at homeland security applications and screening and
developing advanced screening technologies, nuclear forensic
measurements.
The types of measurements that are needed in the situation
that is unfolding in Japan right now are not ones that are
pushing detection limits. There is a lot of radiation in the
area.
And so these typically fall more in the kind of issues
involving sort of sensor networks to measure diffusion. And
those are really responsibilities of other agencies.
In all these cases, there is a very active interagency
process and we are offering support as requested to any of
those sort of ongoing efforts.
Mr. Wolf. And what about domestically here? I have seen the
statement by the governor of New York with that one power plant
that is up on the Hudson north of New York City. Has NIST been
asked to engage in any studies with respect to the ability of
U.S. nuclear facilities to withstand similar impacts,
earthquakes, tsunamis, or other extreme weather events?
Dr. Gallagher. So, of course, the analysis to look at
safety or security consequences falls to the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission directly.
NIST works in partnership with the NRC to give them a
technical basis for performing this type of analysis, so
whether it is a fire risk, we do fire research that looks at
flammability or degradation of electrical cables, whether it is
looking at structural components in these types of buildings.
So we play a role, but it is a secondary role. We are
trying to provide them the measurement tools and information
that supports their responsibilities to analyze.
Mr. Wolf. So you have not been asked specifically by them?
Dr. Gallagher. Not that I am aware of.

NATIONAL EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION PROGRAM

Mr. Wolf. Okay. We had asked the director of NOAA, the
Administrator, I think she said yes, but we are waiting to get
a definitive answer, to put together a conference both on the
East Coast and the West Coast, bringing in NOAA people, the
U.S. Geological Survey people together to talk about the
potential impacts of an earthquake either on the West Coast or
East Coast and a tsunami. And I think she said yes. I will have
to read the transcripts. But the way that it was put, I think
she said she will do it.
Would NIST play any role in something like that?
Dr. Gallagher. We likely would. NIST is actually the lead
agency in the National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program
which is a program established in 1977 and includes FEMA, the
U.S. Geologic Survey, and the National Science Foundation. And
so we would be very interested in participating in a workshop
like that.
The main NIST role, of course, is to disseminate model
codes and standards for adoption so that construction standards
are brought up to a point where we have disaster resilient
infrastructure.
I think the other lesson here with the situation in Japan
is that it is important to look across all different types of
hazards. So a lot of the damage that was sustained in Japan was
actually water related damage from the subsequent tsunami and
not the damage related to the shaking of the actual earthquake.
And this is a lesson that keeps coming up in the NIST work
and it is important to look at all of the threats to structure
and to make sure they are resilient across all of them. You
could have an earthquake with a subsequent fire and you are
actually looking at fire related hazards.
And so we would welcome a workshop like that and be happy
to work with NOAA.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Well, we will tell NOAA that.
Have your people had any thoughts or comments, I do not
want to get too far off some of the budget issues, but on that
about how well prepared--this subcommittee six or seven years
ago when the Indonesian tsunami took place, we sent a letter to
every governor up and down the East Coast, we contacted the UN
to make sure that every locality had the necessary standards
and warning systems. So the purpose of this would be to kind of
do the same thing.
But any comments based on watching what has taken place,
since you are the lead here, what has taken place?
Your heart goes out to the people of Japan. It just is so
painful to watch both the radiation and the death and the
number of people that have not been found.
As you look at that knowing what you know, your concerns
with regard to here in the United States, both East Coast, West
Coast, and the Gulf?
Dr. Gallagher. So, yes. We actually do worry about this
quite a bit and not just the situation in Japan which is an
unfolding tragedy but also looking very carefully at the
situation in Christchurch, New Zealand with that earthquake and
also with Chile which has similar building standards that we
use in the United States.
And the answer is, yes, we do worry about that. In fact,
one of my colleagues is testifying right now in front of the
House Science Committee on the NEHRP Program. And to summarize
what I think he is going to say about the program, we have made
tremendous advances in being able to assess and predict risk
areas.
I think that the codes themselves have shown dramatic
improvement and we continue to take lessons learned. I think
the fact that the property damage we saw in Chile was nothing
like we saw in Haiti is a real reflection changes in building
standards. We have also learned the weaknesses in terms how
buildings perform under severe earthquake conditions.
One of the areas that I think we need to work on and an
area I think I would like to work with you on is the Federal
Government does not mandate building codes and standards. What
we issue are model codes and standards. And the authority is
actually at the state, local, and regional level.
And so as we look at collecting data and rates of adoption
in moderate to high earthquake zones, this is an area that we
are probably not doing as well as we could. And it comes back
to--have we set things up in the way to be most efficient and
giving these local jurisdictions the information they need to
adopt stronger building codes and to assess what percentages of
their buildings are compliant with different codes?
Obviously in older communities, they are going to be built
to older building standards which may be much, much less
resilient.
The other major concern I have is that we have focused on
buildings quite extensively, but we also need to focus on the
resiliency of the supporting infrastructure which is often
called life lines, getting power and water and other key
telecommunication infrastructure rapidly restored or highly
resilient to these types of effects. And that compromises the
ability of a community to respond if there is an earthquake.

GREEN TECHNOLOGIES

Mr. Wolf. Sure. Well, good. We will ask that NIST
participate.
You have your top issues of manufacturing, education, and
infrastructure. The NIST budget includes references to
greenhouse gases, green technology, increased energy
efficiency, reduced environmental impact.
How do these activities fit into NIST's core capabilities
and research activities and standards and measurements? Are
these new initiatives as critical to innovation, the economy,
and life and safety issues such as nanotechnology, neutron
research, or disaster resistant building, for example?
Dr. Gallagher. The activities in green technologies, if you
will, at NIST reflect in some cases strengthening ongoing
activities that we have had before. In some cases, they are
new. But in all cases, they reflect industrial demand.
What we are seeing, for example, in the building technology
area is at the local level and state level requirements being
placed on promoting green building technologies, whether
commercial buildings or residential buildings, and a lot of
interest on the part of the construction industry for tools to
assess the effectiveness of these technologies.
It turns out what we have done is a good job at looking at
the performance of individual components. So we can look at how
insulation performs or we can look at the efficiency of a
particular window or door. We can look at the efficiency of a
particular appliance, heating and cooling system.
There is almost no information on how to bring all these
together and optimize them into a working building and to see
whether they have the type of energy savings impacts.
And that is important to the industry because without that
understanding by the consumer--they want to understand their
return on investment--is this building going to save me money
as I operate it and how soon will I realize the investments.
And so what we are trying to do is provide the measurement
tools to remove a barrier, for adoption for some of these new
technologies.
Similarly on the greenhouse gas monitoring, what is
happening is commercial deployment of greenhouse gas monitoring
networks. The company that was formerly known as WeatherBug
announced a few months ago their intention to deploy commercial
networks of sensor packages that would measure various
greenhouse gases.
And they want that data initially to be of use to the
research community, but ultimately their business model would
be to make that available to local communities and other areas
that would be interested in knowing their emissions of
greenhouse gases.
If that data is not perceived as being reliable and
interoperable, that you cannot compare a measurement taken in
one part of the country with a package with another, so there
is a lot of interest in how do we provide the measurement
science to make sure that these technologies perform the way
they are supposed to, which is a core NIST mission.

NATIONAL STRATEGIES FOR TRUSTED IDENTITIES IN CYBERSPACE

Mr. Wolf. You are requesting an increase of $24.5 million
to increase the national strategy for trusted identities in
cyber space. We understand that this initiative is supposed to
enhance security for people when they conduct business online,
whether it is buying a book from Amazon or check their banking
accounts or pay bills.
They would only have one ID and password. Would you explain
how this would work and could you expand on the statement in
your budget materials that states that, ``a user will no longer
be required to maintain dozens of passwords from both public
and private use?''
Dr. Gallagher. The idea behind NSTIC is to provide a
strategy for one of the real perplexing problems in information
technology which fundamentally is a communication
infrastructure between computers.
And to use that infrastructure to carry out a transaction,
whether you are just sharing information or whether you are
going online to bank or submit your taxes, requires a
transaction between your computer and the other device that you
are using.
And to establish a trusted connection, there has to be an
establishment of identity. I am who I say I am. And, of course,
the level of integrity of that depends on what you are trying
to do.
If it was accessing my bank account, I would want that to
be a very strong form of negotiation, this is really me and
nobody else, whereas if I am just posting some information on a
site, I may, in fact, want the amount of information to be very
low where I can ensure that I am anonymous.
And what we are seeing in the market is a real
proliferation. There is no common way of doing this and no
understanding of how robust these technologies are. And as
consumers, we know this because we struggle with individual
passwords or tokens or various other devices with really no
interoperability between these. So every time you go to a new
site, you have to recreate that.
The government's interest, of course, is that we also work
with citizens. For example, if you are e-filing your taxes, you
would want to have some assurance that you are logging in
saying who you are. In other cases, you want to be anonymous.
So rather than have the government say this is the way it
is going to be done, we do not think that is an appropriate
approach for a number of reasons, the adoption would be low,
the trust would be high for that type of a system, and we may
not know the right technology.
What we would like to do is turn to industry and say, look,
here is the functional requirements, here is the type of
capability we would like to have, a trust infrastructure, if
you will, an identity management infrastructure that people can
opt into. They can use these types of credentials in multiple
environments and they can control how much information they are
willing to share when they are setting up a transaction.
So it is largely a standards effort. I think we are going
to be working with industry to define these type of
requirements, how will identities be established, how do you
protect the privacy of the information you need----
Mr. Wolf. The privacy, I was wondering. The privacy issue
is one that I think most people are getting very concerned
with.
Dr. Gallagher. Very concerned. And I would say the existing
approach is the worst imaginable approach from a security
perspective because every time you go to a new Website and
create a new account, you have to share an enormous amount of
personal information to establish your identity.
And so we have all of this personal information about
ourselves at all of these different locations. And the question
is, if I am a small business and I want to set up a Web sales
application, rather than have to collect all of that new
information from all of my customers, can I use the fact that
they can log on through some trusted, some identity management
organization and basically rely on that.
So we think that this would be privacy enhancing, that
there would be much less of your personal information out there
and it would be used to establish identity and then protected.
It would not be held by the government. You know, we would like
this to be private sector.
If it is done correctly, the government can use these same
technologies itself which is really, I think, the right
approach rather than come up with something new.
Mr. Wolf. Well, the privacy issue even, you know, I saw a
piece the other day that companies are now able to notice what
television station you are watching, whether it is ESPN versus
another channel, and, therefore, begin to tailor ads in the
mail or to you through your computer based on that.
You really almost get the feeling from a privacy point of
view, I mean, you go to the bank teller after the church, the
ATM, and there is a camera there recording you. You get on the
toll road out in northern Virginia to come into Washington--on
the Greenway and the toll road--and use your smart pass. You
then drive up to New York City with it and you go through the
toll, through the tunnel.
And pretty soon everything seems to be almost out there.
And there is the ability to track and know what the person
likes to eat, what time they go into work, what time they leave
to come home.
And I think from a personal privacy issue, I find it very
troubling. I do not have the answer to it. And I do not bank
online, but, I have five kids and they all bank online. They
just think it is just the way to do it. So the privacy issue
troubles me deeply.
And if you can get a young high school graduate to crash
into the Department of Defense computer system and knowing what
the organized crime in Russia is doing and knowing what the
Chinese system that they have set up, almost nothing is not
able to be penetrated now if they really set out.
Now, I am sure they are not going to set out to go after
the individual consumer at Costco. But if they wanted to, they
almost can do it now.
Does that trouble you?
Dr. Gallagher. Well, it does very much. I think that any
powerful disruptive technology like information technology
comes simultaneously with enormous advantages. I think back at
just my 18 years at NIST and it is hard to believe the extent
to which information technology has permeated everything we do.
Mr. Wolf. Yes.
Dr. Gallagher. And so with all of those advantages, of
course, and that ability to move information come all of the
possible downsides with that. And I think the challenge we face
is that the rate of technology change has exceeded our ability
for the policy to respond to it.
I mean, this has opened up new types of privacy concerns
that we simply did not have before just because of how
connected and how much information is being assembled. It just
was not possible before.
So one of the challenges I always am looking at is how do
we try to respond, with everything we are doing, with
cybersecurity standards, with privacy.
The Department of Commerce has been very active in the
privacy arena trying to basically at least articulate a set of
guiding principles that we can start to address how we are
going to think about privacy protection with internet-based
technologies. And it is simply guiding what our actions will be
going forward and being able to work effectively with private
sector, with partner countries.
So we worry about this all the time and it has just moved
so quickly that it stresses--you know, it is hard to
extrapolate something you did in the past that really made
sense then. In some cases, you almost have to start over.
Mr. Wolf. Yes. Look at the pain and suffering that
WikiLeaks has created. I mean, what took place in WikiLeaks has
resulted in the death of people and the fall of governments. It
has done a pretty incredible thing.
We will go to Mr. Fattah now.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Dr. Gallagher.
Let me just for the record also acknowledge that you were
educated in Pennsylvania, University of Pittsburgh, a doctorate
in physics.
And you have worked under a number of presidents. You
started under the, I guess, the first Bush administration----
Dr. Gallagher. So I have been at----
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. In your original role?
Dr. Gallagher. So I joined NIST in 1993, so actually at the
start of the Clinton administration.
Mr. Fattah. Okay.
Dr. Gallagher. And then through the Bush administration as
well. And I actually was director of one of our neutron
research facilities up until 2008 and was made Acting NIST
Director at the end of the Bush administration and then
nominated----

NUCLEAR REACTOR SAFETY REVIEW

Mr. Fattah. So you bring a great deal of competence to the
work that you are doing. And you also have a constitutional
mandate provided through the Congress to set standards and
measurements for the country. And we want to thank you for your
service.
Let me start where the Chairman interestingly started at on
this nuclear question. Now, the problem in Japan, as best as I
can understand, is the most challenging part of it is the spent
fuel in these pools, right, and the leaking thereof caused by
the earthquake and then the tsunami?
We have in our country lots of spent fuel. I am a proponent
of nuclear energy. I am for nuclear energy. But one of the
issues is what you do with the spent fuel, and you have to cool
it for some long period of time. And under the NRC rules, you
put in these cooling pools for five years.
Now, we have some 63 metric tons of spent fuel in our
country. Some of it has been in these pools longer than what is
recommended and some of it is in dry cask.
Now, I guess the standard at the moment is that it really
does not matter whether or not it is a dry cask or whether it
is in a pool, right?
But the Sandia Lab has done some work in this regard and
there seems to be on the science of this edging more towards,
you know, because I am a layman when it comes to this, but to a
common sense view that a dry cask might be a better
circumstance, particularly from a security standpoint, you
know, potential terrorist attack or something like that, but
also even in the case of some other disruption like in the
instance of Japan.
So on the question of when there is a safety review that
the Administration has ordered, and I support the President's
call for this safety review, when we get to the point of trying
to figure out whether or not there is spent fuel in these pools
well beyond the period that it needs to be there and whether it
should go to dry cask, the question of dry cask or no dry cask,
is this something appropriately for NIST to be in the loop on?
Dr. Gallagher. So I think the answer is possibly, but it
would be indirect in support of the NRC. I managed our nuclear
facility for four years at NIST, so NIST does not have a
specific role here.
But speaking as a former manager of a nuclear facility, the
one challenge you always face, and I think the challenge that
NRC faces, that you have to look holistically at the problem.
You want to look at overall the integrity, safety, and security
of various options of storing fuel.
And as you pointed out, the problem we face with a once
through fuel cycle is the fact that there is a lot of decay
product still in the fuel when you are done using it. And as
the element continues to decay, it produces heat.
And so the technical challenge everyone is facing is what
is the right way to provide that cooling in various storage
configurations.
So it is easy to cool in a pool, but you see the
disadvantages of that long term. It is a very active system of
pumps and heat exchangers and various things. And there is no
down side to leaving it in a pool longer than it needs to
because it is pretty cool.
So the challenge with dry cask, the advantage is that it is
passive and can be made very hard, the disadvantage is how do
you provide passive cooling that is adequate to preserve the
integrity of the element. You want to keep the metallic, the
fuel cladding because that is what holds those components in
there to then maintain its integrity.
So I think that for the engineers that will have to look at
this, the best environment they can be put in is to step back
from some of the policy consequences of these and just look at
it from a technology perspective, what can be done to look at
enhanced fuel cladding integrity, what can be done to look at
advanced passive cooling technologies.
I think what they can do if they do that is they can give
us the technical options that let--because there is all sorts
of tricky policy questions that I know you have to deal with as
you look at these options and the impact of proliferation and
various other things, but at least then we have all of the
technology----
Mr. Fattah. There are a lot of policy implications, but
this is a safety review, right? So, again, I start over with
the fact that I am pro-nuclear. I think we should be even more
aggressive. I think we should look at small modular nuclear
reactors. But I also think that we should act in intelligent
ways to protect public safety.
So this notion that it is an equal choice between a cooling
pool and a dry cask to me, and I do not have a doctoral degree
in physics, even from a distinguished university, but it does
not sound to me like it is an equal choice either way.
And I think that this is the kind of thing where NIST, if
you are setting standards, it might be useful--so I would love
for you to review some of the work that has been done on this
question and see what you think.
I mean, I am not trying to jump in front of the NRC, but I
just think that it is an important question because absent the
spent fuel being in the pool, much of the calamity of the Japan
nuclear reactors would not exist. And even if it was in dry
cask and there was some rupture, the level of problem would be
lessened in a very considerable way.
But I do not know. The Chairman started on this. I just
wanted to jump in.

MANUFACTURING

I want to go to your other work. Now, as a state
legislator, I was one of the sponsors of the Ben Franklin
Technology Program in Pennsylvania which has worked very, very
well in taking excellent research from our universities and
bringing it to bear in terms of economic development.
And now you are engaged in that in a number of different
ways through the Manufacturing Extension Partnership and
through the TIP Program. And TIP is an outgrowth of the earlier
program, the advanced technology program, right, and it is
focused on small and medium size manufacturers?
So I have seen some of the work that has been done. I was
out at a manufacturer in Pennsylvania in my district in
Philadelphia. They make fishing reels. It is called Penn Fish `
Tackle or Penn Fishing Reels. It is in North Philadelphia.
They make the world-class saltwater fishing reels, Mr.
Chairman. They sell for about $1,500 a piece and they have no
competitor in the United States at all. And people buy from all
over the world.
But the Manufacturing Extension Partnership helped provide
some technical assistance in the manufacturing process through
a grant and a collaboration.
And I also know another manufacturer who is in bio-tech. It
is a very different process. He is in Philadelphia, in the
Spring Garden area, and he is making glass that you work with
small chemical and biological formulations in the whole DNA
area.
And through the Manufacturing Extension Partnership, they
hooked him up with some people in Chapel Hill who helped design
how this little firm manufacturer of 14 people could be major
players in a world that, otherwise, they would have been frozen
out of by larger players. So the program has worked well.
I know the chairman and I have gotten letters from
Manufacturing Extension Partnerships from I think every State
now and talking about the great work. And we are very
interested. I have said that it is my most important priority.
I notice that the Chairman has an important affinity for
helping in this area.
So you have a number of different programs in the
manufacturing area. This is the largest of them, is that
correct, in terms of dollar amounts?
Dr. Gallagher. Probably not, only because such a large
portion of the laboratory program also works towards
manufacturing. But it is the largest program that is
specifically focused on providing services directly to
manufacturers.
Mr. Fattah. Okay, well if you could walk through all of the
efforts that NIST is working at, and how they work together or
separately to help manufacturers? If you could spend a couple
of minutes on that that would be helpful.
Dr. Gallagher. So thank you. The NIST role in manufacturing
is interesting because it comes in sort of two major ways. One
of them is through that core mission that the Constitution gave
us in Article 1, Section 8 which is to establish a system of
weights and measures and to deploy that system into commerce.
And so a lot of the NIST laboratory work is actually not
defining what the meter is and what the second is. That is an
important part of what we do, but it is realizing active
measurement in commercial environments. How do you measure
deformation when you are trying to bend sheet metal to form
cars? Or what are the materials properties of advanced
materials if you are light weighting? Or how do you
characterize new nanomaterials? Or how do we look at biological
materials?
So an enormous amount of our mission, core mission work in
measurement science is removing measurement barriers to
manufacturing. Similarly our role in standard setting. The
United States is quite unique in that standards are not set by
a government agency. Standards are set by industry. And that
approach to industry-led technical standards is one that we
support. So instead of having us issue standards, we have a
supporting role. We coordinate federal agencies' use, but we
are also there to support the industry efforts to make sure
standards are based on good methodology and so that in the end
you want to measure something because you want to know that a
standard was put into practice. It does not matter if it is on
a piece of paper. You want to show that a product or service
can, you know, can perform the way you wanted it too.
So the NIST laboratories all the way through have these
enormous efforts in providing unique measurement capability,
lowering measurement barriers to manufacturing, and supporting
technology standards. In addition to that the extramural
programs in our ITS account provide a very special kind of
service to industry. And as you pointed out, MEP is a great
example.
The MEP program only provides up to one-third of the
funding for the MEP centers. What MEP really did is not set
something up from scratch. It tied efforts that were in all
fifty states together. It created a network of extension
programs where they were working, often set up through a state
university, or through a state-led program, working with
manufacturers where they were trying to support their local
business community. The power of networking similar state
efforts together, though, is very real. And it allowed the
states to both share information very quickly on best
practices, what kinds of services were most effective. It also
allowed us to collect metrics. You know, what worked? And what
was the impact of these different services. And one of the
things that happens then is we saw a surprising amount of
uniformity across all of these fifty, these centers across all
fifty states.
And the reason I bring that up is that, you know, one of
the issues that comes up every time we talk about manufacturing
programs, and an area that I would like to work with this
committee on, is this tricky question of the appropriate
federal role. And I think it is tricky because states have
always played a major role in economic development in this
country. And so you end up in this, this decision about, you
know, how far should the federal government get involved if the
states are already there?
One of the natural roles for the federal government,
though, is helping the states work together. So this idea of
networking and working across and sharing information,
facilitating information across states is very powerful. And I
think MEP may be one of the best examples of that.
Mr. Fattah. Well this biotech company in my district is a
good example of that. I mean, we have some very fine
universities and people who can be helpful to businesses. But
in this particular case the expertise that was needed for this
company happened to be in North Carolina. And it was through
MEP that that connection was made. And so I think that that is
very useful. Because, you know, as we compete on the world
stage, we are not competing as an individual state or a
parochial community. I mean, a lot of the business location
decisions are either, is it North America, or is it some other
place? And so it is very useful now.

CONSTRUCTION OF RESEARCH FACILITIES

You talked about your lab program. Part of your budget
request is for continued construction at the lab. Is this at
the Colorado lab? Or which labs? Because you got some dollars
through the stimulus program for construction, is that correct?
Dr. Gallagher. That is correct. So the Recovery Act
included funding for internal construction at NIST. Those funds
have been obligated. And there is a lot of construction
underway, if you were to visit either in Gaithersburg or in
Boulder, Colorado. And that is one of the reasons the
construction request is down considerably in 2012 because we
are dealing with this wave of ongoing construction. The
situation in Boulder is that facility was in very poor shape.
It was built in the 1950's. It had the unfortunate accident in
history, I guess, of being built before there were, you know,
central air conditioning and air ventilation systems. So for a
laboratory facility it was a real problem.
So what we did is a study to show whether it was most cost
effective to build new. For very high performance buildings it
is cheaper to just build it from scratch. And that building is
under construction now and will be done sometime next year. And
what functions are most cost effectively addressed by just
renovating the existing building. So the funds in the 2012 are
to initiate and continue that renovation part of the project.
And the reason I focused on it was the timing is really
important. Because if you are going to do renovation you are
displacing existing activities. And so the most efficient way
to do this is to roll right after the completion of the new
building and move through the renovation phase. If that is
interrupted, you know, what will happen of course people will
set up their equipment in these spaces and then we will later
have to move them out and then move it back in. So we are
trying to optimize the phasing of that project in Boulder.
Mr. Fattah. And this is a relatively small agency. What do
you have, some 2,900 scientists? You can go out to one of the
national labs like Sandia which has, you know, got 3,300
Ph.D.'s and another 4,000 or 5,000 workers there. So, you know,
in comparison. So one of the questions is, I know we are
dealing with kind of incremental questions about your budget
from 2010 enacted to next year. But as you look forward over
the next ten years, are we looking at a need to grow the entity
in non-incremental ways in order to take further advantage of
our resources and to compete better? Or are we about where we
need to be with relatively small or, you know, not so small
increases? I guess it depends on how one might look at it.
Dr. Gallagher. So I think the Administration's view is that
NIST has to grow. It was one of the three agencies, and in fact
Congress I think would agree because the COMPETES Act, which
this committee supported very strongly, called for substantial
growth in three agencies as well. The DOE Office of Science,
NIST, and National Science Foundation. Looking at NIST----
Mr. Fattah. For doubling them----
Dr. Gallagher. For doubling----
Mr. Fattah. Right.
Dr. Gallagher [continuing]. That is correct. One way to
look at, you know, what is the optimal size, this is always
difficult to do. But NIST is unusual in a couple of ways. One
is its size, it is relatively small compared to the other major
national laboratory activities. It is also, it is very diverse
technically. It is probably the broadest collection of
technical activities because the measurement science field does
not confine it very much. So it is extremely broad. And if you
look at serving industry as a primary mission area the amount
of technological activity in industry has continued to grow
over the last twenty years whereas the NIST laboratories have
been flat or decline. So as a percentage of the industrial
effort we have lost a lot of ground in the last thirty years.
It comes back to this role of government question. I think,
you know, we have tended, it has tended to be easier to focus
on those areas where there is an overriding national need.
Energy, defense, aerospace, where we can justify the stronger
involvement. When you look at activities that are most
crosscutting I think that has been the harder issue. And I
think that comes back to a point the Chairman raised at the
very beginning. Where we are looking at the enthusiasm gap
maybe in the attendance of the hearing. But I think----
Mr. Fattah. That is all right. The Chairman and the Ranking
Member, we are very enthused. So even though no one else may
be, we are enthused. But thank you, sir, for your testimony.
Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you. We are going to go to Mr. Aderholt in
a minute. I just want to just ask one question, to give you
time, okay? It will be good when we can remove this issue from
the political attack and debate back and forth. I worry, my
wife and I, we have five kids and I have fifteen grandkids. And
I worry about the future of our country. And Norm Augustine
made a comment at an event that I had on a bill to create a
deficit commission to deal with that. He said in the sixteenth
century, Spain was the number one country, and that is no
longer the case. Seventeenth century, it was France. We used
France at Yorktown to gain our independence. The nineteenth
century, the British century. The twentieth century, he said
was the American century. But yet it was in doubt, in essence,
what the twenty-first century would be. Would it be the
American century, or would it be the Chinese century?
I believe if we come together, we are going to have
differences on a lot of different issues. But if we can come
together with the American ingenuity, and the free enterprise
system, it can be the American century. But I worry when I see
the Chinese and others so cooperating with their government, in
manufacturing, and doing things like that, that we could see us
begin to decline. And as these jobs leave America, that the
manufacturing jobs leave. And some have said, ``Well, it is
manufacturing but we have the R&D.'' Well if all the
manufacturing leaves the R&D begins to go. And we are seeing
companies, American companies, opening up amazing facilities
and beginning to move a lot of the R&D offshore.
So for, you know, my grandchildren, and for the future of
America. But this issue becomes so politically charged. So how
do we take it out of that? And some have said on the MEP,
``Well, it is too much government involvement.'' Well, the
internet came through the government. You know, and I would
hold my credentials as a conservative Republican up against
anybody in this Congress. But I want to help America. And on
the bill that I have, with regard to repatriation of jobs, I
have actually had somebody say, ``Well, would be an expenditure
there?'' We give tax credits to companies to return home. We
also will reshape some EDA grants to go to a locality so that
if they are going to bring a plant back from China that they
can have an opportunity for a water and sewer grant. Or
something like that.
But so I would hope that we could, and I think it is
important for your agency to stay totally out of these
political debates. But hopefully we have to come together to
fashion a policy that we can, and in the aviation area, much of
the aviation with regard to Boeing really came out of much of
what was done in the Defense Department. And we see the
spinoffs in NASA. So some time I would be interested, and I
want to go to Mr. Aderholt, to hear your comments. And not here
at the hearing, but you can come by to tell me. What you think
we can honestly, ethically, and morally do to enhance the
manufacturing base of this country?
When I see Apple, you know, many people have iPods, iPads,
iPhones. A large number are being manufactured in China. Well,
they ought to be manufactured in Alabama, or in Pennsylvania,
or in Virginia. And it takes a certain technical skill to do
that. But I would like to know what you think. And after I put
in my bill with Senator Warner in a week or two maybe you can
just set up a time to come on by. When you are going to be
downtown, do not make a, and we can see what we can do to
actually craft a manufacturing program that brings jobs back
and creates jobs for American citizens, and yet can eliminate
this debate that we are having so we can have a unified policy.
So the twenty-first century will be the American century.

MANUFACTURING EXTENSION PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. Thank you, doctor, for being here.
The Alabama Technology Network, the ATN, is a recipient of MEP
funds. And I think we have, and our district has been most
impressed by the work of NIST through those funds. And the
Alabama Technology Network, they tell us that for every dollar
it receives in their MEP funds the government gets back about
$76 in return. The Alabama Technology Network has attracted
significant private investment and saved or created well over a
thousand jobs in Alabama last year. What my question would be,
can you tell us a little bit how those MEP funds are allocated?
Just for our clarification?
Dr. Gallagher. Thank you very much. It is always great
hearing the success stories coming from the MEP program. It is
a remarkable partnership with small- and mid-sized
manufacturers. The way the funding currently works in the
program is actually in two parts. The one-third, the maximum
one-third federal cost share part that supports the day-to-day
operations of the MEP centers constitutes up to about $110
million of the request level. The remainder is what we call
next gen. It is basically the part of MEP that is working with
centers. It is actually done competitively. We issue a call for
ideas and the centers can compete for these additional funds to
develop if they have ideas for new services. In other words,
how to match small- and mid-sized manufacturers with new
technologies. A very active area right now as manufacturers try
to diversify their products and move into new markets. Or to
work with small- and mid-sized manufacturers to increase their
exports. Most of the growing markets are overseas and this is a
barrier for many small- and mid-sized businesses. How do they
work if they are going to start working with exports? Or how
did they become part of an important supply chain? So we have
been working with DOD and the defense logistic agencies so that
when Defense needs parts in certain areas we can rapidly hook
them up with manufacturers who are willing to supply those
types of parts and components. Buy American Acts, you know,
when there is a requirement under a certain type of
construction to supply something that is Buy America to satisfy
it what we can do is use this MEP network to get that request
out to the manufacturers and say, ``Hey, can you make this?''
And provide that as an opportunity.
Those types of, those are sort of new ideas that are coming
from the manufacturers about ways that this programs can
support them. And that is what the additional $30 million is
used for. We use it as a competitive program to help them take
an idea like that and develop it into a program. And then as I
said, what happens, because the program ties all of these
centers together through this network, is they can rapidly see
what works and what does not and can adopt these programs for
their own use.
Mr. Aderholt. What as far as the state allocations, is
every state guaranteed a certain amount? Or is it awarded on
merit? Or how does that operate?
Dr. Gallagher. I do not know the algorithm that determines,
I do not believe there is a state cap for how much each state
can get. What there is in the statute is the federal share can
account for no more than one-third of the total funding. What
the other two-thirds are made of actually varies a lot from
state to state. In some cases the states are directly investing
in these activities and are full participants with funding. In
other cases fees that are collected from the manufacturers make
up part of it. So it is very diverse in terms of how states,
you know, how the centers approach the remainder of the cost
share. And they, the way we determine who runs a center is on a
merit basis. So there was initially a competition and we
evaluated that, and there is a regular review process that is
carried out. And that is what the MEP staff are doing, is
working with the centers. We want the centers to succeed, so it
is not a punitive review. But we are trying to make sure that
these centers are delivering the maximum benefit as possible.
So if there is a center that is having problems we work with
them as much as possible before we would go to a, you know, we
would need to recompete.
Mr. Aderholt. Well I think one reason it has been
significant in Alabama is because we have lost a lot of
manufacturing jobs in Alabama, which a lot of states have. And
not to say that Alabama is the only state that falls into that
category, but needless to say some states have fallen in that
category more so than others especially when it comes to
manufacturing. And you may not know this, but do you know if
there is any way that those states that have lost more
manufacturing jobs, is that taken into account when these funds
are distributed?
Dr. Gallagher. No, we have not been adjusting the
distribution funding based on these changes in manufacturing
levels. Because the programs themselves are saturated. In other
words they are, you know, as effective as this program is it is
not large enough to address all of the small- and mid-sized
manufacturers who might desire these services. So even though
there has been sizable manufacturing reductions in certain
states it is not at a level where there is excess capacity in
the MEP centers to our knowledge at all.
Mr. Aderholt. So based on your comments when I originally
mentioned the MEP program, you have seen a lot of successes
through those funds, I take it? Throughout your time at the
Department of Commerce?
Dr. Gallagher. I have to confess, it is one of the most
enjoyable parts of my job, is to go visit some of these
manufacturers and see what they are doing. You get very excited
that, you know, you are seeing all of the things that we care
about. The American ingenuity, the excitement in moving into
new areas. And anyone who has not done it should because you
will realize immediately when you start visiting these
companies that manufacturing is not what many people picture it
to be. This is some cutting edge, high technology work in very
small firms. This is not just sitting and doing repetitive
manufacturing tasks over and over again. American companies,
when they are succeeding, they are providing the highest
performance products. They have some of the highest
productivity levels in the world. And you see it all when you
go into some of these centers. So it is some of the most
exciting, it is one of the most exciting things I get to do in
my job.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Aderholt. I just, the staff just
gave me this thing here, an AP story. It is in Tokyo. Japan's
Northeastern coast has been rattled by a strong aftershock. The
Japanese meteorological agency has issued a tsunami warning for
a wave of up to one meter. The warning was issued for a coastal
area already ravaged by last month's tsunami. Officials said
the quake was a 7.4 magnitude and hit twenty-five miles under
the water and off the coast. And I just hope we can get the
head of NOAA to tell us that they are going to put one of these
conferences are. But what if 7.4 hit off the coast of
California? Or off the coast of Atlantic City? What would the
impact be? I know that is a different configuration, and but--
--
Dr. Gallagher. Yes, I do not have a detailed knowledge of
the seismological conditions there. I know that the type of
geological structures that we have on the West Coast in some
cases are quite similar to the one that is causing these
earthquakes in Japan. I know that USGS has risk hazard maps.
That is one of the things that has developed under NEHRP. And
what we are developing is a capability to look at the
structural integrity of how we built things according to these
maps. So our ability to start understanding the risk is
improving. But off the top of my head I cannot project what it
would be like.

TECHNOLOGY INNOVATION PROGRAM

Mr. Wolf. You are requesting a total, this is the
Technology Innovation Program, a total program level of $75
million and eighty FTEs for the Technology Innovation Program.
This amount is $30 million above, or 67 percent higher, than
that which is in H.R. 1. What research efforts have been funded
thus far under the program?
Dr. Gallagher. Thank you. So the TIP program, of course, is
one of a few that are called proof of concept programs in the
federal government that are designed to look at high risk, high
payoff advances in science and technology in a focused area.
The program is fairly modest in size for a program that is
trying to do that. So what we have tried to do to maximize
impact is take advantage of the fact that the program calls for
us to define what is called a critical national need.
Justification for why we would make federal investments in a
particular area. And we have tried to focus those so that
within, we get high quality proposals in that area.
The first of the competitions was held in 2007. It was in
the area of civil infrastructure, looking at new technologies
to assess the condition of road surfaces, bridges, this type of
physical infrastructure that we rely on. We are taking this
infrastructure well past its design lifetime and of course the
big challenge is how do you assess condition to make meaningful
maintenance or replacement decisions? And we think technology
could play a role.
All the other competitions that have been held since, in
2008 and 2009, have been in the area of manufacturing. Either
nanomanufacturing or biomanufacturing. We are looking at these
emergent areas where as a country we have made deep investments
in the underlying research and now we are beginning to see the
real promise coming out in terms of technologies that are being
made. And so we think that is, those have been ripe areas.
So the program has focused, with the exception of the first
call in civil infrastructure, in the areas of manufacturing, in
advanced manufacturing.
Mr. Wolf. Well in last year's hearing the TIP program was
discussed and you referred to it as a pilot then. The program
was just begun in 2007. You reported that NIST would have to
evaluate the results of the program to determine if it should
continue. So have you taken that analysis?
Dr. Gallagher. Well the discussions are certainly still
continuing. My feelings have not changed since last year. That
if the intent of the program is to have a broad national impact
in looking at breakthrough technologies in all areas of
national need, it is hard to imagine how we would do that with
a program that has been funded at $70 million to $75 million a
year. So what we have done is we have tried to create much
narrower focal points for the program so we can have an impact
there. And we continue to look at the size of the program
whether this makes sense to do it.
In the context of the 2012 request I think one of the
reasons it has an increase has to do with the fact that these
narrower areas of focus have been in manufacturing. So this is
really reflecting the Administration's desire to increase
funding in breakthrough technologies for manufacturing. I do
not think that means we have stopped looking at the
effectiveness of the program. And we will continue to work with
the committee as we have those discussions.
Mr. Wolf. Because we have here, you stated last year that
TIP, you could really not, you expected impact, unless the
funding were significantly increased. And the climate that we
are in now really will not allow that option, even if we wanted
to do it. So does that make this relatively small program a
lower priority in comparison with your core research
activities?
And as you know, I think, Mr. Fattah is supportive and I am
supportive. I mean, we are not looking to rip the NIST budget
up. And I think we would like to plus it up, if we could. But
make sure that, you know, I can spend a little bit on this, and
a little bit on that, and a little bit on this, and a little
bit on that, and you get nothing. Whereas if you really hit. So
if you had to prioritize programs given the fiscal constraints,
you know, where does TIP rank in relation to other core NIST
programs? And the MEP that we have been talking about? And I
know it is hard to say what one of your children do you want to
put out for, you know, but because of where we are now I think
we have got to look at some of those things.
Dr. Gallagher. So I, yes, this is always tough. And I
think, your priorities depend on where you set funding levels.
I think my feeling remains unchanged. That as TIP was designed,
which was to have broad national impact in a broad set of areas
of critical national need, it is underfunded to do that. And in
fact the way the authority was put together requires a lot of
program management. So we have a lot of staff managing this
relatively small program.
From that context, if the decision is made, as you do your
very difficult job of optimizing these budget choices, that we
cannot grow that program. It would not rank very high on my
priorities because I think given a smaller amount of money I
can think of programs that could have a much bigger impact.
One of the reasons we proposed the Advanced Manufacturing
Technology Consortia Program, AMTech, is precisely for that
reason. It is a relatively small program. But what AMTech is
designed to do is to bring competing companies together to not
just work together but to fund the work they are doing
together. The model is really SEMATECH.
Mr. Wolf. Well then are there other programs? Assuming the
committee had a conversion like Paul on the road to Damascus
and said, ``Well this is just, we have got to do this.'' Are
there other areas--and I am not going to pin you down here
because I think you have to think about this because you are
talking about real live programs and people. Are there other
areas that you would say, ``This I think is so significant for
the future of America that I would prepare to,'' I mean I have
got some other questions, some we will get to, some we will
not, and we will just submit them for the record. But, ``I
would be prepared to give up there.''
Again, we are not looking to take you down. And I think if
you can just think about that and let the staff know. Are there
some other areas that because you like to do this, I mean, I
would like you to be able to move ahead and clean the clock of
the Chinese, if you can. But, so where would we get that if we
wanted to give you that increase? And I cannot speak for Mr.
Fattah, but I think he would feel the same way as we were to--
--

SMART GRID

Mr. Fattah. You can speak for me anytime, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. No, well I, no I cannot, either. But if you could
sort of let us know, I do not know how close we are coming, but
we have a smart grid question here. You are requesting $9
million to continue research on smart grid. What is smart grid?
And why is this important research? And where do we rank with
respect to other nations?
Dr. Gallagher. So smart grid is the combination of
information technology with the technology used to manage the
distribution of electricity. What that means is pretty diverse.
It goes all the way from equipment that is on the high voltage
lines that manage the actual power management at the national
and regional level, all the way to smart meters and smart
appliances that could go into homes. So you could imagine
within a given building you are enhancing your ability to
manage when you consume electricity and can you take advantage
of pricing.
Mr. Wolf. Which is important.
Dr. Gallagher. Which is very important, because if you do
not do that, you cannot store electricity anywhere. So you have
to build your system for where your peak loads are, and that is
a very expensive proposition. So if we can enhance our ability
to manage it there is a very large benefit.
Mr. Wolf. How do we compare with other nations?
Dr. Gallagher. Right now we lead the world, I believe, in
the development of smart grid technologies. The challenge here
is, there is some research challenge. But the real issue is you
are developing something kind of like the internet. You are
going to have a bunch of different devices that need to talk
and work with each other. So coming up with a set of standards
that industry can agree on, in terms of how they are going to
share information, or how a certain device is going to connect
and talk to another device, how that is going to be done
securely so we do not introduce new vulnerabilities into the
system as we increase its ability to do all the good things is
an enormous challenge. It is very similar to creating a set of
standards around, for example, 4G wireless technologies, or the
internet. It is allowing this sort of very high degree of
interoperability.
At the present time my personal view is that the effort on
working with industry, we have 600 or 700 participants in this
effort. We are working with all the major companies, utility
companies, utility commissions. And this, the level of
complexity of a system like that is very high. And this is
moving as fast as any technology of this complexity I have ever
seen.
Mr. Wolf. So this is important?
Dr. Gallagher. This is incredibly important.

CLOUD COMPUTING

Mr. Wolf. You know, I was the author of the bill to, called
Journey Through Hallowed Ground, to preserve and protect land
coming from Gettysburg down to Route 15, down to Monticello.
Gettysburg Civil War, Monticello the Revolutionary War. VEPCO
wants to bring, and some others, to take up, so the smart grid
is important. I am not so sure that most of that power is not
coming to Northern Virginia or the Shenandoah Valley. It is
heading up to New York City. So I am for anything that you can
do to kind of make sure that you can do whatever you would have
to to protect and preserve, but at the same time. So I just
wanted to get that on the record. But if you can keep us
informed on that, too, because I am interested because of the
impact that it is having on the State of Virginia.
On cloud computing you are requesting an increase of $5
million. Would you explain what cloud computing is? Please
explain, and I am going to combine some of these questions and
then to go to Mr. Fattah. And how you are working to ensure
that government information will be as secure as more and more
information is outsourced? And then, I am combining, we have
read that IBM is investing in a new cloud computing data center
in Singapore. They have seven such cloud labs in the Asia
Pacific region. Where do we stand with respect to our
competitors in cloud computing? So what is it? And where do we
stand?
Dr. Gallagher. Cloud is a frustrating term because it is a
little bit like manufacturing. It is one of these terms that is
so broad that a lot of different things fit into it. In short,
cloud is basically exploiting the internet to provide certain
types of functions that you would normally now deal with in
what is called an enterprise mode.
So if I am an organization and I need certain computing
capacity, I would need to buy the computers, buy the servers,
buy the internal internet, buy the software that I run on those
servers and everything would be controlled and run by my own
organization.
What being on the internet at very particularly high speed
internet allows you to do is basically break that model. For
example, I don't need to buy the software. I might simply be
able to let folks in my organization use web applications that
would provide that service, so I don't need to build a data
server. I can actually store the information through the
internet and somebody else can provision it.
What it actually does is, it is the full use of the
internet to provide either IT services, IT software or IT
capacity. And the advantages are pretty significant because it
is a change in business model fundamental. It allows for very
great efficiency. They can rapidly deploy and you don't need to
write software and buy machines. You can very rapidly
reconfigure information.
Mr. Wolf. Why would IBM invest in a new cloud computer data
center in Singapore? There are seven cloud labs in the Asian-
Pacific region. Where do we stand? Where does America stand?
Dr. Gallagher. Well, again, I think that in the information
technology arena, American companies are still at the
forefront, so I think in terms of----
Mr. Wolf. But, you know, it is like a guy in a race. You
can be in front, but last time he would have been so far that
nobody would have been near him but somebody's near him now and
so I think it is somewhat deceptive to say we are out in front.
How far out in front? Are we gaining or are we falling behind?
So I mean, why would IBM--I worry some of these companies--it
is Asia, Asia, Asia, but how do we compare with abroad and why
would they not build them here in the United States? And are
U.S. companies making similar investments here in River City
where we live, here in the United States?
Dr. Gallagher. Well, the answer is yes. I think companies
like Google and Gmail and Amazon, these are all very much
cloud-service type activities. I think this is going to be a
global phenomenon. This is basically a business model approach
and most IT related activities are going to end up being cloud
based, so I think you are going to see IT investments in cloud
services all over the world because the market is growing all
over the world. The challenge in this is that a narrower issue,
which is if we are going to ask federal agencies to start
preferentially looking at cloud before they make big
investments in buying, what are the ramifications of doing
that?
If it is just a data service, where is that data residing?
Do we still meet our obligations to protect that data? Do we,
once the data is in the cloud, are we handcuffed to that one
provider because if I change the company that is providing my
service the data can't get moved over there.
Is it useable? Are these things still providing the same
functionality we had before? So the NIST effort is really
trying to address what the federal CIOs are dealing with. If I
am going to look at cloud for either storing data or providing
some applications or web services, how do they meet their
obligations that are still there to protect the information to
ensure data portability and ensure usability?
Some of that, what we will do right now is we will leverage
existing policy, but I think the thing that makes cloud so
tricky is it basically breaks existing policy. Everything we
tell agencies to do now in terms of how they manage their
assets has to do with how they control all of the assets. It is
their computers, their people running the computers, and all of
the services are on their sites and that is no longer the case
under various types of clouds, so how do they continue to meet
their responsibilities under this?
So we will use Scotch tape and bailing wire initially to
develop in areas where we think it is okay to do that with
existing policy. But the real challenge is, it tends to be a
standards and a conformity assessment problem. How do we get
industry to show us that they can meet our requirements in a
way that is robust and it is a way that we can actually trust a
particular cloud service that meets our needs to protect public
information that we have in our systems and protects all of the
requirements that haven't changed?
Mr. Wolf. Are foreign information technology firms
investing here in the U.S.?
Dr. Gallagher. I am sure they are. Again the question is,
to what extent federal agencies are going to use those types of
services, and I think that is what the Federal CIO community is
actively struggling with now. How do they reinterpret their
obligations to protect information in the context of all these
new services? And we are doing everything we can to provide a
basis for them to do that.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Well, this is a very sensitive area, but I am
not going to delve into it other than saying that we do have
certain protections related to the ownership of broadcast and
communications entities, and farm land, and I think we have to
think anew, because that was done a long time ago, about what
other areas from our own national interests we need to section
off from, you know, significant foreign ownership because we
are competing with economic competitors and we have to be
careful that we don't want them to understand our--you know, to
be too kind of close in to our huddle either. So you have to
kind of think this through and move in this internet age.
But I want to go back to the original subject because I
want to make a request of you, but I want to mention, and one
day we will get you to Philadelphia and take you around, but
Cardel Industries is a fascinating company in Philadelphia, a
manufacturer, a couple of thousand employees, no competitor in
the U.S. They make what are called refurbished auto parts, and
a number of places have required them because they are cheaper
to use these refurbished auto parts. This is 10 percent of the
manufacturing job base in Philadelphia. It is a fascinating
company, family owned. They have a chaplain service. They have
prayer in the morning and they get to work.
And they have been doing this so well that, you know, like
I said, they have no other competitor anywhere in the U.S. Over
in West Philadelphia is a place, we have a high school there
called West Philadelphia High and it competed in the XPRIZE to
develop a car that could go 100 miles on a gallon of fuel and
they beat out Toyota and they beat out MIT and they beat out--
they were the only high school among 110 teams. And they would
have won the final, but their car only ran 80 miles, so they
didn't win, but they hooked up with the entity that did win,
Edison, and now they are working on manufacturing this car.
It is fascinating. It is not so much the kind of IQ only.
The part of it is the desire and the enthusiasm to get
something done and these kids have done a remarkable job of--I
mean, all these companies have spent over $100,000,000 on their
entries in this contest.
So part of what we have to do is, we have to challenge
ourselves and then we also need to find opportunities for us to
demonstrate our interests in this area, which gets to my
request. And I am sure that the Chairman will join in with me.
I would be very interested. I am going to send you a letter,
because I have done this for the Chairman, I am going to send
you a letter asking if, through the MEP program, we could put
together essentially a catalog of American manufacturers so
that when people are looking to have something made, then we
are trying to get something done, and they want to use an
American company to make it, they have some sense about where
they can go to get it done, you know.
So you have this Cover Sports in Philadelphia. They make
tarps, but they also have a little contract with DoD, just a
little teeny $100,000 contract where they make these bags made
of some of the tarp material for some of the nuclear waste on
the subs. So, you know, we need to focus our efforts on making
sure that the capabilities that exist here are utilized.
So I am going to send you a letter, and I am going to get
the Chairman and do--our staffs will work together to get it
over, and I think it will be good because then, at least when
people want to buy something who need a product or a widget
made, there is really no reason for them to be looking some
other place to get it made, and there are people here who can
do anything, and I think that is part of how America is number
one today, how it could be number one tomorrow, but we have to
make sure that people know about these capabilities, and they
don't exist only in Philadelphia.
We have 1,300 manufacturers. We've got 5,000 in the region,
but there are manufacturers all over our country. Some are in
the MEP program. Some are not, but I think at a minimum if we
could get a, you know, obviously in this day and age they
wouldn't be in print, but it would be probably in some online
format, so that companies and individuals and inventors who
want to get their product made can find someone who can do it.

BALDRIGE PROGRAM

Mr. Wolf. I think that is a good idea because I think when
particularly some of the Fortune 500 are looking to, let us say
in the space program, to do a certain thing, they have places
they can go to. Maybe the MEP people could put that all
together that they could look for an American manufacturer
before--or even someone who is somewhere in the area who could
then add on and do that. I think that makes a lot of sense.
The Baldrige Program, is it core scientific NIST activity?
And we are down so that is why we have been moving, so there is
a vote on and we will have to leave in a minute. Is it a core
scientific NIST activity? You are reducing it from $10,000,000
to $8,000,000 with plan to transition out.
Dr. Gallagher. It is not a scientific activity, but it has
been a core NIST activity since it was first created in the
late 1980s.
Mr. Wolf. Yes, I remember it as being at Commerce, but how
do you envision this transition to non-governmental funding
taking place?
Dr. Gallagher. I don't know the answer to that yet. So what
we have done is we have signaled that we would like to move in
this direction with this request and what we are doing right
now is engaging with the Baldrige Foundation. Baldrige is
really already a public private partnership?
Mr. Wolf. Is it? Is their funding, is it all private?
Dr. Gallagher. Yes, there is a foundation with an
endowment. They provide funding through the endowment. Of
course, at the time it was set up, the cost share was set up
one way and so the endowment size was limited to the size of
the contributions into the endowment, so it lowered the
barriers for doing that.
So I think the name of the discussion now is--has the
program matured to the point where it is worth reevaluating
where you draw that public/private line, and that is the
discussion we have started with the foundation. And I think
until we see what the options are and what the consequences of
the options are, it is premature to start talking about what
the implementation would be towards a particular goal.
Mr. Wolf. All right. And that is underway?
Dr. Gallagher. That is underway.

POSTDOCTORAL RESEARCH ASSOCIATESHIPS PROGRAM

Mr. Wolf. That is underway. You are also here on, we
covered MEP pretty extensively. Is that the education one
there? Page 9 on post-doctoral research. You are requesting an
increase of $3,000,000 for a total of $14,400,000 for your
post-doctoral research program. We are concerned. I am. I
should say ``I'' rather than ``we.'' But America is falling
behind our competitors with respect to the number of students
in technical fields. Would the additional funding enable NIST
to hire up the authorized level of 120 associates? And with
regard, if you can make that fast so I can then go to Mr.
Bonner, he can ask whatever questions.
Dr. Gallagher. The answer is yes. It was designed to
restore the program to its full scale, so.
Mr. Wolf. And are you concerned about America's competitive
edge falling behind?
Dr. Gallagher. Yes.
Mr. Wolf. You are. And if you have any studies where we
have directed NSF to do a study on how do you get young people
to be active and major in the sciences, and from maybe up to
fifth, the numbers fifth or sixth grade to begin to go. What do
you think we have to do to encourage more people perhaps on a
longer-run basis? And maybe if you could call the head of NSF
and see what they are doing and how you may cooperate with
them, I would appreciate it.
Mr. Bonner. Mr. Chairman, I don't know where we are, and I
apologize for being late.
Mr. Wolf. That is okay.
Mr. Bonner. I can put these question in the record. That's
fine. If you are close to concluding----
Mr. Wolf. No, you are fine. No, no. You go ahead. No, no.
Mr. Bonner. Dr. Gallagher, forgive us, those of us who came
in late for these----
Mr. Wolf. There are so many hearings and people bounce back
and forth.
Mr. Bonner. Not having the benefit of hearing the
conversation between you and the Chairman and the Ranking
Member, I wanted to just ask a couple of quick questions. In
your testimony you identify only two proposed cuts, I believe,
to the fiscal year 2012 budget, and forgive me if this question
has been posed and it has been answered, but in light of the
serious financial situation that we are in, acknowledging that
what you do at NIST is critically important to our country's
future, can we tell our constituents back home and the
taxpayers of this country that that is all we can squeeze out
of this funding request?
Dr. Gallagher. This tension between looking at the fiscal
situation, trying to get the budget deficit down and looking
at, particularly in this request is dissident, and I think what
the Administration did was to set a top level number that was
fiscally responsible, but then optimize under it.
What happens at NIST is that the mission of NIST to promote
innovation and industrial competitiveness, basically, is
exactly aligned with what the President put as the centerpiece
of driving economic growth through supporting technology
innovations.
So it is hard to see in our programs that it is
uncomfortable. I can tell you almost all of my programs are
looking at increases, but it is really where the optimization
took place. What we tried to do is, since all of our programs
were ones that were aligned with this priority is, we certainly
looked internally and have tried to target Administrative
savings. We are trying to improve alignment with outside
agencies who are doing similar things. We are trying to drive
efficiencies that way.
I think this is a very responsible request from that point,
so I think you certainly can reassure constituents that we are
doing everything we can. We are very cognizant of this need. It
is quite real.

MEP COST-SHARE

Mr. Bonner. Then the other question. The Hollings MEP has
been successful in my home state, and I am from Alabama. In
leveraging state and local funds to support efficiencies,
especially in the manufacturing industry such as timber, pulp
and paper, which has just been so devastated over the last,
really over the last several years, but certainly over the last
few years, of your other programs can you highlight which have
such a significant state matching requirement and is this a
model that should be better utilized where appropriate?
Dr. Gallagher. So the MEP program sets a limit on the
federal share, up to one-third. It doesn't actually stipulate a
state funding level. In fact, the approach across the United
States is pretty diverse in terms of how the MEP centers
provide the remaining two-thirds.
It does align very well with what states have always
focused on, this type of outreach to business. So most cases
the states are involved and frankly the success of the MEP
centers is strongly related to how involved the states are.
That is one of the key ingredients for success.
Many of the programs in NIST actually work closely with the
states, all the way from our laboratory program--because NIST
has no regulatory authority where technical, non-regulatory
agencies do. For example, even in weights and measures programs
where we are defining how do you do certain measurements, we
work with all 50 states because they are the ones that actually
set the requirements, so we are working with every state in
those areas.
The TIP program, which provides funding for high risk, high
payoff research has a mandatory 50 percent cost share
requirement and the makeup of that requirement is quite diverse
but often includes public universities and other funds.
So we were talking about when you are in this area of
innovation, you know, one end is pure research and we are very
comfortable with the federal government. The other end is
purely commercial and we know there is private sector activity.
It is the area in the middle that is tricky but it is
critically important because if you don't connect the two
sides, we don't get the optimum efficiency out of our ability
to take up new ideas and turn them into successful products and
services.
And I think one way of getting around that is to have
public-private partnerships, cost sharing and other
arrangements to make sure that that is handled correctly. It is
a very important point.
Mr. Bonner. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Fattah. Mr. Chairman, can I follow up on that real
quick? Is the one-third federal participation in terms of MEP,
is that in the America COMPETES Act? Is that a statutory
requirement?
Dr. Gallagher. It was in the original authorization
language for MEP. In fact, in the COMPETES Act there is a
requirement to study that cost share, so the GAO was asked to
specifically look at the cost share, determine whether it
should be increased to as much as 50 percent. They just
released a report this week that we will have to take more
particular----
Mr. Fattah. My point is that this is something that the
Congress said.
Dr. Gallagher. That is correct.
Mr. Fattah. That you are following.
Dr. Gallagher. That is correct.
Mr. Fattah. And we also are studying whether we might make
some changes in it, and that is important to note because I
know a number of states feel burdened. They love their program,
but obviously that is something that if we said it, we are
going to have to change it. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you for your testimony. There will be other
questions from probably a number of others submitted for the
record. And I, personally, want to thank you for you and your
people and for what you do. There has been a little concern
that I have had quite frankly and I think if you just look in
my voting record, I am a conservative Republican. I am pro-
life, strong on fighting for strong defense and all the things,
but I really get a little concerned when I see the criticism
with regard to a number of federal employees.
And I just looked at your bio. You were with the Agency for
19 years. You can go out, as I said to Director Mueller
yesterday, you could go out and make a lot of money. Are you
married? You have family? Yes. You can make a lot of money.
IBM, these guys would pick you up at a drop of a hat. And you
have stayed, and so I appreciate the fact that you haven't
turned this into a coin operated thing where you can go out and
work for the Chinese or do something like that or work with a
maker online but stayed to do what is good for the country. So,
thanks.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Friday, April 1, 2011.

NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION

WITNESS

DR. JANE LUBCHENCO, UNDER SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR OCEANS AND
ATMOSPHERE AND NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION
ADMINISTRATOR
Mr. Wolf. We want to welcome you, Dr. Lubchenco for being
here today. We want to discuss NOAA's fiscal year 2012 budget
request which is $5.486 billion. This amount is $723 million or
15 percent higher than 2010. NOAA's budget request represents
about 62 percent of the Commerce's entire budget request for
fiscal year 2012.
Between 2008 and 2010, NOAA's funding increased by 22
percent, higher than any other program in this bill, more than
the FBI, more than the National Science Foundation.
As we have been telling all the agencies that are
testifying before us this year, the Congress will not be in a
position to provide such increases.
The fiscal crisis facing the Nation is real and will
require a level of austerity that goes beyond the President's
budget.
We are going to ask, though, if you can help us, knowing
that there are some things that you would not want to do, but I
think you will have a better sense of what the priorities ought
to be.
And so it is kind of like if you are shaving, cutting back,
or doing something, I think you can help us insofar as to say,
well, you know, the committee, this issue is really one that
will--and so we do not want to postpone this, but we will
postpone that program to be able to do this. But if you can
help us as we go through that.
With regard to that then, I recognize Mr. Fattah for any
opening statement.
Mr. Fattah. I will reserve my opening statement because of
the advent of votes, and we want to move through this, so thank
you very much. Welcome.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
Your full statement will be in the record. You can proceed
as you see appropriate.
Dr. Lubchenco. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that
very much.
Ranking Member Fattah, Chairman Wolf, thank you very much
for your leadership and support of NOAA. Your continued support
for our programs is greatly appreciated as we work within the
Department of Commerce to improve science, products, and
services that are vital to supporting America's businesses,
also its communities and its people.
The vital role that NOAA plays in the protection of life
and property has recently been exemplified by the actions that
NOAA has taken in the wake of the tragic events in Japan
earlier this month.
The earthquake and resulting tsunami had far-reaching
effects, and many of NOAA's programs played a critical role in
life-saving information, providing that to emergency officials
and the public both here and around the world.
Today I am honored to be here to discuss the President's
fiscal year 2012 budget request which promotes innovation and
American competitiveness and lays the foundation for long-term
economic growth while making responsible reductions.
The budget recognizes the central role that science and
technology play in creating jobs and improving the health and
security of Americans and those abroad.
I wish to highlight the following in our fiscal year 2012
request: key savings, climate services, weather, satellites,
research and innovation, fisheries and protected resource
management, and coastal and ocean services.
The fiscal year 2012 request, as you noted, is $5.5
billion, a decease from the fiscal year 2009 request and an
increase above the fiscal year 2010 enacted due primarily to
our requirements to execute the restructured Polar Orbiting
Civil Satellite Program.
As part of the Administration's Administrative Efficiency
Initiative, NOAA analyzed its administrative costs and reduced
nonessential spending by $67.7 million.
The fiscal year 2012 request includes proposed budget
neutral reorganization that brings NOAA's existing but widely
dispersed climate capabilities under a single management
structure called the Climate Service.
If approved by Congress, it would have a budget of $346
million. Our climate services demonstrate the utility of
improving our scientific capability.
Advances in science make it possible to provide useful
information about the months to years time frame, data which is
of potentially immense use to businesses, communities, and
military operations.
The National Weather Service provides critical information
to communities and emergency managers and is the Nation's first
line of defense against severe weather.
The fiscal year 2012 request of $988 million envisions
using cost-cutting and cutting-edge technologies to deliver
more reliable forecasts, reduced weather related fatalities,
and improve the economic value of weather, water, and climate
information.
NOAA's satellites provide data and information for
forecasts that enable safe transportation, earlier response to
severe weather, and smart construction, as well as emergency
rescue operations.
The fiscal year 2012 budget request for the satellite
service is $2 billion invested in multiple satellite
acquisition programs. This includes an increase of $688 million
for the Joint Polar Satellite System. This program is essential
if we are to maintain the quality of our severe storm warnings,
long-term forecasts, and receive emergency distress signals in
a timely fashion.
In parallel to creating a Climate Service, NOAA would
strengthen and realign its existing core research line office.
The Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research will refocus
its work to be the innovator and incubator of new science,
technologies, and applications within NOAA as well as an
integrator across all of NOAA, consistent with the President's
call for science and innovation.
NOAA's request includes $212 million to continue
strengthening core capabilities such as improving our
understanding of ocean acidification and its impacts, and
promoting conservation and use of coastal resources through our
renowned Sea Grant Program.
Rebuilding our Nation's fisheries is essential to ensuring
long-term sustainability and to protecting the livelihoods of
fishermen and related industries.
In fiscal year 2012, NOAA is requesting a billion dollars
to support the National Marine Fisheries Service including
investments to expand annual stock assessments and improve the
timeliness and quality of catch monitoring in recreational
fisheries.
Complementing science with robust management, we will
continue to support the voluntary establishment of catch share
programs which have yielded significant financial and
ecological benefits and the improved safety for fishermen.
Over half of the U.S. GDP is generated in coastal counties
and it is expected that the Nation's coastal population will
grow by more than 11 million by 2015. To continue delivering a
dynamic range of services to promote safe, healthy, and
productive oceans and coasts, the fiscal year 2012 budget
includes $559.6 million for the National Ocean Service.
In closing, I would like to note that I have a nickel in my
hand. I believe that this nickel represents one of the best
bargains that this country has. It costs each American less
than five cents a day to run NOAA.
This nickel gets you the world's best weather information
and allows us to save lives and property when severe storms
strike. This nickel means that our coasts are more healthy and
vibrant and in turn our coastal communities more prosperous.
This nickel helps American business owners succeed from the
fishermen on the coast to the farmer in the heartland and
everything in between. This nickel helps keep our homeland
secure.
We take our work seriously because we know that citizens
and businesses depend on us each and every day. I look forward
to working with the Members of this committee and our
constituents to achieve the goals that I have laid out in the
fiscal year 2012 budget. And I am happy to answer any questions
you may have.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Well, thank you very much.
And I support your programs. I think they are very
important.

TSUNAMI WARNING PROGRAM

I want to cover an issue that I think is very important and
I am going to give you a letter to this effect, but I will read
the first question.
I would like to talk to you about funding for NOAA's
tsunami warning activities which have been the subject of focus
again after the recent events in Japan.
NOAA's base funding for its tsunami warning network has
been about $28 million since fiscal year 2008. In addition to
this base funding, following the Indonesian tsunami in 2004,
NOAA received three supplemental appropriations to improve its
tsunami warning programs and activities.
I believe very strongly in the need for these predictions
and warning programs. We discussed this when Secretary Locke
came before us a few weeks ago.
I inserted a letter in the record that I had written to the
states back in 2005 urging them to help their coastal
communities become tsunami ready.
I wrote the then head of NOAA in 2004 urging him to review
NOAA's tsunami programs.
I have drafted a new letter which we will give you so it is
officially sent. And I want to discuss it with you today.
I am asking NOAA to convene two summits this year, one on
the West Coast, one on the East Coast--and as soon as
possible--to bring together NOAA and the U.S. Geological Survey
which is out in my area in northern Virginia.
I used to work at the Department of Interior for five
years. I was a deputy to Secretary of the Interior, Rogers C.B.
Morton. And some of the best minds are out there in the U.S.
Geological Survey with regard to earthquakes.
To bring together NOAA, the U.S. Geological Survey, and
state and local officials to talk about tsunami awareness,
educational needs, and preparedness activities as well as a
deep ocean assessment and reporting of tsunami programs is
important.
And the end to that, I would ask you as you do it on the
East Coast to involve the nations in the Caribbean, too,
because as we were checking on this back in 2004 and 2005, they
were in danger and there was some concerns with regard to
Puerto Rico and places like that.
So we will give you the letter at the end of the hearing,
and I will just read briefly the letter.
But it said in light of the recent earthquakes in coastal
regions of Haiti, Japan, and Burma and the devastating tsunami
that struck Japan last month, I believe it is imperative for
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to work
closely with state and local officials in the United States to
strengthen our preparedness for a tsunami.
The tsunami alerts issued in Hawaii and the West Coast
states immediately following the Japanese earthquake are a
stark reminder of the danger U.S. coastal states face.
In order to better prepare the U.S. for future tsunami
events, I urge you to immediately begin planning two
conferences including one on the East Coast and one on the West
Coast and invite governors, all the governors up and down, and
other state and local officials because we found in 2004 and
2005 that many localities really did not have a tsunami warning
program.
They did not have very much going. Some were participating
and some were not. But to have the governors and local
officials from coastal states in the region to discuss deep
ocean assessment and reporting of tsunami, DART system alert
and evaluation programs.
I also believe it important to include the U.S. Geological
Survey in the summit. Please provide a report to me within 30
days of the date of this letter regarding your efforts to plan
and host these conferences.
And I know you know a lot of people, some at universities
and maybe people at Caltech and maybe people at other MIT who
are experts. But I would like to see you do that.
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, thank you so much for
recognizing the importance of this very critical topic.
NOAA has been working very diligently to raise awareness of
the importance of tsunamis. We currently work quite closely
with the USGS on--the tsunami warnings that we were able to
issue following the Japan earthquake, the Haiti earthquake, and
the Chili earthquake, all of those depend directly on our
connections to the USGS.
Mr. Wolf. Right.
Dr. Lubchenco. We take that scientific information, run
models that are appropriate to particular ocean basins and then
utilizing our DART tsunami buoys to issue warnings and
advisories appropriately.
But equally important is your highlighting the communities'
understanding how to respond appropriately when there is a
warning, to understand what it means for them and what they
should do.
NOAA has identified that there some 250 communities at risk
around the coastal areas of U.S. states and territories. And we
have a tsunami ready program that works with local communities
to have signage, to have warning systems, to have trials,
drills to have people understand what they are supposed to do
so that they can act in a manner of minutes which is often what
is required.
We currently have 83 communities that have been certified
as tsunami ready and part of our ongoing efforts involve adding
additional ones through time to that number. We have seen the
benefit of that.
For example, in this last tsunami warning, both along the
West Coast of the U.S. as well as in Guam and Hawaii, our
tsunami warnings were issued. The first one was issued within
nine minutes of the earthquake happening in Japan. And the
response in U.S. states and territories was quite effective. No
lives that I know of were lost. And many of the----
Mr. Wolf. Excuse me. You may want to check your
microphone----
Dr. Lubchenco. Thank you very much. I apologize. I looked
at it when I started and it looked like it was green, but
obviously not enough.
Mr. Wolf. I hear you fine, but apparently the reporter was
having a problem.
Dr. Lubchenco. Okay. So you are absolutely correct. This is
a vitally important topic.
We just had tsunami awareness week last week with a whole
series of activities designed to help raise awareness, but it
is such a timely and important topic we would be open to
discussing additional ways to----
Mr. Wolf. Well, I would really like you to just put the
conferences on to tell us that this is important. The fact is
it would be helpful to just say today we will do this and not
only with regard to the tsunami but also with regard to the
earthquake issue.
There is a concern with regard to the power plant up there
in New York City, north of--up there on the Hudson River. I
mean, I just would like you to say, ``Mr. Wolf, it is a good
idea and we are going to move on this and we are going to deal
with this, one on the East Coast, one on the West Coast, not
only on the tsunami issue but also on the earthquake issue.''
I mean, you have the metropolitan New York City. You have
millions of people that live there. And so I followed it. I do
not represent New York, but I have heard Governor Cuomo. He has
made a pretty powerful case.
And so what I would like you to do is to agree, and I do
not know why you would not--I mean, this ought to be something
that we move ahead on.
You know, there is a song that I sometimes quote by Simon
and Garfunkel and they sang it in Central Park. It is called
The Boxer. And the words say, ``man hears what he wants to hear
and disregards the rest.'' Sometimes we may only be hearing
what we want to hear. And I do not want us to disregard the
rest.
And I would like to see you, I have great respect for you
and I think NOAA does exceptional work, to bring together a top
team in the East Coast and a top team in the West Coast and
invite all of the governors and all--I mean, your testimony
almost indicated there are some that are not doing what they
should be doing.
Also I know Mr. Serrano who is not here has interests with
regard to Puerto Rico, and involving also the Carribean nations
because Haiti has been devastated with regard to that.
So I guess the question is, not to put you on the spot, but
would you do this, tell us that you will do one on the East
Coast and one on the West Coast?
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, I think that's a terrific
idea. We would be delighted to work with you and explore the
possibilities, the timing, what it would look like. May we work
with your office to do that?
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Well, fine. Good. I appreciate that. And
your people have done a good job. And I am just afraid of when
something happens, the whole world focuses.
I remember when the Indonesian tsunami hit. And then after
about a year, it was a big issue at the UN and then it sort of
just drifted away. And now you never heard about it until we
saw what we have seen and feeling the hurt and the pain and
suffering of the Japanese people.
I know the French sent a team there and they are looking to
see what lessons learned so they can come back, and I think it
is important for us to do this.
And I would assume that every governor working with the
National Governors Association would be very interested to come
and to kind of find out because particularly in these days of
budget issues, people are focusing on different things to sort
of force people's minds back to focus on this, to make sure
that everything that can be done is being done.
So we will be glad to work with you, do whatever you think
is appropriate. I do not have to attend but, I think I just
want the very best minds that we have both on the East Coast
and the West Coast.
And I think Caltech has some pretty good people and I know
that--I think we should hear what MIT and others have to say,
okay, let's bring the very best, and maybe you would have the
same team do it for the West Coast as the East Coast or maybe
you would even decide that, you know, because of variances, it
would change. But I would hope we could do that and you can run
it.
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, we saw in the aftermath of the
Indian Ocean tsunami, because that did raise awareness, it
enabled us to--Congress acted as a response of that, in
response to that. And that was what prompted our significantly
adding to the tsunami DART buoy network that are very important
in detecting tsunamis.
So I think you are absolutely correct. This is a moment in
time where people are focused on this and we need to capitalize
on it.
Mr. Wolf. And it was this committee that actually pushed
it. I remember I said we are going to write a letter to every
governor. We are going to force everybody to focus on this. At
first, it did not seem that any one paid attention and then all
of a sudden, the interest came and now until we see what
unfortunately took place in Japan.
So, anyway, I appreciate it very much. We will help you
every way we possibly can. If you need approval to reprogram, I
mean, you just tell us and we will be there and help you.
Next we are asking everyone who comes before the
subcommittee about the priorities for fiscal year 2012. Given
the funding constraints that we are under and we will continue
to be under, what are your top three appropriation priorities?
And what I have been saying to most of the--hello, Mr.
Bonner-- what I have been saying to most of the witnesses is
that I wish we could fund all of what you are asking for, but
we are facing a fiscal crisis in the country. We have $14
trillion of debt.
I was listening to the news coming in and there is a new
report out on PIMCO.com about the unfunded liabilities of the
Nation. So until we deal with the fundamental issues of the
entitlements, Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security, these
tough times will continue.
It would be my hope that we could have a bipartisan
agreement. I personally was not appointed to the Bowles-Simpson
Commission. It was an idea that Jim Cooper and a group of us
came up with and the President appointed. But the
Administration walked away from it. I would support the Bowles-
Simpson Commission. I would try to make some changes in it, but
we have got to do this thing hopefully by the end of the year.
And so until there is a bipartisan agreement to come
together to deal with the big entitlement issues, you are going
to really find pressure on these programs and other programs.
Once we reach that agreement to deal with the entitlements,
then I think you will see a continuation and kind of a removing
of the lid, if you will, on some of the fundamental programs
and also including programs for cancer research and Alzheimer's
research and infrastructure, things that we need as a Nation.
But you are going to have to deal with the entitlement issue
and it has got to be done.
So what are your three top appropriation priorities?

FISCAL CHALLENGES

Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, we take the current fiscal
challenges that the Nation is facing very, very seriously which
is why in constructing this budget we did a very careful
questioning of every single item that is in our budget.
I mentioned that we had achieved some actually quite
painful administrative cost savings of $67.7 million. We have
also reduced programs and other areas that under other
circumstances I think would be very appropriate, very
worthwhile, very important programs. And we just decided we
could not do them this year. So we have already gone through a
very serious exercise of questioning everything.
The items that we are asking for in this year's budget
request represent things that are essential to our mission of
saving lives and property, stimulating the economy, and they
are ones that I believe will bring great benefit to the
American people on the short term as well as the long term.
The analogy that was used by the National Academy of
Sciences in their report about when it comes time to lighten an
air load, what you do not want, if an airplane is overweight
and you need to jettison something, do not jettison the engines
that enable the plane to fly.
And, in fact, a lot of what NOAA does is comparable to
that. Whether it is fisheries or whether it is coasts or
satellites, those programs are all ones that directly serve the
American public.

JOINT POLAR SATELLITE SYSTEM

Now, the largest budget number in our request is clearly
for satellites, $2 billion. And of that, a very significant one
is this Joint Polar Satellite System which provides us with the
wherewithal to do severe storm warnings and long-term forecasts
as well as search and rescue, all vitally important to the
American public.
We currently have a polar orbiting satellite that is in
space now that is providing that information for us. If we do
not have the funds in both fiscal year 2011 and 2012 to build
the next satellite and the instruments that go on it to replace
the one that is there now and the one that we are going to
launch in the fall, we will have a data gap.
In fact, because of the current situation in fiscal year
2011, we already have a delay in the launch of from 12 to 18
months. And that will likely result in a data gap starting in
as early as 2015 where we may have coverage--where we will not
have coverage by a polar orbiting satellite run by the U.S.
And the consequences of that are quite, quite serious. We
will not be able to do long-term weather forecasts that we do
today. Our severe storm warnings will be seriously degraded.
And we recently took the exercise of looking back at some
very severe storms of last year and asking the question what
would our forecasts have been like if we had not had that polar
orbiting satellite information.
And with your permission, I would like to request entering
into the record----
Mr. Wolf. Without objection.
Dr. Lubchenco [continuing]. The analyses that we did for
this.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Dr. Lubchenco. And we used two scenarios. One was for the
snowmageddon which everyone will remember February of 2010 and
the forecast that we did for that was quite accurate. It
predicted a horrendous storm and that is exactly what happened.
That depended directly on the polar orbiting satellite
information.
If we take that out of the model and re-run the model,
which would give us an idea of what would happen in the future
without that polar orbiting satellite, we would have grossly
underestimated the severity of that storm. We would have
estimated it might have been off by 200 to 300 miles in terms
of where it was and we would have underestimated the amount of
snowfall by at least ten inches.
So emergency preparedness would have been impaired.
Aviation and surface transportation would have been much, much
worse than it was.
So that program which is one of our high dollar numbers in
this budget is really, really important. And the longer we
delay both with funds in 2011 as well as 2012, the longer this
gap will be. And for every dollar that we do not spend even in
2011, it will cost three to five dollars down the road to bring
that program back up to speed.
Mr. Wolf. Well, this is not an entitlement hearing. You are
not the director of OMB and I understand that. But it is the
``man hears what he wants to hear and disregards the rest.''
What the fundamental disregarding of this Administration is
they are disregarding.
And I am going to put in the record today at this moment
the PIMCO report.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. I agree with everything you have said, maybe even
more. I take my responsibility seriously. I mean, I worry about
some of these things. My wife and I, we have 15 grandkids. But
you have got to deal with the entitlements too.
And so far, the President and the Administration has been
AWOL. They appointed Erskine Bowles and Simpson and they have
walked away.
And I agree to the engine analogy. I agree with everything.
I mean, let it be said that I agree with the administrator. But
where we have differences, and, again, it is not fair and I am
going to leave it because you are not Jack Lew at OMB, it is
the entitlements.
And if Tom Coburn and Dick Durbin can agree to come
together to link arms, probably, you know, having a concern,
but link arms, then the President ought to be able to do it.
Now, Tom Coburn is being criticized by Grover Norquist, but
he is not afraid of that. He is willing to say this is what I
believe in and this is what I am going to do to save the
country. And we expect the President to do the same thing. If
Durbin and Coburn can do it, then the President can do it.
And so I have said enough. But it is not enough just to
say, you know, the engine story and we want to invest in every
nickel. We are borrowing now 40 cents of every dollar from
someone for every dollar that we spend. So of that nickel, we
are borrowing it. And we are also borrowing from China, this
fundamentally immoral nation, what they are doing to people
insofar as religious freedom and human persecution and things
like that.
So until we deal with this issue of the entitlements, all
these things are going to be squeezed. And so when they are
squeezed and people come down and criticize on the forums, you
say until you are--I have said I am prepared to vote for
Bowles-Simpson or Simpson-Bowles, whatever they call it.
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Wolf. And I am going to say if you do not like the
discussion, you tell me what you are prepared to do on the
entitlement issue. If you are going to be AWOL and just talk
about it and throw a rock at something, have a little cut, then
that is that. That is not the way we are going to solve the
problem.

NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE

Let me ask you about the Weather Bureau. I would place the
National Weather Service at the top of NOAA's priorities. The
fact is before I go to bed, I always watch the weather. It is
sort of just-- yet, the Weather Service budget has not
increased at the same rate as the rest of NOAA.
Does your budget priority prioritize the Weather Service
and what else among NOAA's programs would you categorize as
critical to life and safety? But where does the Weather Bureau
come in?
Dr. Lubchenco. The Weather Service is absolutely critical
to saving lives and property. And they depend on the
satellites, for example, which is one of the reasons why--in
fact, 98 percent of the information that goes into our
numerical models for weather come from satellites.
So the Weather Service cannot do its job without having
that information from the satellites, both the geostationary as
well as the polar orbiting. So it is not really easy to
separate out from a functional standpoint. They need one
another.
So the Weather Service is vitally important and they do a
spectacular, magnificent job not only in providing basic
information to citizens and emergency managers but also in
providing opportunities for the private sector to add value and
sell additional products or provide additional services.
So AccuWeather, the Weather Channel, for example, take the
basic information, add value to that. And so there's an
opportunity to grow businesses and we have seen that in this
particular instance. So it is a priority. I would love to have
even more in our budget for the Weather Service.
What I believe is in our request is a responsible amount
that will enable us to do what we need to do. And it depends on
other parts of NOAA to do that efficiently. It depends on the
ships and the planes to get information to service our tsunami
DART buoys, for example.
So the different parts of NOAA actually interact with one
another and complement one another.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. I am going to go to Mr. Fattah now. But
with Mr. Bonner walking in, I just wanted to--I had asked the
administrator to put together a conference on the East Coast
and the West Coast to deal with the whole issue of the tsunami
issue and the earthquake issue.
But I would also say that I think the Gulf ought to be
included because Mr. Bonner represents the Mobile area. So I
would urge that it be not only the East Coast and the West
Coast, I would amend my letter, but to also say the Gulf to
make sure what impact it would have on them.
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, when you were discussing that,
you mentioned the Gulf and the Carribean, so I understood that
to be the case.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Let me thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And let me start with this whole question of life savings
now. As I understand from the work of my staff, this work of
people who are fishing for a living is the most dangerous work
in the country and that there are over 118 deaths per 100,000
and that NOAA's satellite services have helped rescue over
6,500 and saved the lives of people through these satellites.
I am concerned about the satellite gaps that you mentioned.
And, you know, we talk about the Gulf. Through your work, you
have been able to cut in half the error rate on hurricane
forecasting.
Now, in the Philadelphia area, we do not get a lot of
hurricanes, but I know my colleagues in other parts of the
country do so that when we get to forecasting severe weather,
you have been able to cut this margin in half over the last
decade. And I understand there is a significant financial cost
on the evacuation side of a million dollars per mile.
So the satellite is development the largest part of the
increase that you are asking for, right? So that is what I want
to focus in on. So on one level, you are saving lives, but I
want to talk--unfortunately, this is the Appropriations
Committee, so I want to talk about money.
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah. The other thing that is happening with these
satellites is that it protects and enhances financially a
number of industries.
And my question is, for instance, start with the National
Weather Service, are there any fees that NOAA charges.
So, for instance, we talk about the maritime industry and
say, you know, 90 percent of the world's trade is handled
through this industry. You talked about AccuWeather and the
Weather Channel and others who are valuable and taking this
public information and using it. In the fishing industry, there
is a lot of money made.
Are there ways for NOAA, and I do not mean today, but over
the near-term future, are there ways to look at where there are
abilities to extract fees for services that you are now
providing that are having a direct impact in terms of various
industries that may at some point provide some of the resources
that we need?

SATELLITES

I mean, satellites are not cheap. They cost a lot of money.
And if we talk about satellites, that we can cut the error rate
on hurricane forecasts in half in a decade, that is saving
lives, that is saving money. But in the meantime, there are
other benefits that are being provided, and they are being
provided in ways in which some people are making lots of money.
And so I wonder if you could comment on whether there are
ways to monetize some of the services that NOAA provides.
Dr. Lubchenco. Thanks, Mr. Fattah. Thank you for
highlighting the importance of those satellites to a variety of
both issues having to do with life and property as well as
economic issues.
And let me give you a few numbers that are directly
relevant and illustrate your point and then answer your
question.
For the search and rescue function that the polar
satellites are involved in, in 2010, 295 lives were saved by
the rescue beacons that are activated, that signals go to the
satellites. And we estimate that if we do not have this Joint
Polar Satellite System that the time for search and rescue, the
response time would be at least doubled without our polar
orbiting satellites.
So that just gives you some sense of what the consequences
are. And, of course, in an emergency, it is often minutes that
are important to saving lives.
Relative to the economic benefits, the maritime commerce
sector represents $700 billion a year. And that sector depends
directly on maritime weather information and that comes
directly from these polar orbiting satellites.
The fishing industry is hundreds of millions of dollars and
they, too, depend on the weather information from these
satellites.
The aviation industry only for ash forecasting, our polar
satellites save them $200 million a year, save the aviation
industry $200 million a year for ash forecasting alone.
And then if we look to on the land, equally important,
providing drought forecasts is worth $6-8 billion to farmers,
to transportation, to tourism, and energy sectors.
So cutting across multiple different sectors of the
economy, these polar orbiting satellites are vitally important.
And, of course, they interact with and support the work of the
National Weather Service, enable them to do all these, run the
models.
The research arm within NOAA develops the new knowledge
that enables those improvements in weather forecasting. And so
that is an interconnected part of NOAA that results in these
economic benefits.
Now, that said, your question is, you know, what is the
business model for all of this and are there alternatives. The
United States' current model for this is to have essentially a
partnership between the government, the private sector, and
universities where each has a distinct role and where those
roles are complementary, not in competition.
And the basic philosophy is simply that the government
provides the fundamental information that allows saving lives
and property and economic benefit. And it is very difficult to
tease out what part of a weather forecast enables somebody to
operate safely on the sea versus what part of it is important
to saving lives and property.
So because it is fundamental to saving lives and property,
that basic information is deemed to be appropriate to be
provided by the government.
The fee-for-service model is not one that we employ. The
concept is that there is significant opportunity within the
current model for businesses like the Weather Channel or
AccuWeather to take the basic information and tailor it to add
significant value and then sell that product.
Mr. Fattah. Well, you know, I would not be raising this
question except that the question becomes this: Will the
service be provided at all? You follow me?
Dr. Lubchenco. I understand.
Mr. Fattah. If the point is that there is $2 billion in
your budget for satellites, satellites are needed, they are
needed to save lives.
Dr. Lubchenco. Correct.
Mr. Fattah. And you have saved lives.
Dr. Lubchenco. Correct.
Mr. Fattah. They are needed to forecast severe weather and
to cut down the margin of error so that, for instance, our
neighbors in the Gulf know when a hurricane is coming and you
have cut that margin of error in half. These are all public
spirited and very important things.
In addition to all of this, you also are facilitating
others making hundreds of billions of dollars.
Dr. Lubchenco. Correct.
Mr. Fattah. So the question becomes, if we are going to
have either no satellites or have significant gaps, as I would
understand it, there is no substitute for this satellite
program anywhere in our government.
Dr. Lubchenco. That is correct.
Mr. Fattah. Okay. So either we are going to have the
satellites or we are not. And then the question is dollars. And
we have an allocation and, you know, we are limited to an
allocation. We have got to figure out how to make all this
work. And the Chairman is absolutely right that these are
untenable options.
So I was just wondering, because I know, for instance, some
of our economic competitors do this a little bit differently.
Dr. Lubchenco. They do.
Mr. Fattah. I mean, Germany has a different approach,
right? So I was just wondering whether or not there were other
models we could look at. And, again, we cannot create them
overnight.
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah. It may be they are not even useful in the way
that we function here in our country, but we should at least be
knowledgeable because if the satellite is not there, then all
of these industries are going to be impacted, and it is going
to harm--for instance, the drought information, that is $6-8
billion, or the maritime trade which is another $700 billion.
So, you know, we have to think through, these services and,
I mean, we are putting a billion dollars just in terms of the
fish side of this deal, right?
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah. People who go fishing, you know, they get
fishing licenses. They do other things. They pay. I am just
trying to figure out, if you are saving the lives of fishermen
and rescuing people, whether there are ways in which there are
opportunities for the government to get some of these costs
reimbursed.
So this is kind of a straight business question. And I know
you have advised the Bush administration, the Clinton
administration. So you have been at this for a long time. You
are one of the most distinguished scientists in this area.
This is not really a scientific question. It is a business
question about whether or not the services that we now provide,
are there ways to monetize that and ways in which those who are
benefitting in a specific way that generates profit might also
share the burden.
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman Fattah, I understand exactly
what you are asking. And as you know, you mentioned Germany,
other European nations also have different models. They do use
a fee-for-service model. It is a very different philosophy. And
there are other models out there.
I believe that our model is actually one that enables and
supports businesses and economic prosperity and growth. But
these are fundamentally, you know, basic questions that deserve
to be asked. Are there other models that would be an
improvement and what do they look like?
In the meantime, we are challenged with providing the
services under the current model and still struggling to try to
minimize the gap that is already going to be happening. So that
is the challenge.
Mr. Fattah. I do not want to trade our economy for one of
our European ally's economies. You know, I think our model has
obviously worked very well for us. We are at a point, though,
where we are saying perhaps we will not have a satellite system
there. You follow me?
So if the question is, we cannot generate the money on the
public side to finance the work of NOAA, if we have to make
cuts that are untenable in either the Weather Service or in the
satellites, in any of these programs, are there other ways to
think about doing this because you are saving lives?
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah. And you are also helping industry.
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah. And so the only reason I ask the question is
because whatever we are doing is now being overwhelmed by our
fiscal circumstance.
Dr. Lubchenco. I understand.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you very much.
I will yield back.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Bonner.
Mr. Bonner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Lubchenco, welcome.
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, nice to see you.
Mr. Bonner. Nice to see you. And I would say for the record
while I appreciate the chairman's recognition that the Gulf of
Mexico needs to be considered in any survey such as that.
The administrator has been to Mobile. She has been to the
Gulf and was a frequent visitor during the oil spill last year
for which we personally express our gratitude for your interest
and your leadership in that.
I am going to focus a little bit on the oil spill----
Ms. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Bonner [continuing]. Because, and I say this very
carefully, no one would say that what we have gone through
compares with what the people of Japan are going through. That
earthquake, tsunami, and then the issues with their nuclear
plants is beyond comprehension.
That said, many people along the Gulf Coast felt they went
through an environmental/economic tsunami last year because it
was the worst oil spill on record in the history of this
country. And it may be years or decades before we know the full
impact of that tragedy that we are approaching the one-year
anniversary on.
I thanked you earlier. I repeat not only your leadership
but also the staff at NOAA for the work that you all did during
the early period following the April 20th incident. Your
satellite modeling capabilities came to full utilization during
the crisis and offered our best hope that federal, state, and
local responders had to track the movement of the oil in a
timely fashion so that we could position the very limited
resources that either industry or government had to try to
protect sensitive wetlands, the coast, and the other areas of
those states that were impacted.

GULF OF MEXICO RESTORATION

As many of my colleagues in Congress have heard me say
before, while we weathered the early storm, the long-term
economic and ecological impacts remain in question.
So along those lines, in your written testimony, you note
that NOAA's ongoing participation in the Gulf Coast Ecosystem
Restoration Task Force, which I think is being led by Ms.
Jackson of the EPA, that includes scoping the programmatic EIS
as well as under the NRDA claims.
Given the importance of the fisheries economically to our
region and to the Nation and the impact the oil spill has had
on that sector, do you believe apart from the mandate of the
Oil Pollution Act of 1990 and Natural Resource Damage
Assessment process that economic consideration should carry
equal weight to environmental restoration?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman Bonner, thank you for
recognizing the ongoing challenges to the Gulf. I know that it
is an issue that many people in the Gulf struggle with on a
daily basis. And I know that they often feel the rest of the
country has moved on and they are still in great pain. All of
our folks that are in the Gulf recognize that.
And as you indicated, there are long-term challenges for
the Gulf. The Natural Resource Damage Assessment process is
focused directly on the damage that was done to natural
resources and the public's loss to those natural resources. And
that is the process that is underway now to evaluate what the
impact was, not just the short-term, but the long-term impact.
And economics plays into that. This is a scientific,
economic, and legal process for determining the impact to the
resources and the public's loss to those resources. And that
process which is a joint one between the states and the federal
government, there are three federal trustees of which NOAA is
one, and there are five state trustees. That trustee council
works together to do the analyses.
NOAA is providing a very significant fraction of the
scientific information to enable understanding of what were the
long-term impacts to different economically important species,
to a variety of other species that are important to those
species, and to other parts of the coastal and the open water
portions of that ecosystem.
That process continues to be underway. We have had on the
order of I think 80 different, somewhere between 70 and 80
different research expeditions on ships to continue to take
samples in addition to a lot of intense sampling along the
shore.
That process is ongoing and is obviously designed to build
the most effective case possible against the responsible
parties to ensure that they pay for the restoration of those
natural resources and the public's access to them.
So that is just a short summary of what that process is all
about. I want to emphasize that the NRDA process, the Natural
Resource Damage Assessment process is completely independent of
the claims process that Ken Feinberg is leading for individuals
and businesses to file claims.
The NRDA process is only about loss to natural resources
and the public's access to them, so it is a very different
beast, if you will. Part of the NRDA process is not just
determining the impact but determining the restoration that
will address the impact.
And so there is very active consideration of the range of
possible restoration activities. Unfortunately, this is going
to take time to play out and I think everyone would wish that
we could, you know, push the fast forward button and be farther
along, but many of these populations are ones that it is going
to take a while before we know the full impact. So we do not
want to pre-judge prematurely and not have the responsible
parties pay what they actually should pay.
Mr. Bonner. Well, the reason I asked about the economic
is-- and you mentioned Mr. Feinberg is leading the claims
process. I would say he should be leading it. He got a pay
raise to $1,250,000 a month and, yet, we have got businesses
that are struggling to survive that have been paid pennies on
the dollar. But just----
Dr. Lubchenco. Fortunately, I do not have anything to do
with that.
Mr. Bonner. The chairman is not holding you responsible for
OMB. I am not holding you responsible for Mr. Feinberg.
Dr. Lubchenco. Appreciate you both.
Mr. Bonner. Your agency has also been helpful, hats off,
for the announcement regarding additional safety of testing
Gulf Coast seafood. A recent poll, I hate to even repeat the
numbers because it is very troubling, but 70 plus percent of
the American people lack confidence in Gulf Coast seafood and,
yet, it is probably the most tested seafood for safety of any
seafood from the Pacific to the Atlantic to the Chesapeake.
I doubt there is another--that is a good question. Is there
any other seafood in our country that is being tested as
thoroughly and closely as Gulf Coast seafood right now?
Dr. Lubchenco. To the best of my knowledge, no, sir.
Mr. Bonner. Well, can you tell us, and we are not competing
against Chesapeake seafood, it is good seafood, especially with
the chairman, but what steps can you, additional steps can you
take to continue to communicate with consumers?
I know the secretary of Defense indicated that they are
buying more Gulf Coast seafood for our soldiers and sailors and
airmen, but what steps can NOAA specifically do to communicate
that Gulf Coast seafood is being tested, is safe, and people
can purchase it and enjoy it with confidence?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman Bonner, we, as you know, did
close areas in response to the presence of oil and then
reopened them only when our extensive testing showed that the
seafood was free of any contamination by either oil or
dispersants which some people were concerned about as well.
And we do, in fact, continue to test. And we have announced
an ongoing program to do exactly that. As you note, however,
there continues to be suspicion. And, you know, I think this is
a cognitive dissonance in the minds of many people.
After seeing day after day images on TV of this oil flowing
and on the surface and oiling birds, I think it is hard for
people to understand how it could not be contaminating
everything in the Gulf. And so I think that is just a matter of
human nature, if you will.
Fish can process hydrocarbons. They can cleanse themselves
of it. And the testing that we have done is for twelve
different compounds of hydrocarbons called polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons, PAHs, and----
Mr. Bonner. I would ask you to spell it, but I bet you
could.
Dr. Lubchenco. I probably could. So we test for those
twelve PAHs that are known carcinogens. We developed, as a
result of the spill, a brand new test to identify a compound
that was in the dispersants to be able to know whether it was
residing still in flesh of fish and other seafood.
So we know from that testing that the fish, the crabs, the
shrimp that are being caught from the Gulf are, in fact, free
of those hydrocarbons and the dispersants. But more has to be
done than simply asserting that it is safe. That obviously has
not been enough to convince people either in the Gulf region or
around the country.
NOAA has been working very carefully and closely with our
Sea Grant Program in the Gulf states to help address this. Part
of this is providing information, holding public hearings,
holding sessions with folks so that they have access to people
who have the information and can try to dispel much of the
misinformation that continues to be out there. So we have been
doing that throughout the spill and continuing now as a way of
continuing to provide information to people.
You also mentioned the recent announcement of the
Programmatic Environmental Impact Assessment process, the PEIS,
which is a formal portion of the NRDA process that involves
public hearings. The major purpose of those hearings is to
solicit ideas from the public, from academic scientists, from
anybody with some great ideas about what restoration should
look like.
And a part of those seven, it is either seven or nine
different hearings, I cannot remember which, around the Gulf,
about half of which have now happened, part of those hearings
involve opportunities for citizens to ask questions. And over
and over and over, we are getting questions about seafood
safety. So we are taking every opportunity even under the
context of the NRDA process and this PEIS to provide additional
information.
On top of that, the seafood industries of the relevant
states did receive some money from BP to launch a public
awareness campaign about safety. We have not done that for
them, but we have provided them information.
So we have been working closely with the seafood industry
to try to help get over the hump, if you will, and restore
their credibility. This is an ongoing effort. We continue to be
involved and we will support it to the best of our ability.
Mr. Bonner. Mr. Chairman, I have a lot more questions, but
could I get three more in?
Mr. Wolf. Go ahead. Take your time.
Mr. Bonner. And thanks for mentioning the Sea Grant
Program. LaDon Swann in our area certainly does a good job.
Dr. Lubchenco. Terrific.
Mr. Bonner. He will be pleased to know that he got a shout
out from the administrator.

STOCK ASSESSMENTS

As we have discussed previously, I and others have called
on NOAA to fund fishery independent----
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Bonner [continuing]. Data collection of the reef
fishery in the central Gulf Coast. I want to thank you for
committing additional funding in a tight budget environment to
the Gulf for this purpose.
I believe this data is vitally important to provide the
most accurate stock assessments that we can arrive at. Can you
share any information resulting from this effort and do you
plan to continue supporting it if you can?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, we absolutely do plan to
continue to support this. Fishery independent survey
information is vitally important. And we have not had as much
of it in the past as we need and we are very seriously
committed to acquiring that information. That is true for both
commercial as well as recreational fisheries.
And one of the things that I know you are aware of is my
personal commitment to build much better relationships with the
recreational fishing community, to acknowledge how important
they are.
I think they felt for many, many years that NOAA was
ignoring them and what they do and what they represent, their
economic value to the country, but also just the importance
that they bring to families and friends to just get out and
have a good time, recreation. All of that is vitally important.
And so one of our challenges with recreational fisheries is
having adequate information about both the status of the stocks
as well as what the activities are involved in and this year's
budget does reflect a serious commitment to improving the
quality of the information both on the stocks as well as on who
is catching what, when, and where.
Mr. Bonner. You mentioned in an earlier answer referenced
the fishery closures during the oil spill that were necessary
obviously. During that time, there were no fish landed to
provide data for the collection efforts.
Was your use of fishery independent data collection
increased during that time or do you have a data gap during
those closures?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, I do not know the answer to
that, but I am happy to find out and get back to you.
[The information follows:]

Representative Bonner: Was your use of fishery independent data
collection increased during that time or do you have a data gap during
those closures?
Answer: Some data was lost due to the oil spill (Deepwater Horizon:
DWH) and the diversion of vessels for response efforts. Less data
invariably leads to potential decreased accuracy in stock assessments;
however, it is difficult to determine the exact impact. The data that
was collected was useful, thus still supporting stock assessments. See
below for more details on the number of lost days at sea (DAS).

FY10 SEFSC Survey Impacts

The Southeast Area Monitoring and Assessment Program
(SEAMAP) is a State, Federal, University program for collection,
management and dissemination of fishery-independent data and
information in the southeastern United States. NMFS conducts surveys in
federal waters and the states conduct relatively the same survey in
their state waters so the two surveys complement each other. The SEAMAP
Spring Plankton Survey lost 7 DAS in the Gulf of Mexico from the
usually 60 DAS that are used to cover the entire Gulf of Mexico and
part of the Caribbean. The SEAMAP Reef Fish (i.e. red snapper) survey
lost 8 DAS out of the 38 DAS that had been allocated. As a result,
planned survey work was not finished in the western Gulf of Mexico.

The South Atlantic Reef Fish Survey was allocated 39 DAS
and lost 5 due to DWH. It is not a component of SEAMAP.

The first SEFSC/NEFSC Cooperative Survey was canceled.
This survey of both the southeast and northeast U.S. continental shelf
ecosystems, would allow NOAA to understand how the resources (i.e.
fisheries and protected species) in one system depends on the
neighboring system. The loss of this survey will negatively impact
NMFS's ability to build a cohesive view of marine ecosystems along the
east coast.

Summer groundfish, shark/red snapper longline and the
SEAMAP reef fish surveys were used to collect DWH samples and at times
had to be diverted to collect samples but for the most part were able
to continue with the planned stations.

CATCH SHARE PROGRAMS

Mr. Bonner. And then just a couple more. NOAA has dedicated
a significant portion of the NMFS budget to the implementation
of catch share programs which I believe have merit.
One concern that some of the fishermen in my area have,
however, is that you are aggressively moving forward with the
National Catch Share Program in advance of a complete stock
assessment.
Can you comment on those concerns?
Dr. Lubchenco. Certainly, Congressman. The stock assessment
challenge is an ongoing one and we need the best possible and
the most current possible information. And when you consider
over 200 stocks that are priority stocks, the ones that are
caught most often, that is a significant challenge.
And that is why in this year's budget request we are asking
for an increase and $15 million for stock assessments to be
able to have better and more current information on an ongoing
basis.
That information is important regardless of the management
tools for a particular fishery. Catch shares are a management
tool. They are not imposed by NOAA. Each fishery management
council makes decisions in the form of a fishery management
plan for each different species or groups of species that are
caught together. And we are encouraging councils to consider
catch shares where they are appropriate. And councils are, in
fact, doing that.
And the funds that are in this year's budget request in
support of catch shares are to enable the catch share programs
that have been approved recently, some of which, for example,
the West Coast Trawl IFQ was seven years in the making, so it
is a long-term process. It has to be carefully designed,
carefully planned. And these funds will enable those programs
to continue to happen.
The one hallmark of catch share programs is that they
require considerable information about catches on an ongoing
basis. So observer programs and monitoring is vitally important
to the success of these programs. And that is part of what the
additional resources help support is this additional observer
and monitoring coverage.
So what the Federal Government is doing using this West
coast program as an example, is helping with the majority of
the costs for this additional monitoring and observing early
on. So year one, 90 percent of the cost the Federal Government
is bearing. Year two, 50 percent. Year three, 25 percent. Year
four, zero.
So it is to transition the fishery into more productivity,
less over-fishing, more economic viability with the idea that
then the fishery assumes the--this is the fee for service. They
are paying directly for this additional monitoring that is
needed.
The benefits of are that it ends over-fishing. Overfishing
typically does not happen in a catch share program. It also
reduces by-catch, the unintended catch of other species which
can--especially in the Gulf, there is very significant impact
to many different species that are important for recreational
fisheries that are caught as bycatch in a commercial program,
for example.
So a reduction of by-catch. It is also the case that in
catch share programs, fishermen can choose--they know what
their quota is going to be for the whole year, so they can
choose to fish when the price is right, when the market price
is right, when the conditions are safe so they do not have to
go out and be competing against other fisherman under
horrendous weather conditions.
So the track record for catch share programs is very, very
impressive which is why we are encouraging councils to adopt
them where they are appropriate. But they are not a panacea.
They are not going to solve all of our over-fishing and they
are not appropriate for every particular fishery.
So they need to be well-designed. They need to, for
example, ensure that all the big guys do not buy out the little
guys which can happen if you do not design it properly.
So there are a lot of important design considerations that
are very important and that is why it needs to be done well and
carefully.
Mr. Bonner. Well, I could go on and on, but we have got
other colleagues.
Chairman, thank you very much.
And, again, Madam Administrator, thanks for your
leadership.
Dr. Lubchenco. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Bonner.
I am going to follow up on one of Mr. Bonner's issues to
ask you a question along that line. We are going to go to Mr.
Austria and then Mr. Schiff.
When I think in terms of the--we have some questions here
which we hope that we will get to--aquaculture and where some
of the seafood is coming in from Vietnam and from China with
the other chemicals and it is just a disgrace. And then I think
of the Gulf.
Could we not and what would your position be if we in the
committee directed you--and before I tell you what I would like
to direct you to do, think in terms of when cranberries were
hit very hard back in the 1950s. You may be too young to
remember the cranberry issue. You were probably--maybe you were
not even born. I will put it that way.
Eisenhower made a major effort, had cranberries in the
White House on Thanksgiving and they brought the cranberry
industry back. The same thing happened in the 1960s with regard
to tuna. Tuna went through a very difficult time. They found
botulism in tuna. They put together a major program.
Could we not direct you or what are your feelings to
mandate BP to put together a major advertising program,
particularly when you think of where some of the stuff from
Vietnam and from China, some of the pits that their fish has
come out of there, a major advertising program working with the
Gulf from Florida to Alabama to Mississippi to promote Gulf
seafood whereby BP would not do it because I do not think they
have the credibility, frankly, whereby they would work with a
consortium to advertise so that everyone when they are
watching, instead of seeing some of these drug ads that you are
seeing every other 30 seconds, you would see an ad to encourage
Gulf seafood?
What would your position be if we were to put language in
directing the Administration to approach BP to fund the program
in cooperation with the Administration and with the Gulf Coast
states to promote seafood from the Gulf similar to what was
done in many respects with regard to cranberries?
Do you remember the cranberry case?
Dr. Lubchenco. Not well. I remember it vaguely, but I love
cranberries.
Mr. Wolf. It devastated the industry. Massachusetts was
heavily hit. The bogs were hit. Wisconsin was hit. President
Eisenhower made a deal, made an effort at Thanksgiving time to
have cranberries to show. And it came back.
Do you remember the tuna fish botulism issue?
Dr. Lubchenco. No, I do not.
Mr. Wolf. Does anyone remember? Yes? And they brought it
back. I bet everyone here. Who has had tuna fish in the last
week here? I mean, everyone. And so I would like to see----
Mr. Bonner. Let the record show almost every hand went up.
Mr. Wolf. Every hand went up. I would like to see if you
would look at it working with Mr. Bonner's office and working
with the committee. We could put language in to direct, and we
would need your cooperation, the Administration, because you
are now looking at prosecuting cases with regard to BP, direct
BP within the next, you know, quickly, 30 days, this is not
something we want to drag out, we want to take advantage of the
summertime, for a major advertising program and bid it out
working with the governors and yourself to promote Gulf seafood
throughout the United States and throughout the world.
Would you be open to that? What are your thoughts about
that?

SEAFOOD SAFETY

Dr. Lubchenco. So I think there are a number of issues that
are relevant to your suggestion, Mr. Chairman, one of which is
that NOAA does test seafood, but----
Mr. Wolf. But it was so tested and so clean and clear and
good. We have to tell other people about it.
Dr. Lubchenco. I understand. I understand. The Food and
Drug Administration, FDA, is the federal agency that has
responsibility for certifying that seafood is safe. So what I
am saying is NOAA and FDA have complementary but different
roles.
And so there are a number of agencies that have been
involved and would need to be involved. All I am saying is this
is not just a NOAA issue.
Mr. Wolf. Well, I think it is a White House issue.
Dr. Lubchenco. And the White House has already asked BP to
fund this campaign that I mentioned with the seafood industry
in the Gulf to promote awareness.
Mr. Wolf. Beginning when?
Dr. Lubchenco. It is underway now, but I do not know. Maybe
Congressman Bonner has more knowledge about where it is.
Mr. Bonner. Well, it is whatever is happening is not
enough.
Dr. Lubchenco. Exactly.
Mr. Bonner. And I will give you a quick example. In
Alabama, our governor, brand new governor that just got elected
in November, was negotiating directly with BP to get some
tourism dollars. We got I think $14 million. Louisiana and
Florida got $30 million because their governors had negotiated
a better deal.
I think what the Chairman is saying is is that if the
Administration will continue to put pressure on the responsible
party, I think this is a great idea, Mr. Chairman, of trying to
not necessarily--and the administrator is right. FDA, there are
a lot of agencies that would have to play a role in this, but
if you could continue to put pressure on the responsible party
to do their part and then some----
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Bonner [continuing]. We could go a long way toward
getting us over what could be even a more challenging summer if
those claims and the other part of this process do not continue
to pan out.
Dr. Lubchenco. I believe we need to be doing more. And NOAA
would like to be helpful in that process just understanding
that there are others involved as well.
Mr. Wolf. If you could work with the subcommittee and Mr.
Bonner. And we would, if we could, carry language to tell them
that we are going to carry it, but urge them to do it and
develop a consortium. And I would urge you to look at the
cranberry in the late 1950s----
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. And the tuna fish issue and then
anything we could do, you know, whether it be a letter, so I do
not think we want to wait until we have a 2012 bill. I think we
want to kind of move something quickly so it is in play----
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. Ideally and you need one person to
be the coordinator. I mean, personnel is policy----
Dr. Lubchenco. Absolutely.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. And the right person who can--well,
thank you.
Mr. Bonner. Thank you.
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, could I just add one other
quick thought to this? You were highlighting the need or an
ideal situation where we would be eating more of our seafood
from U.S. waters.
Mr. Wolf. That is from a country that has 35 Catholic
Bishops in jail, has plundered Tibet, has hundreds of
Protestant pastors in jail, is shooting people, taking their
kidneys and selling them for $50,000, and is spying on us.
That would be my choice. I would rather take fish and
seafood from the Gulf than from China who has the 2010 Nobel
Peace Prize winner in jail and his wife is under house arrest.
Wouldn't it be better--or Vietnam where they got the
consular U.S. embassy staff guy and shut his foot in the door
and slammed it and slammed it and slammed it and, yet, we are
taking all of that because many times you have these big law
firms in this town that are representing the Chinese government
and the Vietnamese government.
Let's take the seafood from Alabama, from Mississippi, from
New Jersey, from places like that. And that is the point of
trying to--not to punish China, although I would be certainly
anxious to do that, but to enhance the American seafood
industry. And if you look at some of the places that we are
getting the seafood from, the shrimp, they are literally
cesspools. And so if we can help our own people.
Dr. Lubchenco. I wanted to connect what you were suggesting
in terms of having more seafood from the U.S. waters with our
current budget request because we, in fact, have a goal of
recovering all of our fisheries and ending overfishing. And
that is what much of our policies are designed to do.
Based on estimates, if we recover all of our fisheries that
are currently depleted, we could increase economic benefit of
$2.2 billion from that industry from $4.1 to 6.3 billion
annually. We are on track to end overfishing, but we have a lot
more to do. And much of what we are asking for in this budget
will give us more ability to do that economic recovery, end
overfishing, and have more great healthy seafood from our
waters.
Mr. Wolf. Good.
Mr. Austria.
Mr. Austria. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Doctor, thank you for being here. Thank you for your hard
work and commitment. We appreciate it very much.
Let me kind of switch gears here a little bit. I know you
touched briefly on this earlier, but I just want to get some
more clarification.
It has been suggested that if adequate funding for the
Joint Polar Satellite System is not provided quickly, there is
the possibility of that data gap by 2017. I want to learn more
about this data gap and the impact it is going to have.
So could you please describe exactly what this data gap
would look like and the possible effects it would have on
particularly the military side and civilian use? In other
words, what are the short-term, long-term effects of such a
data gap on our national defense?
Dr. Lubchenco. Thank you, Congressman, for asking about
that.

JOINT POLAR SATELLITE SYSTEM

If we do not have adequate funds in both 2011 and 2012 for
this Joint Polar Satellite System, the consequences will be
multiple. Because of the Continuing Resolution in this year, we
already have a delay in the launch of this Joint Polar
Satellite System of at least 12 to 18 months and it is likely
to be longer depending on how long it takes to resolve the
current budget situation for 2011.
That delay in launch will likely result in a gap in time
where we will not have a U.S. civil polar orbiting satellite in
place and the consequence of that will be to our ability to do
long-term weather forecasts, severe storm warnings, search and
rescue, and weather for Alaska. Those are sort of four
different categories.
You asked specifically about consequences to the military.
They depend directly on our long-term weather forecasts to make
decisions about troop deployments, for example, or refueling in
air. So those are two specific examples of how the long-term
weather forecasts provided by NOAA are utilized by the
military.
So in addition to those direct impacts, having maritime
weather information is vitally important to the Navy. And those
polar orbiting satellites provide the eyes on the water, if you
will. They give us information about weather situations on the
oceans all around the world.
And so it is quite likely that the quality of our maritime
weather information that supports naval operations would be
degraded. So there are multiple consequences.
Mr. Austria. Okay. And I know we are running short. We have
a vote here shortly.
One other area I wanted to touch on real quick was one of
the most successful programs I think that NOAA has that
connects research to the ground and on the ground challenges
that our State in Ohio and in other states around Lake Erie,
local entity space, is the Sea Grant Program which was
discussed briefly.
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Austria. And I think one of them is run out of the Ohio
State University back in Ohio.
Dr. Lubchenco. Right. Correct.
Mr. Austria. And it is obviously focused on the Great Lakes
and the work that is being done there, Ohio State's program
leads bi-national efforts between the U.S. and Canada on Lake
Eries and the Great Lakes.
How do you plan to use the Sea Grant Program to help in
running the new Climate Service proposed in your budget? In
other words, how is that going to impact or what are your plans
with this program as you restructure with the Climate Service
Program?

CLIMATE SERVICES

Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, the climate services, many of
which we already provide some of, and the proposal in this
budget is to do a budget neutral reorganization so that we can
provide climate services more effectively than we can now.
And I should clarify that when I say climate in this
regard, it is anything more than 14 days. So our weather
forecasts are zero to ten-ish. Anything more than 14 is
climate. So when I say climate services, it is information of
the a couple months from now or next year. That is climate in
the way that we talk about it.
That climate information, the climate services are directly
relevant to Sea Grant programs and enable them to add value to
provide information to many of their constituents in making the
decisions that they make and in turn, they provide a critically
important flow of information in the other direction where they
are eyes and ears on the ground, out in the field, working with
folks all around the Great Lakes in this case to give us
information about what do communities around the Great Lakes
want to know about how conditions, you know, a year from now or
two years from now are affecting their businesses or their
lives.
So they will help through a regional organization of
regional climate centers. Sea Grant programs can help feed into
that better understanding of what people's needs are, so----
Mr. Austria. So do you envision with the Climate Service
now using the established network relationships of----
Dr. Lubchenco. Absolutely.
Mr. Austria [continuing]. Working together or are we now
going to have a new competing set of outreach programs?
Dr. Lubchenco. We have established regional climate centers
that are collocated with our National Weather Service regional
offices. And those will be tapping into existing networks like
Sea Grant and other existing networks, many of which with our
universities, to provide this tailoring. We are not going to
set up a whole new structure. We are going to tap into existing
networks and Sea Grant Program is a great one.
Mr. Austria. Thank you very much, Doctor. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Schiff.
Mr. Schiff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just wanted to follow up briefly on JPSS. I share the
concerns about the delay in that program.
In the Washington Post yesterday, there was a story about
the importance of JPSS in making accurate weather forecasts.
Looking at just the example of the February snowstorms in
Washington last year, forecasts without the satellite would
have seriously under-predicted the snowfall that closed down
the city. Many businesses and families would have failed to
anticipate the seriousness of the blizzard and people could
have been put at risk.
Under the current budget circumstances, what is your best
estimate for when JPSS satellite will launch? The first phase
of the project, the NPP satellite, is due to launch this fall.
Is that still on track?

JOINT POLAR SATELLITE SYSTEM

Dr. Lubchenco. Yes, the NPOESS Prepartory Project (NPP),
Congressman, is still on track. The launch date for JPSS-1 is
highly dependent on funding, funding in 2011. So the launch
date because of the Continuing Resolution, the launch date for
JPSS-1 has already been delayed by 12 to 18 months. It might be
longer than that depending on when we have a budget. And the
launch date for JPSS-1 was originally 2015, so it has been
pushed back 12 to 18 months beyond that.
So we have a current satellite in the sky now that is
providing the information we are talking about. NPP will be the
next one that will be providing that information. It was
originally designed not as an operational satellite but as an
experimental satellite. This is a NASA satellite that was
designed to test out some new instruments that would then be
used by what is now the JPSS series of satellites.
So its life span as a risk reduction NASA mission, was
designed for five years. Originally NASA had assigned mission
success criteria of three year for NPP. So there is some
uncertainty in exactly how long this data gap would be. But if
you do the math, it is looking like there is a very, very high
likelihood that we are going to have a significant data gap
when we have no polar orbiting civil satellite that the U.S.
runs that is giving us this vital information for severe
storms, for long-term weather forecasts, and for search and
rescue.
Mr. Schiff. That is a grave concern. If the, and I know
this is still somewhat speculative given the budget situation,
but if you do get the greater longevity of five years, what
will the gap look like then or even under that best case----
Dr. Lubchenco. We would still have a gap under those
circumstances. And I think just a couple of other things that
are relevant for this issue. The amount that we need in 2011 is
$910 million. So that is the $382 million that was the 2010
enacted level plus $528 million above that. So it is a very
sizeable amount. And I fully realize that that is the case.
But for every dollar of that that we do not have in 2011,
it will take three to five dollars down the road to bring that
program back up to speed and all the money in the world is not
going to close that data gap. So this is fiscally, I think--
well, there are fiscal issues here as well as public safety and
economic consequences.
Mr. Schiff. Thank you.
And in the interest of time, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Fattah. And just one quick point before we go, Mr.
Chairman, is that the other thing we are doing is we are paying
for these satellites as if they are only being utilized in one
budget year rather than looking at the cost over the number of
years they are being in service, they are going to be in
service. It is like paying for a house all at once----
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. Versus paying for it over the life
of its use. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
Mr. Honda.
Mr. Honda. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to go over some of the other questions that were
asked previously. You talked about the polar orbiting civil
satellites. That is both polars that we are talking about?
Dr. Lubchenco. Yes, sir.
Mr. Honda. Okay. I just wanted to know because you said it
covers all the oceans, so I was trying to figure out how you
did that without----
Dr. Lubchenco. So the polar orbiting satellites go around
the poles.
Mr. Honda. Right.
Dr. Lubchenco. And the earth is rotating under them. And so
they see a different part of the earth every time they do a
pass.
Mr. Honda. Okay. It is like peeling an orange with that
little machine?
Dr. Lubchenco. Repeatedly. Repeatedly.
Mr. Honda. Then I understand now the distinction between
Weather Service and Climate Service. And I think that that is
an important understanding in order for us to understand why we
should be staying on top of the budget because you just
mentioned that creating a data gap is the gap is a gap and it
will never be recovered because it is oriented to the time that
has elapsed and you cannot go backwards and capture that data
that has already elapsed; is that correct?
Dr. Lubchenco. The data gap that we would have,
Congressman, where we would not have a polar orbiting satellite
that the U.S. operates means that for whatever period of time
that it is, we would not have information that would enable us
to do severe storm warnings of the quality we do today.
For example, two to three days advanced warning for
hurricanes or severe storms.
Mr. Honda. I get that part. So the gap is created because?
Dr. Lubchenco. Because there is no satellite that is giving
us information about development of severe storms or----
Mr. Honda. We are not putting up a satellite to replace one
that is coming down?
Dr. Lubchenco. That is correct.
Mr. Honda. Okay.
Dr. Lubchenco. Sorry. I apologize.
Mr. Honda. I just wanted to understand that if we do not
have that up there and we want to be able to predict in the
future, a gap is a gap because once time has passed, you cannot
go back?
Dr. Lubchenco. That is correct.
Mr. Honda. You cannot bank it and go back and see if you
still have it?
Dr. Lubchenco. That is correct. Those polar satellites,
both provide real-time information that enables us to do
weather forecasts, but they also provide data about the earth
that is irreplaceable.
Mr. Honda. And in terms of the budgeting process, what are
the things that Congress is doing that creates the challenge
for you to be able to be continuous or be able to--that is
going to create the danger of having a gap? What is it that we
are doing or not doing?
Dr. Lubchenco. The challenge is in fiscal year 2011, the
current fiscal year, lack of adequate resources will keep us
from continuing the contracts.
Mr. Honda. So if we do H.R. 1 and cut more into the current
CR, there will be less money to do what you need to do that was
planned for 2011?
Dr. Lubchenco. H.R. 1 would be insufficient to----
Mr. Honda. H.R. 1 cut into your current planning, what you
had done for the last CR, the CR that we are operating under
right now?
Dr. Lubchenco. So even the existence of the CR now has
already delayed the launch.
Mr. Honda. Right.
Dr. Lubchenco. If we do not have the full $910 million in
this fiscal year, we will have to terminate contracts and not
be able to----
Mr. Honda. It does create a gap.
Dr. Lubchenco. And that creates the gap.
Mr. Honda. And that creates the danger in the future as far
as----
Dr. Lubchenco. Correct.
Mr. Honda [continuing]. Condition for satellites for
weather Climate Service that we depend upon both military and
commercial and domestic?
Dr. Lubchenco. Correct.
Mr. Honda. Okay.
Dr. Lubchenco. And every dollar that we do not spend this
year, it is going to cost three to five dollars down the road.
Mr. Honda. I just wanted to make sure that we understood
the gravity of not doing the work here in a timely manner with
the necessary funds for us to maintain, maintain the kind of
services that we expect for everything from domestic to
national security.
Dr. Lubchenco. That is exactly right, Congressman. It is a
very grave situation.
Mr. Honda. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
We are going to try to, Mr. Fattah and I am going to try to
keep going back and forth, so we do not break the hearing.
There may be a point that we have to, but----
Dr. Lubchenco. Okay.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. On the satellite, a couple of fast
ones. Given the current funding climate, there will be less
funding. What contingency plans are you making to address the
funding amount needed for the JPSS Program in order to remain
on schedule?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, the original request for fiscal
year 2011 was over a billion dollars and we have scrubbed that
budget and brought it down to $910 million dollar.
Mr. Wolf. But I guess the next question, and I apologize
for breaking----
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. I don't want to keep you sitting
while we are----
Dr. Lubchenco. I appreciate that.
Mr. Wolf. Will Commerce reprogram funds in fiscal year 2011
to minimize the schedule?
Dr. Lubchenco. We have very little ability to do
reprogramming at the scale that is needed to address the
challenges of JPSS.
Mr. Wolf. If you do not reprogram funds, when do you
anticipate the first JPSS to launch?
Dr. Lubchenco. That depends directly on when we get the
resources and how much they are.
Mr. Wolf. Well, then I guess the big question is, it is
very possible that the level of funding you are requesting for
the satellite program is just not going to be there in 2011 or
2012.
Are there lower priority programs in other areas, because
we would like to help you do this if we can, that you fund at
reduced levels in fiscal year 2011 and 2012 in order to ensure
that there is not a gap in weather satellite data? Are there
other satellite programs that could be further reduced to
provide more resources for this?
I am just trying to figure the reality, and the reality is
the reality. And I do not know how well this has been accepted
in the Senate either. Do you have any indication of how the
Senate is thinking?
Dr. Lubchenco. I know that your counterparts in the Senate
Appropriations are concerned about this, at least individuals
with whom I have spoken.
Mr. Wolf. So then what would you say if there is a gap?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, we just do not have--these are
such big numbers relative to the rest of our budget. It is very
challenging to identify anything that could make up this amount
as important as this program is.
Mr. Wolf. Well, I can see you do not want to answer the
question and I understand basically what-- I think it is
something you are going to have to work with the committee on.
And, you know, there is only going to be so much available. And
I guess if you want to go ahead and we think this is such an
important program----
Dr. Lubchenco. Chairman, we are happy to, you know, sit
down and work through the numbers with you and your staff. I,
frankly, do not see how we can manage this. I understand that
it is a huge challenge and I am really pleased that you
appreciate how important this program is.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Fattah, you want to and I will----
Mr. Fattah [presiding]. Let me stay on our satellite focus
here. And I know the Chairman may go down and vote, and then he
will come back and I will go down and vote.
Walk me through this, right? The length of the service of
the satellite would be what, the polar satellite?
Dr. Lubchenco. I am sorry. Say that again, the----
Mr. Fattah. How many years will we get benefit of the data
from the satellite?
Dr. Lubchenco. From JPSS?
Mr. Fattah. Yes.
Dr. Lubchenco. So typically our satellites, the polar
orbiting satellites are expected to live five years. They have
fuel enough for seven.
Mr. Fattah. Okay. So five years, right? Prepare for the
cost all in one year?
Dr. Lubchenco. Correct. Well, so the costs, we receive the
money, for example, in this year. We build the instruments. We
build the satellite. We test them. We refine then. We do all
this stuff. And then we launch them years down the road. So the
money, the big bulk of the money is in the years of
construction.
Mr. Fattah. Yeah. What I am trying to figure out is I buy a
car.
Dr. Lubchenco. Right.
Mr. Fattah. I bought a Ford Explorer, right?
Dr. Lubchenco. Right.
Mr. Fattah. I am going to drive it for a period of years. I
am going to pay for it over a period of years. I am trying to
figure out whether you are buying this satellite all cash on
the front end----
Dr. Lubchenco. No.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. Or whether there are costs
associated in each year.
Dr. Lubchenco. There are costs associated in multiple
years, but the bulk of the costs are before the satellite is
launched. There are continuing costs after it is launched.
Mr. Fattah. Okay.
Dr. Lubchenco. But it is a multi-year budgeting.
Mr. Fattah. And there is no utility in looking at, for
instance, leasing satellite space on other satellites that are
commercial that are already in orbit or partnering up? I know
you tried to partner with DoD.
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah. That did not work out. That marriage did not
make it all the way through. Or are there efficiencies in terms
of or duplications with NASA that help us and help the chairman
try to think through these budget numbers?
Dr. Lubchenco. Right.
Mr. Fattah. That is what I am--so that we can both get
satellites and be able to afford them.
Dr. Lubchenco. Yes. I understand. We do not have any
duplication with NASA satellites. We partner closely with them,
but it is not a situation of duplication at all. They do
different things.
We do already, excuse me, partner with many other
countries.
Mr. Fattah. You partner with Taiwan? You have some
partnerships with Europe?
Dr. Lubchenco. With Europe.
Mr. Fattah. But in this particular instance, there is----
Dr. Lubchenco. We do not.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. No substitute?
Dr. Lubchenco. That is correct. It should be noted,
however, that the Europeans have a polar orbiting satellite as
do we and we all use data from both of them, but they are
nicely complementary and we need both. They do not duplicate
one another.
Mr. Fattah. On the dollars. The Europeans use data from
ours and we use data from theirs?
Dr. Lubchenco. Correct.
Mr. Fattah. Do we pay for data for theirs and do they pay?
Dr. Lubchenco. No. We give them our data. They give us
theirs.
Mr. Fattah. Free exchange of information?
Dr. Lubchenco. Correct.
Mr. Fattah. All right. Okay. So there is no other----
Dr. Lubchenco. I like the way you are thinking. I wish I
could be more helpful in identifying----
Mr. Fattah. Well, you know, in many of the areas of the
Commerce Department, which is the department you are situated
in, they do charge fees----
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. For services that are rendered for
people who are making money?
Dr. Lubchenco. Correct.
Mr. Fattah. So I am just trying to figure out whether there
are some ways inside NOAA----
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. For us to be as entrepreneurial.
So this gap that we are going to have notwithstanding because
of the CR, we are going to have a gap. Your plan in terms of
data, and this has to do with both morning and afternoon and so
on----
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. Information, right?
Dr. Lubchenco. Correct.
Mr. Fattah. What is the plan just to deal with the gap? It
has nothing to do with the money issue. But----
Dr. Lubchenco. So we----
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. Say we have a 12-month gap, no
satellite data. How are we going to----
Dr. Lubchenco. So for the period of time for which there is
a data gap, we have the European satellite that would be
providing half of what we have now. So it is not as if we
have----
Mr. Fattah. Have morning or afternoon?
Dr. Lubchenco. They have a morning orbit.
Mr. Fattah. Right. Okay.
Dr. Lubchenco. Actually, they have a midday orbit. Sorry.
And ours is afternoon. And so it is not that there will be no
data. It is that there will be half as much data and,
therefore----
Mr. Fattah. But if you were trying to tell my colleague
from Alabama in terms of challenges, the data is going to be
off by a significant amount because of this gap----
Dr. Lubchenco. That is correct.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. Right?
Dr. Lubchenco. And, for example, our hurricane models, if
we are going to pick on Alabama for a moment, our hurricane
models----
Mr. Bonner. I am glad I came back.
Dr. Lubchenco [continuing]. Are dependent on information
from both of those satellites. And we will have half of that
information. And so the models for that for other severe storm
warnings for Philadelphia----
Mr. Fattah. You are going to be off by a day or two?
Dr. Lubchenco. They will be off by a number of days and
they will not be as high quality. So the track of hurricanes,
we will not know that track as well. So you will end up
evacuating a much larger section of the coast or
underestimating snowfall by ten inches.
Mr. Fattah. That is about a million a mile on the
evacuation cost?
Dr. Lubchenco. Correct.
Mr. Fattah. But this gap is going to happen. There is no
sense-- I mean, we are going to have a gap.
Dr. Lubchenco. That is right.
Mr. Fattah. But what I am trying to understand is, are
there other things that we can do? You know, NASA is under the
jurisdiction of the subcommittee and the chairman. I mean, do
they have satellites that could make up some of this data over
the period of the gap?
Dr. Lubchenco. They do not have satellites that have these
instruments----
Mr. Fattah. Okay.
Dr. Lubchenco [continuing]. That are flying in this orbit.
Mr. Fattah. Okay.
Dr. Lubchenco. This is unfortunately a unique satellite.
Mr. Fattah. All right. I will yield back.
Mr. Wolf [presiding]. Thank you.
We understand that the NPP is supposed to launch in October
2011 and remain viable for five years. JPSS is supposed to
launch in September 2016. I understand it takes about a year to
calibrate.
Really what would happen if the NPP launches
unsuccessfully? What are the contingency plans, if any?
Dr. Lubchenco. If NPP is unsuccessful, we would have an
even longer data gap than we are currently anticipating.
Mr. Wolf. You know, one of the problems of all the
administrators, and I do not want to talk now, people come who
run agencies and sign contracts and say they are going to do
things that do certain activities within so many years. Then
they leave. And then, I mean, you can see the cost overruns
that people have looked at. I guess that is why the Senate has
some problems.
So I think you have to look at the whole big picture. And
you are having fewer satellites at a higher cost and, yet,
whoever signed this at the time had these optimistic
projections. And that is what you are really faced with. What
do you actually do now to kind of deal with it?
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, when I came into this
position, this committee and others challenged us to fix the
flawed NPOESS Program which had many of the challenges that you
identified, cost overruns, delays and many problems that were
really, I believe, inexcusable.
This Administration made a serious commitment to fix the
problems with that program and this JPSS Program is a result of
those fixes. This was to be a transition year. We are on
target. We have fixed the management problems.
And one of the reasons that we are up against a wall right
now is simply the past problems with that program have given us
very little wiggle room at this point. That is why it is so
dire.
So you are right. Part of where we are now is a function of
history and it is very unsatisfying to all of us.

NEXTGEN

Mr. Wolf. Okay. Some other questions we will have. Let me
go to aviation weather forecasting. NOAA budget includes an
increase of $27 million to fund Next Generation air
transportation, NextGen. That represents a third year
development.
Would you please tell the committee what improvements to
the Nation's aviation weather system you expect as a result of
this investment and describe the partnership you have with the
FAA?
Dr. Lubchenco. The Next Generation Program is a multi-year
effort to significantly increase the quality and the timeliness
of information for aviation. The request for this year is for
NOAA's part, our contribution to that NextGen Program.
It specifically will develop what is called the 4D weather
cube which is envisioning essentially a cube of air and
understanding and being able to model what happens in that
parcel of air through time.
And so it is much higher resolution information that will
enable much more accurate and more timely weather information
for the aviation industry that is so heavily impacted by
adverse weather.
The FAA estimates that two-thirds of the weather delays by
the aviation industry could be prevented with more timely and
accurate information about weather. And that is what NextGen
would do.
Mr. Wolf. What is your partnership--I am going to run out
and vote again--but what is your partnership with FAA and how
much are they putting into this?
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, I do not have that number, but
I will get it to you. It is a partnership. We provide our part
of it in a program that was jointly designed with them, you
know, taking and drawing on our expertise and utilizing--you
know, they do their part of it and we do our part. And I am
more familiar with our part.
[The information follows:]

NextGen Roles--NOAA and FAA

In the NOAA hearing transcript, Mr. Wolf asked Dr. Lubchenco to
provide FAA's contribution, financial or otherwise, to the NextGen
aviation weather program.
To differentiate between NOAA and FAA contributions to the NextGen
program, NWS is responsible for developing the 4-D Weather Data Cube
infrastructure for NWS, populating weather information in the Cube,
improving forecast accuracy and forecast capabilities, and connecting
NWS infrastructure to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). FAA is
responsible for developing the 4-D Weather Data Cube infrastructure for
FAA, receiving weather information from the NWS, and disseminating and
integrating weather information into decision support for effective
National Airspace System management. This is in accordance with the
NextGen Joint Planning and Development Office (JPDO) Integrated Work
Plan (IWP). To minimize duplication, the NOAA NextGen Weather Program
and the FAA's NextGen Net-enabled Weather (NNEW) Program continue to
closely coordinate and align program goals and requirements to meet
NextGen weather needs. During 2010, the FAA and NWS developed the Joint
System Specifications v.42 to ensure alignment of technology
development between agencies for meeting the NextGen weather initiative
goals. The FAA and NWS completed and adjudicated the Integrated Program
Management Plan for NNEW and the NOAA NextGen 4-D Weather Data Cube in
December 2010. Both programs are currently developing an Integrated
Configuration Management Plan, due in draft in June 2011, and an
Integrated Risk Management Plan, slated for completion in fall 2011.
FAA does not currently provide any financial contribution to the
NWS NextGen aviation weather program. NOAA and FAA do have an agreement
that FAA will reimburse NWS for NextGen weather capabilities that are
above and beyond what NWS would otherwise have a requirement to
implement; however, as NWS starts to implement Initial Operating
Capability (IOC), FAA does not reimburse NWS for its NextGen
activities.

Mr. Fattah [presiding]. Can we just revisit for a second?
This is a pocket of air? I know you are a great scientist, but
could you help us? We are politicians. How do you----
Mr. Bonner. Speak for yourself. What about statesmen?
Mr. Fattah. You are going to take a pocket of air and study
it over a period of how long?
Dr. Lubchenco. So this is actually not my area of
expertise, so----
Mr. Fattah. Quantify a pocket.
Dr. Lubchenco. So instead of modeling, let's say, the
entire U.S. or, you know, a city or a state, as weather systems
are moving across the country, there are all sorts of dynamics
that affect where the weather goes, where a storm goes, how
intense it is, whether it is snow or rain. And obviously there
are things happening at different altitudes and different
places. It interacts, you know, when it goes over a mountain
range.
Mr. Fattah. How much air are we talking about here in this
pocket?
Dr. Lubchenco. So I actually do not know the size of the
cube, but I will get that to you. Why don't I just get you a
description of what that 4-D weather cube is? I would be happy
to do that.
[The information follows:]

Representative Fattah: Dr. Lubchenco offered ``So I actually don't
know the size of the cube, but I will get that to you. Why don't I just
get you a description of what that 4-D weather cube is? I would be
happy to do that.
Answer: As the lead agency for the Department of Commerce's
participation in the multi-agency Next Generation Air Transportation
System (NextGen), National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) is responsible for providing aviation weather information to
NextGen decision makers and users. The 4-Dimensional (4-D) Weather Data
Cube is a weather information management and delivery system designed
to support the time critical decisions made by managers of the National
Airspace System. The 4-D Weather Data Cube consists of an information
technology (IT) architecture (software, hardware, and communications
circuits) and advanced weather forecast information content. The Cube's
contents and its supporting services will provide users with access to
global aviation weather information through a single access
methodology. This concept allows each participating agency (Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA), NOAA and Department of Defense (DoD)) to
coordinate their existing, agency-specific efforts to fulfill aviation-
weather requirements to provide a mutually supportable, national--and
eventually global, construct. This Federal effort addresses a way to
satisfy public and private sector aviation weather needs while allowing
each agency to maintain various independent capabilities consistent
with their own requirements. A foundational element of this effort
builds upon and takes advantage of evolving information technology
advances.
Modernizing the nation's current air traffic system, which is based
on technology invented during World War II, is universally seen as
critical to coping with the congested airspace over the United States
and to accommodate growing traffic. Under NextGen, a greater level of
automation will help air traffic decision makers manage a highly
flexible system to maximize the use of available airspace. This system
requires high resolution, accurate digital weather information that can
be easily ingested by automated air traffic management systems. The
NextGen 4-D Weather Data Cube will provide a consistent view of the
weather relevant to aviation decision makers through a single access
methodology, ensuring that all users have access to the same
information.
The NextGen 4-Dimensional (4-D) Weather Data Cube is fully
described in the NextGen Concept of Operations and the NextGen
Integrated Work Plan. This ``Cube'' is characterized by:
(a) Improvements to IT infrastructure comparable to those already
employed by other governmental agencies and by industry to provide
greater and easier access to NOAA weather information for aviation
decision-makers. Greater access to aviation-relevant weather
information will facilitate better integration of this information into
aviation users' decision-making processes.
(b) More consistent aviation weather information, providing a
common operational weather picture needed for consistent decision
making across the National Airspace System.
(c) Improvements to accuracy of weather information. The research
and development (R&D) needed to meet the stringent weather requirements
of NextGen will take an extended, multi-year effort to complete. This
long lead-time R&D will improve the overall accuracy of aviation
weather information and will provide forecasters with a more solid
foundation upon which to add their expertise to move toward meeting
NextGen requirements.
(d) Improvements to aviation forecast generation techniques. NWS
meteorologists require advanced tools and techniques to enable faster,
more accurate generation of aviation weather information.
While the 4-D Weather Data Cube is intended to benefit the aviation
community, improvements to IT infrastructure, forecast accuracy and
more advanced forecast processes will have wider reaching benefits to
governmental and private sectors that require environmental
information. These results will improve other NWS service areas, such
as support to Emergency Managers and improved forecasts for severe
weather notification or flood warnings to the public. NOAA, other
governmental agencies, private industry, and the public will have more
effective and efficient access to accurate, consistent, and timely
weather information to drive their decision-making systems and
processes.

Background

The air transportation industry is an important element of the U.S.
economy and weather impacts to the National Airspace System result in
significant economic losses. The industry generates 5.4 percent of
America's Gross Domestic Product, $640 billion in revenue and over 11
million jobs. The Congressional Joint Economic Committee estimates that
air traffic delays cost the U.S. economy over $41 billion in 2007, of
which 70 percent are related to adverse weather. The FAA has determined
that two-thirds of these weather delays are avoidable; more accurate
and better integration of weather information into decision-making can
potentially reduce the number of delays by 46 percent and save $19
billion annually. As air traffic increases, delays and the associated
economic toll will only increase. By 2025, US air traffic is predicted
to more than double, which is not manageable by the current air traffic
control system. The NextGen 4-D Weather Data Cube will provide the
National Airspace System with authoritative and timely aviation
decision support information in an effort to reduce air traffic delays
from severe weather. By 2025, all aircraft and airports in the National
Airspace System will be connected to the NextGen network and will
continually share information in real-time to improve efficiency,
safety, and enable the predicted increase in air transportation.
NOAA is statutorily mandated by 49 U.S.C. 44720 to provide weather
information to the FAA. In addition, the Vision 100--Century of
Aviation Reauthorization Act (Pub. Law No. 108-176, 117 Stat. 2490
(2003)) directs the Department of Transportation (DOT), FAA, Department
of Commerce, National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and
NextGen Joint Planning and Development Office (JPDO) to conduct
integrated planning for research to operations to support NextGen. This
investment represents a coordinated effort spanning two NOAA line
offices with linkages to numerous IT, observation, and service
improvement projects. NOAA NextGen investments will result in a
significant increase in weather prediction and dissemination
capabilities with wide-ranging benefits across the spectrum of NOAA
product users. The weather information in the NextGen 4-D Weather Data
Cube will enhance decision-support systems by offering consistent
information at high spatial and temporal resolutions.

GULF OF MEXICO DISASTER RESPONSES

Mr. Bonner. Mr. Fattah, so you do not have to worry, I am
going to ask a Mobile, Alabama question.
Mr. Fattah. I am going to come down to the experience of
Trent Jones----
Mr. Bonner. Good. We want you there.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. Little pocket of land.
Mr. Bonner [presiding]. Madam Administrator, as you can
appreciate with the vote series, I think we have got three or
four additional votes, we are trying to be respectful of your
time----
Dr. Lubchenco. I appreciate that.
Mr. Bonner [continuing]. And trying to get the chairman an
opportunity to come back and complete the questioning that he
has and other Members might have. Since I am the only Member
here, let me ask you.
You came down in January of 2010 and we had the pleasure of
welcoming you to Mobile for the groundbreaking of NOAA's Gulf
of Mexico Disaster Response Center.
Do you have an update that you can share with us and, if
not, could you give us one at your convenience that would give
us some idea in terms of how the building is coming along, the
staffing of it, and could we anticipate that it might be ready
before the upcoming hurricane season?
And since the chairman is back, I will just leave that on
the record for a later response.
Dr. Lubchenco. Perfect. I would be happy to give you that
information, Congressman.
[The information follows:]

Representative Bonner in regard to Disaster Response Center: Do you
have an update that you can share with us and, if not, could you give
us one at your convenience that would give us some idea in terms of how
the building is coming along, the staffing of it, and could we
anticipate that it might be ready before the upcoming hurricane season?
Answer: The DRC is scheduled to open in July/August 2011. The
actual date of opening is dependent upon the remaining construction
schedule. NOAA's vision is to use the DRC as a regional integrative
force for disaster preparation and response, and foster federal
interagency cooperation, federal/state collaboration, and directly link
NOAA capabilities to the emergency management community.

Mr. Bonner. Thank you.
Dr. Lubchenco. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf [presiding]. Thank you.
I think we have covered hurricanes. We will have some
additional questions.

CATCH SHARE PROGRAMS

Now, on the fisheries catch shares issue, you are seeking
an increase of $37 million to implement additional fisheries
catch shares. I understand this has been very controversial in
some fisheries.
If catch share programs have been used, in use since 1990,
why are they so controversial and has NOAA changed the way that
they are implemented?
And obviously there was a vote on the House floor too. And
I am glad Mr. Bonner is here too. I had a question. We were
talking to the staff yesterday.
If people are concerned that the catch shares program is
harming small fishing operators, could you reserve a portion of
the catch for these small operators rather than having them
openly compete against larger fishing vessels, basically almost
a small business set-aside that you have at SBA, but that you
would have for fishermen so that you would take some
controversy? Have you looked at doing that?
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, yes, indeed we have. It is a
very viable model and one that is used in some existing catch
share programs. This is an assertion that is often made about
catch share programs, but the reality is any particular catch
share program can be designed to prevent that from happening.
So the design is of critical importance.
Mr. Wolf. But we have a quote from the Environmental
Defense Fund report on catch shares and the Environmental
Defense Fund is a strong proponent of catch shares. It seems to
support the concerns stating that as a result of catch shares
programs, ``the total number of available crew positions
decreased by half and the viability of some small scale
operators in ports may indeed be reduced.''
So, I mean, this is a concern that it fosters consolidation
in the commercial fishing and drives out smaller operators.
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, the real driver here is the
fact that in many fisheries, there has been overfishing. And
any attempts to end overfishing are going to have some
consequences to some individuals. That situation exists
regardless of whether catch shares is the management tool or
traditionally managed other tools such as days at sea are used.
Mr. Wolf. But have you not seen--I have seen a report that
some of the smaller ones are having a harder time with this.
The bigger operators can----
Dr. Lubchenco. So, again, some catch share programs in the
past have not had provisions to prevent consolidation.
Mr. Wolf. Well, you know there was a vote on the floor?
Dr. Lubchenco. I am well aware of that.
Mr. Wolf. So the sentiment is, and I am just saying I do
not know what my--I do not come from an area that is heavily
involved----
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. In that, but I respect both sides.
And I think both make a legitimate case. The question is, would
you be able to look at a--you know, and the Small Business
Administration or DoD, they had small business set-asides----
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. To do something whereby everyone
knows they are somewhat protected because, I forget what report
Leslie showed me, but it showed that smaller fishermen were
having a hard time. And if they are, you know, you could bring
a couple big guys in and knock them out. So that was the
question of a set-aside.
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, that is a very real concern.
It is one that I share and is one that is fixable either when
the program is designed or retroactively. And one thing that we
have done in our Catch Share Policy is to require that the
design elements be reviewed.
Mr. Wolf. I am going to let Mr. Fattah finish.
Dr. Lubchenco. Okay.
Mr. Wolf. And then I will be right back. It is not a very
good way to run a----
Dr. Lubchenco. I understand.
Mr. Wolf. Otherwise, you would be sitting here without
anything to do for about an hour and a half.
Dr. Lubchenco. This is preferable.
Mr. Fattah [presiding]. If you want to finish the answer to
the Chairman's question for the record, that would be good.
Dr. Lubchenco. Okay. I will do that. Thank you.
I think that there has been a lot of misunderstanding about
catch shares. There are a lot of assertions that are simply
untrue.
One of them is that NOAA is making fisheries become catch
shares. This is patently false. NOAA encourages the councils to
consider catch share programs, but it is the actual councils
themselves that decide whether a catch share program is
appropriate for any particular fishery or not.
So they are voluntary programs. There is nothing mandatory
about them. They are voluntary programs and they are chosen by
the councils that include fishermen on them. And so there are
many, many fishermen that are champions of catch share
programs.
I think a lot of the concern about catch share comes from
two corners. One is individuals concerned about what the
initial allocation of shares would be and it is sort of the
devil you know versus the devil you do not know. If there is
uncertainty about what your allocation would be, you are
nervous and you think it might not be to your advantage,
especially if you do not have a strong catch history. So that
is one source of concern.
The other source is simply many recreational fishermen do
not see any utility in catch shares for them because they are
more appropriate for commercial fisheries.
And so I think for both of those reasons, there is a lot of
confusion about them. But the track record for catch shares is
actually very compelling in terms of the economic and the
environmental, the safety benefits of them.
Mr. Fattah. Well, let me put into the record an article
that appeared in the Boston Globe on this point. It is an
editorial saying that this program has worked very well----
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. In New England and articulates a
little disagreement between my good friend, the governor of
Massachusetts----
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. The secretary of Commerce on the
matter.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Fattah. But it says that the fishermen in Massachusetts
have had a 21 percent higher result than in 2010 under this
program and that it is working very well and that the bugs
should be worked out.
I am not really a fisherman, so I do not know the details.
I do know that you are spending about a billion dollars on
this, the fish question, all of these various programs.
And, again, I am going to be asking GAO to take a look at
where there are opportunities for taxpayers to share in the
burden but not carry the entire burden of any number of these
programs.
But I know that my ranking member, Mr. Dicks, would want me
to ask you about salmon in Washington State so that you can put
something on the record about where we are there. I know that
your request is somewhere in the 50 plus million dollar range
there, but if you could comment in his absence on both the
hatchery efforts, and that would be helpful to me.

PACIFIC SALMON

Dr. Lubchenco. So I suspect the program that Congressman
Dicks is interested in is the Pacific Coastal Salmon Recovery
Fund, PCSRF.
Mr. Fattah. Interested is an understatement.
Dr. Lubchenco. Fair enough. He is, as am I, a strong
champion of that program. It has accomplished some very good
things. It is a program that we continue to support.
The amount that is requested in the fiscal year 2012 budget
is less than the enacted, but it is a respectable amount that
can do some very important things. I am a strong champion. I
have seen firsthand much of the good that has come from that
program. It takes a watershed approach and works with
communities to recover habitats that are important for salmon.
And salmon are one of those species where you cannot just
manage the ocean side. You cannot just manage the land side.
You have to manage them in an integrated way. And this PCSRF
Program really focuses on the land side. And it is the example
of the kinds of programs we need for many other endangered
species, but it is a successful program.
Mr. Fattah. Where are we at between where this is impacted
in some ways by some of the treaties with sovereign Indian
tribes and this hatchery issue between a more natural approach
and some that takes a more, I guess, scientific approach for
lack of a better term? How is that working out?
Dr. Lubchenco. The hatchery program is very complex and
there are lots of different dimensions to it as you indicated.
So is that another understatement? Is that what you were going
to say?
Mr. Fattah. Understatement.
Dr. Lubchenco. There are tribal issues. There are genetic
issues in terms of impact of hatchery raised fish on wild
caught fish. We are currently in the process of reviewing the
comments to the document that was out for public review and are
on track to have a revision of those that we would be happy to
share with Congressman Dicks and anyone else on the committee
who would be interested once we have made those changes.
Mr. Fattah. And I guess you really cannot jump ahead and
tell us whether or not there is some concern between how this
is affecting the natural--I mean, you understand the Native
Americans. Their assertion is that it is somehow, I do not know
what the term would be, at least changing the species, I guess
is the best way I would say it in a neutral way.
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, there is good genetic
information that hatchery fish in some instances have a
negative impact on wild salmon. And so the management
challenges are how do you get the best from hatcheries without
the problems. That is the challenge. And that is the balancing
act that we are trying to do. They can provide good benefit,
but they also we now realize can have significant detriment.
And so how do you have the benefit without the detriment? How
do you minimize the detriment?
Mr. Fattah. Thank you.
I am going to give it back to the Chairman and I am going
to go vote.
Mr. Wolf [presiding]. You do not want to miss this one.
Thank you, Mr. Fattah.
NOAA is proposing a $346 million reorganization with regard
to the Climate Service. The House Science Committee, as you
know, has raised serious concerns about the establishment of a
Climate Service. And the amendment to H.R. 1 prohibits funding
of it.
And so your budget proposes a new NOAA Climate Service
built largely by taking resources away from your Office of
Oceanic and Atmospheric Research. There are significant
concerns about the wisdom of this, as you know, the Hall
amendment that Chairman Hall as the chairman of the authorizing
committee, which passed by an overwhelming vote. I forget the
exact number.
But please outline for us how you intend to ensure that the
science mission of NOAA will not be sacrificed for or driven by
politics in a reorganization like the one you have proposed.

CLIMATE SERVICE REORGANIZATION

Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, the proposed reorganization
that would result in the Climate Service is budget neutral. And
what it does is take existing climate sciences and services
that are now in three different parts of NOAA and brings them
together into a single new line office.
Bringing them together can have great benefit because then
they can interact more directly and that is the intent of
creating this Climate Service. It is simply an internal
reorganization to make things more effective.
Mr. Wolf. But have you talked to Mr. Hall, Chairman Hall,
because, I mean, what was the vote? Does anyone recall what the
vote was? It was fairly substantial.
Dr. Lubchenco. I understand that there is a concern about
anything that says climate. And this particular formulation has
been through a very exhaustive review by the National Academy
of Public Administration at the request of Congress. And the
review of NAPA, the National Academy of Public Administration,
took a very hard look at is this reorganization a good idea?
Should it look like the way NOAA has proposed or something
else? What is needed to make it most effective, et cetera?
And their report which was issued last fall said a Climate
Service is strongly needed, would be of great service to the
country. The way NOAA has proposed is basically the right
structure. There were a few things they suggested and we have
adopted their recommendations. And they agreed with us that
creating the Climate Service would be in the country's best
interest.
One of the concerns that Mr. Hall has had has been that the
science that remains in the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric
Research should remain strong. I could not agree with that
more. One of my priorities is to ensure that NOAA is not only a
strong science agency but continues to have strong, good
science.
Mr. Wolf. Well, we understand, though, that some of your
outside stakeholders have opposed this. And I guess the
question is, have you resolved this with Chairman Hall because,
I mean, with the vote that you have now in opposition to it, I
just--where are you with regard to that?
Dr. Lubchenco. I have made every attempt to discuss the
areas where there are disagreement. I believe that what we have
proposed actually does address the concerns part from the
word----
Mr. Wolf. What about the stakeholders? We have been told
universities and others who currently receive funding have been
somewhat concerned about the quality of science generated by
NOAA knowing that it will decline as private sector research
dollars are reduced. And some universities have expressed
concern. Most of the stakeholders, are they for this or opposed
to it?
Dr. Lubchenco. Most are strongly supportive of this. In
fact, I am unaware of the ones of which you speak. I think
there was confusion early on because the size of the line
office that is named Oceanic and Atmospheric Research will
decrease. It looks as though we are funding less science.
Mr. Wolf. Right. We have the question that, in fact, if you
look at the budget, it looks like it is being cut in half.
Dr. Lubchenco. Correct. But, in fact, that is not the case
because the same science that was in OAR is now in or would be
in this Climate Service. So it is the same science. It would
still be done. It will still thrive.
Mr. Wolf. You can appreciate the concern, though, that
people would have.
Dr. Lubchenco. I absolutely can.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. I will be right back.
Jo, you can do whatever you want to do and I will be back
in about two minutes.
Mr. Bonner [presiding]. As the chairman was saying,
likewise, OAR's Laboratories and Cooperative Institute programs
are being cut nearly in half from about $109 million to $62
million. Again, this is fewer research dollars going out the
door to scientists.
Why the dramatic shift in resources toward in-house
research and can you help us understand how some might question
the results of in-house research?
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Congressman, or should I say, Mr.
Chairman----
Mr. Bonner. How about Jo?
Dr. Lubchenco [continuing]. This is a matter of
appearances. The reality is there is no change to the dollars
that are going to science or to the dollars that are going out
the door. The same science is being done. But instead of all
being in a single structure, it is now split between two
structures, the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research and
the Climate Service if this proposal is accepted.
So the reality is we are not funding less science. We are
not funding different science. We are not changing anything
other than the fact that the climate scientists that were in
OAR are now in the Climate Service.
Other science remains there and will continue to thrive.
The climate science would now be housed, I need to make this
clear, we have not made these changes and we will not make
these changes if they are not approved, but the proposal is to
have the climate science be in this climate services line
office specifically so that it can be more closely aligned with
the delivery of services.
So information to people, to communities, to businesses
about what is happening months to years from now, that is
climate service information. And if that is collocated with the
climate scientists in this Climate Service line office, that
interaction can be more productive and more effective.
So what we are trying to do is in the best interest of good
government, of reorganizing where there is a compelling need to
do things in a way that is more effective, and, in fact,
without any diminution of the amount, the caliber, the quality
of the science that would be done.
Mr. Bonner. So no less science, just----
Dr. Lubchenco. No less science. It is no less science, no
fewer bodies of people doing the science. They are simply
reporting to a different boss, if you will.
Mr. Bonner. Okay. How would you, though, address concerns
that would be raised about reducing the peer review standards
that extramural research undergoes before ideas are awarded?
Dr. Lubchenco. There will be no change in any of the peer
review that we typically do. That is a hallmark of holding our
own feet to the fire and making sure that we have robust, good
science. Peer review is an integral part of that and that will
not change.
Mr. Wolf [presiding]. We are back.
Dr. Lubchenco. This is definitely multitasking.
Mr. Wolf. We are really multitasking.
Mr. Fattah.
Mr. Fattah. Mr. Chairman, I know we have been around this a
number of different times. I am not going to belabor it. But I
would just reiterate that on the satellite issue and the gap,
obviously it is a very problematic situation.
And if there are other ways that you believe that there is
any help in terms of the gap, you know, that the issue of
shortening the gap is obviously that is totally in our control,
but the gap itself and whether you think that there are other
ways we can prevent or shorten this gap, I think that that
information would be helpful.
And, Mr. Chairman, I do not have any further questions for
our witness today.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. Thank you.
Well, we have a couple more and then we will probably--I
think there is a motion to recommit. It will be ten minutes, so
a while.
In February of 2011, NOAA released its draft aquaculture
policy for public comment. According to this report, wild
stocks are not projected to meet increased demand even with
rebuilding efforts. So future increases in supplies are likely
to come either from foreign aquaculture or increased domestic
aquaculture production.
According to NOAA's draft, about 84 percent of the seafood
consumed in the United States is imported. Is that accurate?

SEAFOOD IMPORTS

Dr. Lubchenco. Yes, sir, I believe so.
Mr. Wolf. And where is it mainly imported from?
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, it comes from many other parts
of the world.
Mr. Wolf. What are the top five?
Dr. Lubchenco. Asia.
Mr. Wolf. I mean, countries rather than----
Dr. Lubchenco. I do not have a list, but I would be happy
to get that to you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. Is China high?
Dr. Lubchenco. It is certainly up there. I do not know
exactly where it ranks.
Mr. Wolf. And is Vietnam high?
Dr. Lubchenco. I suspect for shrimp farming, it probably
would be.
Mr. Wolf. Do our people go over there and inspect? The
record will not pick up a shake. You are going to have to tell
us yes or no.
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, I actually do not know what
kind of inspection happens, if any. I will have to get back to
you on that. The Food and Drug Administration is involved here
as well which is why I am a little uncertain.
Mr. Wolf. Given our continued trade deficit, what effort
has NOAA undertaken to ensure that domestic aquaculture can
keep pace or even outpace our foreign competitors?
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman we believe that aquaculture is
vitally important and that it can be done in a sustainable
fashion which is why we released our draft aquaculture policy
for public comment.
We believe that there are good checks and balances that can
be utilized to ensure that aquaculture is sustainable and that
it is vitally important to the Nation to be able to have
sustainable aquaculture so that we have more healthy seafood to
address part of the trade deficit and to be a complement to
wild caught fisheries. And that is exactly what this
aquaculture policy has been designed to do.
Mr. Wolf. Are we doing better today than we were five years
ago or about the same or what?
Dr. Lubchenco. I will have to get back to you on that. I
think it is likely that we are importing more than we did, but
I will double check.
Mr. Wolf. That is why I am so sympathetic to what Mr.
Bonner wants to do. If you are sitting in a seafood restaurant
in south Philadelphia or southern Alabama or down in the Gulf
Coast or in Maine and you had a choice of taking fish from the
Gulf caught by Americans, processed by Americans or taking it
from China or from Vietnam with the health conditions, almost
every American would say--and I would hope you could really,
particularly building on what Mr. Bonner is saying, that you
could really take it upon yourself to really be the initiator
in the Administration to do this. It is not a Republican or
Democratic issue. It is an issue of our country.
I am sure if you were to dig or if any of the reporters out
here were to dig and they would look at the Chinese firms and
the Vietnam, the Vietnamese firms that are exporting in and
then tie it into their lobbyists here in town, tie it into the
big law firms that they have, you will find there are probably
some or the largest law firms.
Some of his people in the Gulf are lucky if they can afford
to hire law firms to draft their will. And it is just out of
balance.
And I would hope that, you know, I do not think the amount
of money you want to put in for this is really enough, and I
would hope that you could really spur it on and to build again
on that to get back to the committee on the whole issue of
putting together one person to advertise and promote, so we can
create American jobs. The Administration wants to create jobs
here. The same thing would hold true along the Atlantic
seaboard and, you know, the New Jersey area and places like
that.
But if you can supply, and I am anxious to see even before
it gets to the record, so if you can tell us maybe by the end
of the day somebody to call, what are the top five and what
percentage do they--and also whether or not those facilities
are inspected by the Food and Drug Administration or by NOAA,
and I am sure NOAA does not, and how many times a year they
inspect them. And I would appreciate that.
Dr. Lubchenco. And just to be clear, Mr. Chairman, you are
asking about just seafood imports regardless of whether it is
wild caught or farmed?
Mr. Wolf. Yes, ma'am.
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Wolf. For your educational program, you are
dramatically cutting NOAA's education programs from $54 million
in fiscal year 2010 to $21 million in 2012. Why are you doing
that?

NOAA'S EDUCATION PROGRAMS

Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, I will verify this, but it is
my recollection that what is not in the current budget are the
congressionally directed funds that were added in last year.
And so the request, I believe, is similar to what it was last
year.
I am a very strong proponent of our educational programs. I
think they are very----
Mr. Wolf. That is a big cut though.
Dr. Lubchenco. I understand.
Mr. Wolf. That is taking an engine off. You made the
analogy earlier. That is taking an engine off if you are
cutting the education programs.
In the past, the ocean education activities of the JASON
Project were funded through earmarks. Is the funding in your
fiscal year 2012 budget request for competitive opportunities
for groups like the JASON Project to apply for support for
science education activities?
Dr. Lubchenco. I do not know, sir.
Mr. Wolf. Have you ever met Dr. Ballard?
Dr. Lubchenco. Oh, yes. And I am well familiar with the
JASON Project. It is terrific. And I know a lot of teachers, my
sister included, who is a teacher who has participated in that
program. It is a terrific program.
Mr. Wolf. Well, then if you could answer that and then tell
us how they would compete because if you cannot have an earmark
on an issue with regard to science, the ocean, how would they
compete in order to promote exploration and education with
regard to NOAA?
Dr. Ballard has noted that we have better maps to Mars than
we do of the earth's oceans. And do you want to say something
about that letter or give it to you?
Dr. Lubchenco. I would, please. It is my understanding that
JASON could compete for funding. I think the point is more that
the funds are not as much as we would like them to be.
Mr. Wolf. But if there is very little in the bank and
everyone can compete, legally under the law, they would have
the opportunity to compete. But practically speaking, they may
be foreclosed.
Dr. Lubchenco. Well, they would have the ability to
compete.
Mr. Wolf. Yes.
Dr. Lubchenco. I think there are more good science
education opportunities for oceans and atmosphere than we can
possibly fund with the resources that we have.
Mr. Wolf. I think the JASON Foundation has been funded for
years through this committee. I think Mr. Regalua, if I recall,
was the beginning. And I think they do tremendous work.
I had an opportunity. I was invited to introduce Dr.
Ballard at the Rachel Carson Intermediate School in Fairfax
County.
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Wolf. And it was the same night I think of the seventh
game of the world series. And I said to the people I will come,
but I really do not think there is going to be very many
people. When I walked into the school and into the auditorium,
it was actually the gymnasium, it was packed and it was packed
with young kids, some with their parents, but young kids who
were really excited to listen to Dr. Ballard.
We have very few programs that really bring young people in
whereby they have that. So I would hope that you could be very
sensitive as that goes on.
Mr. Fattah. Mr. Chairman, that is one reason why we should
revisit this congressional directive spending issue and maybe
one day we will in the future.
Mr. Wolf. One or two other questions and we will have a lot
for the record, but I know there is going to be a vote pretty
soon. And I do not want to keep you away.
The National Ocean Service is also proposing a new $8
million program called Working Waterfronts to assist fishing
dependent coastal communities. Funds would support
socioeconomic studies, community-based planning, and capacity
building and economic development and transition projects.
This sounds like an EDA program in NOAA. Should this be
funded out of EDA and not out of NOAA? Shouldn't you take that
money and put it into satellites?

WORKING WATERFRONTS

Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, we at NOAA collaborate closely
with EDA on a variety of our programs and this would be a nice
complement to the things that they do. This particular program
is really focused very specifically on fishery dependent
communities that are undergoing transition.
Mr. Wolf. But shouldn't it really be in EDA, I guess? I
mean, the question, how does this program rank in priority to
the National Ocean Service program like Navigation Services?
Dr. Lubchenco. They are both important.
Mr. Wolf. Well, I know. Marine Sanctuaries. I mean, if we
had to rank and----
Dr. Lubchenco. I understand.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. Somebody said, okay, Madam
Administrator, I know you do not want to tell us what one, but
how do they rank, Marine Sanctuaries or this program? What is
the most important?
Dr. Lubchenco. That is a tough one. They are so very
different.
Mr. Wolf. But if you had to answer. I am not going to make
you answer, but if you had to answer. The answer is Marine
Sanctuaries or Coastal Zone Management Grant.
Okay. We have another vote. I appreciate your testimony. I
think the satellite issue will be a difficult one. I think you
are going to have to work the Senate hard. I think everyone
will help. I doubt that will be the amount of money that you
really think. And so I think it is important for you to be
talking to the staff about the reprogramming and with Mr.
Fattah and see how we do it.
The last thing is, and I would hope that you could respond,
I am hopeful, and we did not want to surprise you, but now that
we have raised the issue on the conferences on the--here is the
letter that, we will just give it to you, that you can get an
answer to us on or not even, but just tell people that we are
going to move ahead on this summit or whatever you want to call
it, it is your thing, to bring together all the people that
should be interested in it who may not be and who may be on the
East Coast including the Gulf and also on the West Coast and
including in the whole issue of earthquakes also----
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. Because I do not think you can talk
just about tsunamis without earthquakes.
Dr. Lubchenco. Correct. Right.
Mr. Wolf. And hopefully someone from the media will call
you by the end of the day to see if you are going to be doing
it. But I hope you will. And we would be certainly open to, you
know, the reprogramming. I do not think we are talking about a
lot of money.
I think you do have some of the best minds there, but to
sort of sensitize communities that may not be sensitive to it
and also involve in some of the Caribbean areas and also Mr.
Serrano I know has an interest in Puerto Rico. So if you can
get back to the committee and let us know what you are going to
do with regard to that.
Dr. Lubchenco. We will do that, Mr. Chairman. And as you
can appreciate, you know, the budget uncertainties this year
make everything a real challenge. And, you know, I think this
is a good idea. We would like to work with you to figure out
how we might do it.
You know, simply reprogramming is not--the biggest
challenge, I think, is just figuring out, given where we are
this fiscal year and given the CR's, especially just the
uncertainty with planning is a challenge for everything. That
does not mean we will not try to do this. It just means--and I
know you appreciate how challenging this year is.
Mr. Fattah. Well, we can find, you know, the Pew Foundation
or Rockefeller, someone to help. But I think the point is that
we should probably do it versus have a calamity and wish we had
done it.
Dr. Lubchenco. I think that is a very good suggestion to
look for partners. And I think that we should definitely pursue
that idea.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Fattah has a good idea. Pew and the Council
of State Governments funded the one on corrections. Did a
pretty incredible job. And I think it would be good to partner
with some of those groups on the outside. And I would imagine
that you would be very, very anxious and very interested in
doing that.
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Wolf. I thank you.
Mr. Fattah, you have any other----
Mr. Fattah. No. I think Rockefeller would also be
interested, you know, but there would be plenty of, I think,
people who would be anxious to support the Subcommittee's
interest in this matter.
Dr. Lubchenco. Uh-huh.
Mr. Fattah. And I think the Chairman is right, which is
that we need to get people together and talk and make sure that
we are----
Dr. Lubchenco. It is the right time, the right time.
Mr. Fattah. It is a good time to talk before the problem.
Dr. Lubchenco. Absolutely.
Mr. Wolf. Good. Thank you.
Thank you very much, and the hearing is adjourned. And,
again, sorry.
Dr. Lubchenco. Thank you so much. I appreciate your time.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Tuesday, April 5, 2011.

OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE

WITNESS

AMBASSADOR RON KIRK, U.S. TRADE REPRESENTATIVE
Mr. Wolf. The hearing will come to order. We welcome
Ambassador Kirk here today, and I thank you for being here. We
are here to discuss the Trade Rep's budget request for fiscal
year 2012. Your budget request is $51.3 million, which is $3.4
million greater than fiscal year 2011.
We have a number of issues to discuss with you today, and
particular issues with respect to China. If you compare U.S.
and Chinese manufacturing output at current dollars China has
surpassed the U.S. in manufacturing. Chinese manufacturing
has--do you agree with that, that China has surpassed us? All
the indications are that they have. Secretary Locke said that
they had not. But where do you stand on that? Has China
surpassed us?
Ambassador Kirk. Well output----
Mr. Wolf. We are going to put a lot of the information in
the record so I just want, but where do you stand on that?
Ambassador Kirk. I am sort of one of those ``whatever the
numbers, the numbers are what they are.''
Mr. Wolf. Oh, okay.
Ambassador Kirk. I think in raw numbers that they have
surpassed us. On productivity we have still a huge competitive
edge.
Mr. Wolf. But Chinese manufacturing has exploded and
particularly since it was accepted into the WTO in 2001. Our
trade deficit remains lopsided, totaling $252 billion in 2010,
the largest trade deficit in the world between any two
countries. The committee would like to get your assessments of
the impact of this deficit and what can be done about it. We
will have a number of questions on other issues on pending
trade agreements, and things like that. But with that, I
recognize Mr. Fattah for any opening statement. And then we
will go directly to the questions.
Mr. Fattah. Let me thank the Chairman and let me welcome
the United States Trade Representative Ron Kirk, who has had an
extraordinary career of public service, both as a mayor, and in
a number of other capacities. But in this role, he has taken
the lead in helping to increase in a positive way the exports
of the United States around the world. I know you have done
extensive traveling and a great deal of work and let me commend
you for the work you are doing to help create American jobs and
also the secure American jobs that exist now based on our trade
with the rest of the world. And I look forward to your
testimony.
Mr. Wolf. Your full statement will carry in the record. You
can proceed as you see appropriate, but welcome.

OPENING STATEMENT OF AMBASSADOR KIRK

Ambassador Kirk. Mr. Chairman, thank you again for the
invitation to come and discuss with you and members of the
committee our proposed budget for fiscal year 2012; to Ranking
Member Fattah, thank you for your kind words; other members of
the committee. With over 95 percent of the world's consumers
now living outside of the United States increasing exports is
critical to putting Americans back to work and the United
States back on a path of sustainable long term economic growth.
With just over 230 employees and a couple of dozen detailees,
USTR plays a critical role in meeting these goals.
Over the past two years our small agency has enforced
America's trading rights, held our partners accountable,
negotiated agreements that will expand opportunities for
American exporters and their workers. And we have accomplished
these goals while maintaining strong fiscal discipline that
saved or voided cost of more than $2 million last year alone.
Mind you, this is against a budget of less than $50 million.
We believe that the smart investment that the President's
fiscal year 2012 budget proposes for USTR will have significant
bang for the buck, even as our work continues to produce
results. I would like to share with you three areas of our work
and how it is related to our budget.
First, we are negotiating high standard job creating trade
agreements. I hope you know that in December we successfully
concluded negotiations with the proposed trade agreement with
Korea that is much better for our auto and manufacturing
industries, but more importantly, will support a minimum of
70,000 additional jobs and $10 billion to $11 billion in
additional U.S. goods exports alone. We have made significant
progress on negotiations in the nine country Trans Pacific
Partnership, in which the U.S. has provided leadership in
drafting what we hope will be one of the most dynamic regional
trade negotiations in unlocking East Asia Pacific for U.S.
businesses.
We have also intensified, Mr. Chairman, our engagement with
Colombia and Panama so that we can resolve outstanding issues
relevant to those trade agreements and then submit them to
Congress this year. As you know, Colombia represents an over $1
billion market in new export opportunities, as does Panama. But
we believe Panama is also critical to providing and increasing
our access to growing markets in Latin America.
In the Doha talks, we continue to provide the leadership to
seek a more ambitious outcome that will provide meaningful
market access for all of the members of the WTO. And we look
forward to working with Congress this year to grant Russia
permanent normal trade status so that U.S. firms and workers
can fully benefit when Russia accedes to the WTO.
Secondly, I would like to address your concerns about
enforcement. At USTR we have made holding our partners
accountable for their commitments through enforcement of our
rights, one of the hallmarks of the Obama administration's
trade policy. We have taken steps to stop China's use of so-
called indigenous innovation policies. We brought the first
labor enforcement consultation ever under a U.S. trade
agreement. And we have secured major wins at the World Trade
Organization across the board for our farmers and ranchers.
Just last week, for example, the WTO announced a second in a
pair of decisions that constitutes the largest win ever of
anybody at the WTO to the benefit of U.S. workers in the
aerospace industry. This relates to our cases we have been
prosecuting over Boeing.
Third, we are creating new opportunities to strengthen
trade relationships and eliminate barriers to U.S. exports.
This include unexpected barriers, and I give you again an
example. Last year we worked with the Department of
Agriculture, and Commerce, and others to successfully reopen
markets from China and Russia and Indonesia and others to U.S.
pork exports after the H1N1 scare. These countries collectively
represented over $900 million worth of exports to our pork
producers in 2008.
Through all of these efforts we are on pace to achieve the
President's ambitious goal established in the National Export
Initiative to double U.S. exports by the end of 2014 and to
support the creation of two million additional jobs here at
home.
Our budget provides us the necessary resources for USTR to
implement a robust trade agenda that boosts American exports,
and it does so in a fiscally responsible manner. The
President's $3.4 million increase for this nimble agency in
2012 can have significant returns for our economy. As the
President makes prudent investments at USTR we also ask
Congress to join us in making smart investments in America's
workers. Trade adjustment assistance helps us do that by
putting Americans back to work and providing training to help
prepare them for the challenges of the 21st Century. Likewise
our preference programs, the General System of Preferences and
the Andean Trade Preferences Act, also merit renewal we believe
for as long as possible. Both of these critical programs not
only help foster economic growth among some of the world's
poorest countries but just as importantly they help create well
paying jobs here in America.
In closing, opening new markets, enforcing our trade
rights, and addressing trade barriers in existing markets
supports businesses and workers and communities all across the
United States. USTR will continue to use the resources you
provide us as wisely as possible to support these important
objectives. I look forward to our dialogue today, Mr. Chairman.
At this time I am welcome to take your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

VACANCIES IN IP ENFORCEMENT ATTORNEYS

Mr. Wolf. Thank you very much. One such shortfall that we
have heard about in the past was intellectual property
enforcement attorneys. Are all the vacancies filled in that
area?
Ambassador Kirk. I know that we have filled two of those,
Mr. Chairman. I think we are at full capacity, but we may still
be trying to fill one of those. Unfortunately, I think for me
at least, one sign the economy is turning around is the speed
at which the private sector is beginning to raid our very
talented staff. And as you know, in IPR that is a critical
area. But we have brought on board two very talented lawyers. I
will, if I can check with my staff and maybe give you a more
precise answer?
[The information follows:]

The Office of General Counsel has three GC attorneys assigned
during FY 10 and 11 to cover IPR issues: one GC staff attorney full
time, one GC staff attorney part time, one detailee full time.
The Office of Intellectual Property and Innovation has 7 policy
staff, of whom 2 are designated Attorney-Advisors.
The overall staffing of 7 has been consistent for the past three
years. The designation of 2 of the slots as attorney-advisors is a new
development this year.

Mr. Wolf. Sure. Would you outline for us USTR's presence in
China? How many positions are there? What are they doing? Does
your budget seek to send any additional staff to the China
office?
Ambassador Kirk. China, we have a very modest presence, if
I can be honest. We share space in a mission provided by the
State Department.
Mr. Wolf. How many?
Ambassador Kirk. We have I think at most three or four
full-time employees in that office. But----
Mr. Wolf. Should that be beefed up?
Ambassador Kirk. You know, if I can couch this with the
recognition that I think the events going on outside this
committee room today magnify the challenge before this Congress
and administration to make sure we have a budget that lives
within our means. And the easy thing for me to come and say,
``Do we need more people?'' Is yes to everything. But all of
the work we do with China is not just contained in that office.
So I think you have to balance that against the staff that we
have within our office here.
Mr. Wolf. But there is nothing like being on the ground at
that time, seeing, feeling, listening, touching, speaking the
language. And so we are not necessarily increasing. We are not
talking about spending a lot. But would it be helpful to have
more in China? Is this the high water, low water mark that USTR
has had in China?
Ambassador Kirk. Well for us it would be the high water
mark. You know we, as you noted in your introduction, we are a
very small agency. You know, literally roughly forty, fifty
years old, and really only been over 200 employees within the
past decade or so. And so we have gone from having just one
employee in China to now having two or three.
But I would say one of the things we do very well, we rely
very heavily on the cooperation and resources we get with the
State Department, with the Commerce Department, and with the
U.S. Department of Agriculture as well. We often forget that
the Department of Agriculture, I think, has over ninety offices
around the world. So we try to be smart and economical about
leveraging all the resources the United States has on the
ground.

HUMAN RIGHTS AND RELIGIOUS FREEDOM IN CHINA

Mr. Wolf. Earlier this month the USTR published its 2011
trade policy agenda and 2010 annual report. This report is 443
pages long, yet the committee did not find any references to
human rights or religious freedom in China. Similarly, the
USTR's 2010 report to Congress on China's WTO compliance does
not reference human rights or religious freedom. Does USTR have
any interest in promoting human rights in China?
Ambassador Kirk. Well let me say the Obama administration
has very strong interests in the issue of human rights in
China. But as head of this agency we are expressly tasked in
terms of our relationship with China at looking at the
commercial relationship. As I am sure you know, the State
Department heads up our dialogue with China as it relates to
human rights. We do follow that in an ancillary manner,
particularly through our participation in our strategic and
economic dialogue. But my responsibility that you have tasked
me with as a Congress is to make sure that we almost singularly
focus on how we can expand economic opportunities and address
barriers to U.S. businesses and exports.
Mr. Wolf. But by comparison on the English language website
of the Chinese Ministry of Commerce, their agency responsible
for trade, there are over sixty references to human rights. If
the Chinese can put up 13,000 pages mentioning human rights,
should not the USTR at least have it as a factor? As I look
through some of your testimony, you are very heavy into climate
change. I read the testimony, looked through it last night, I
have it marked up here. If you can get involved in climate
change, could you not get involved in human rights and
religious freedom, which has a major impact on trade and all
these other issues?
I mean, you probably were at the White House, I would
assume, when Hu Jintao came? Were you not?
Ambassador Kirk. Yes, sir. I was.
Mr. Wolf. At the very time Hu Jintao came to the White
House the 2010 Nobel Prize winner was in jail in China. And his
wife was under house arrest. So trade dominates and drives a
lot of that. So if the Chinese could reference it, over sixty
references to human rights, would it not be appropriate for the
USTR to at least factor this in?
Ambassador Kirk. Mr. Chairman, first of all we very much
share your concerns about human rights. And I know the
President and Secretary of State have spoken not only to their
concerns about the treatment of the Nobel Prize winner, but
more recently the arrest of others. But I took an oath when I
was given the privilege of being confirmed by the United States
Senate to conduct myself in a manner consistent with the charge
in the Constitution, and the mandates of this Congress.
Now if this Congress were to expand the responsibilities of
our office to include human rights, then we would do that. They
are addressed, I want to make it plain, they are addressed by
the administration. Our relationship, as you know, with China
is complex enough that it involves the work that we do on the
trade front at USTR, the work of Treasury on currency and
macroeconomic matters, the work of our State Department, and
Defense on security and others. And I mean, I can only state to
you what I said. Within the overall construct----
Mr. Wolf. Did your oath deal with climate change?
Ambassador Kirk. No, but our oath does give me the
responsibility to carry out----
Mr. Wolf. But that is in, that is in your materials,
though.
Ambassador Kirk. But in our mandates and in the work that
we do----
Mr. Wolf. I believe it is even in your testimony about
climate change?
Ambassador Kirk. I do not think I mentioned anything about
climate change----
Mr. Wolf. In your submission to the Congress?
Ambassador Kirk. I am not sure that we addressed climate
change specifically as much as we addressed climate within the
context of the work that we do to secure and address in our
trade agreements to reflect those values we have on labor and
the environment. It is contained within that context.
Mr. Wolf. The USTR budget request places a large emphasis
on labor rights. The request notes that the administration
brought a labor case against Guatemala, worked with the
Panamanian government on labor rights issues, and made progress
on a plan to address labor issues in Colombia. Your budget
submission appears to omit labor rights in China. What have you
done with respect to labor rights in China?
Ambassador Kirk. In every engagement that we have with
China, whether it is through direct bilateral dialogue with,
between President Obama and President Hu, or our participation
in the strategic and economic dialogue, which is led by
Secretary Geithner and Secretary Clinton, or our direct JCCT.
When we have issues, labor issues as reflected in trade issues,
we raise those with the Chinese in every one of those four
occasions.
Mr. Wolf. But your budget submission, the report request
notes the administration brought a labor case against
Guatemala, worked with the Panamanian government on labor
rights, made progress on a plan to address labor issues in
regard to Colombia. But it is silent on China. Now China has
one of the worst human rights and workers rights records in the
world, bar none. Probably at the very, very top. You have done
activity in Colombia, activity with the Panamanian government,
activity in Guatemala, and nothing with regard to China.
That does not seem really appropriate. It seems almost--
personally I believe, and if I, and I am not taking issue, we
are not going to get into it, but I just want to, for the
record, if anyone is listening or ever reads this record. This
administration has a very poor record with regard to human
rights and religious freedom in China. There are a number of
Catholic bishops that are in jail today that no one speaks out
for. There are hundreds of house church leaders that are in
jail today that no one in the administration speaks out for.
The person who designed the bird's nest stadium in China, which
I have seen, was arrested the other day, taken away. And only
when it was quizzed at the State Department did a spokesman say
anything. And no one in a political position, and no one in the
administration, has said anything. They have pretty much
plundered Tibet. They have destroyed the Tibetan culture. Hu
Jintao was the one who put together that policy. They have
persecuted the Uighurs, the Muslims. And so in some respects,
the human rights record of this administration with regard to
China is one of the worst, I think, since I have ever seen us
be engaged with regard to human rights in China.
But there was no, back to workers rights which I know is
part of your effort, there was none with regard to China. Do
workers in China have the right to organize independent labor
unions?
Ambassador Kirk. I am not sure if they do, but it would not
surprise me if they do not. Mr. Chairman, and I do not want to
belabor the point. I think you made your point and want to move
on. One difference in terms of our engagement with China and
the other cases that you reference in our budget is that we
have free trade agreements with Guatemala, and we have proposed
free trade agreements, as you know, with Panama and Colombia.
And that dramatically increases the tools and resources that we
have to pursue them under those. The engagements that we are
pursuing under those are for violations of not complying with
the standards with those FTAs. We do not have a free trade
agreement with China.
Mr. Wolf. Well we did not have one with the Soviet Union,
and yet during the Reagan administration the Trade Rep spoke
out on these issues of human rights. And every time someone
from the cabinet would go to the Soviet Union they would
attempt to meet with dissidents, they would raise these issues
of workers rights. Lane Kirkland, who was head of the AFL-CIO,
was one of the champions on this issue of workers rights. And
so we did not, the Reagan administration did not have an
agreement with the Soviet Union, yet advocated for human
rights, religious freedom, and workers rights. And Lane
Kirkland, with the AFL-CIO, was an advocate, one of the best we
have ever had, on this issue. And yet we had no trade
agreement.
So I do not think we can just say simply because we have no
trade agreement that we will never advocate. You know, silence
is almost an advocation if you refuse to raise something when
people are being persecuted. And silence of your friend is
terrible. And so the dissidents who were speaking out, those
who want to work, and organize, and have labor reforms, are
looking for the United States to advocate. And I think with all
due respect the USTR ought to be somebody who is advocating on
those issues. And if you could do it in Panama for workers
rights then I think you could certainly do it in China.
I am going to leave this. I might come back to it. But a
prominent human rights lawyer, and you do not have to answer
this if you do not want to, who I personally know. His name is
Jiang Tianyong, who appeared before a committee we had. He
testified before the Human Rights Commission, which I cochair,
has not been seen or heard from since he was grabbed by police
in Beijing on February 19th. His wife and daughter do not know
his fate, or if they will ever see him again. It appears to be
part of a broader crackdown by Chinese authorities on human
rights defenders and pro-democracy advocates in the wake of the
revolution in Egypt. I know the USTR has representatives in
China. I would ask that you or your representative at least
raise the Jiang case at the highest levels. Would you be
willing to do that if I give you this here, and raise, have
somebody in your office in China raise this?
Ambassador Kirk. I will certainly bring this to the
attention of our representatives in----

INTERNET CENSORSHIP IN CHINA

Mr. Wolf. Thank you. I appreciate that. The great internet
firewall of China is increasingly a favorite tool of repression
and control. Limiting access to information has often been
viewed as solely a human rights concern, delink them from any
discussion of trade. But in November, 2010 a Google white paper
pointed out, ``The internet is the 21st Century trading route.
And so when it is impeded the commerce that passes through it
is impeded, too.'' Is the USTR doing anything to address this
issue? And is there any serious consideration being given to
bringing a WTO case against China?
Ambassador Kirk. Well let me first say that one, it is,
just as a matter of policy, we do not publicly broadcast
whether or not we are thinking of bringing a case with any of
our trading partners, just because it, and particularly in
cases with China, if I can be so candid. You telegraph that
ahead of time, our ability to do the diligence we need to make
that case is compromised. I can tell you we had extensive
consultations with Google throughout their ordeal and worked
with other partners in the WTO as well because of the very
broad implications of the internet firewall, and have followed
that closely. We did not get to the point where Google had
asked us to pursue but we engaged them on that extensively and
involved our partners from the European Union, Japan, and
others in trying to get China to make sure that they kept that
an open market.
Mr. Wolf. Well maybe that answers this question, and maybe
you can tell me offline. A recent Bloomberg Business Week
article reported, ``The Office of the U.S. Trade Rep has been
reviewing the idea of internet censorship as a trade barrier at
least since 2007.'' Do you know what the status of that review
is?
Ambassador Kirk. That might be one of those that it would
be more helpful to engage the committee off the record.
Mr. Wolf. Okay. If you could, I would appreciate that. I
have a number of others, but we will go to Mr. Fattah, and then
back. So Mr. Fattah.

PRESIDENT'S EXPORT INITIATIVE

Mr. Fattah. Thank you very much. Can you talk to us about
the President's export initiative? And you indicated in your
prepared testimony that we were moving towards meeting the goal
that was set, to double exports. And can you talk about where
we are on that and how that work is being done? And what more
can be done? The committee has a number of entities under its
jurisdiction, including the Commerce Department, for instance
the Manufacturing Extension Partnership program, and a number
of other entities that in certain ways are engaged in
activities that could be beneficial to the export initiative.
So if you could talk about where we are, and where you see us
going?
Ambassador Kirk. The good news is where we are. We are well
on pace to meet that goal. Now I frame that, you know, with a
bit, I may perhaps parentheses now just because of the
extraordinary disruption of markets not just because of the
horrific earthquake and tsunami in Japan, but if you combine
that with the earthquake in New Zealand, and the floods in
Australia, that creates a little bit of uncertainty there. But
broad numbers, we are on pace. Last year was a very strong year
for U.S. exports, up some 19 percent over the previous year. An
incredible year in particular for our agricultural exports. We
are on a pace, I think according to Secretary Vilsack if we can
keep the pace this year we will have a record number, maybe
$135 billion in agricultural exports.
We have been working, the President has tasked us as you
know, to have more collaboration than we have ever had before
within the administration, recognizing that we cannot have any
duplicating of effort or services. So within that, and part of
I think our budget reflects that increase, is making sure that
we have the ability to continue to do what we do best which is
negotiate new market access. But particularly, I think, our
budget reflects that we have then, people are beginning to see
the value of the emphasis that we have placed on enforcement
equal to what we do in opening new markets and when we enforce
our agreements. For example when I came into office I sat down
with our general counsel, asked him to give me a synopsis and
review of every case we had pending at the World Trade
Organization. And I know we spend a lot of time talking about
China, but I was frankly stunned that by a huge margin it was
not close. The largest single number of disputes we had were
with the European Union.
What troubled me more, particularly, and you were kind to
mention my background as a mayor. In which, you know, I grew up
in a world of retail politics. You do not have five years to
solve something. We have cases pending seven, eight, nine
years. We had a beef dispute that had locked us out of that
market for twelve years. We got it resolved in three months.
And since then our beef exports are back up almost 20,000
metric tons, which is about $200 million in value. I can give
you more examples of those, whether it is----

PROPOSED REORGANIZATION OF TRADES AGENCIES

Mr. Fattah. Let me drill down on this for a minute. Because
both the administration, and I know that the Chairman has
mentioned this a number of times, to think about how these
agencies can be organized. There are a number of entities that
are disconnected from your office or your department, like the
Export/Import Bank and the Overseas Private Investment
Corporation, that have a relationship to helping with exports.
So for instance, in the Philadelphia area, you know, we took
the Goldenbergs, they have a peanut chew, they make peanut
chews. The world's best candy bar, anywhere in the world. And
we brought in the Export/Import Bank, OPIC, now they sell them
in forty-five different countries around the world. And we want
to open up more opportunities. But some of these other
entities.
So the question is, since the administration is looking at
reorganizing Commerce, and there is some talk of your shop
being moved into Commerce. I mean, there are all kinds of
discussions that you may or may not be able to get into. But
are there ways that we should be thinking about restructuring
the federal effort to be more supportive? As I would understand
it, less than one percent of our businesses export. And of
that, 57 percent of that only export to one other country. So
we need to build up the focus of American companies that, as
you have said in your testimony, more than 90 percent of the
world's customers are outside of the United States. So we have
to have a view towards doing that. But share with me what your
thinking is around this notion of reorganization.
Ambassador Kirk. Well as you know, in the State of the
Union this year the President as part of his approach to making
sure that we are as a federal government are going through the
same exercises that American families are, of having to cut the
cloth to fit the pattern, singled out an effort to make sure we
are streamlining our efforts. And he singled out trade because
it is touched by nine different agencies as a place we would
start. He has appointed a task force headed up by Jeff Zients
at OMB to look at how we might rationalize that.
I can tell you that as part of the export initiative we had
begun doing some of this anyway. And you mentioned the Export/
Import Bank. As a matter of course when we do export initiative
road shows, which we have done, we always travel with Commerce,
USTR, Export/Import Bank, and the Small Business Administration
to try to bring a holistic approach to both educating
businesses about opportunities and making them aware of the
resources that are available. We have done that in New Orleans.
We have done it in Illinois. We attempted to do it I know under
Governor Rendell. He had a big export initiative. We are doing
these all around the country and improving information access.
With respect to government reorg my belief, and again
building on my bias as a mayor, but more importantly my bias
having served on three corporate boards, that if every three,
four, five years you are not stopping and examining how you are
doing it to see if you cannot be more efficient you are
probably losing ground with your competitors. Now I say that
within the broad framework that I think, and one of the reasons
I have enjoyed my work at USTR contrasted to my work as mayor,
it is a lot easier to get things done with 230 employees than
15,000, 90,000. We can be nimble. We can be responsible. We
engage businesses every day and can attack problems that they
face, try to solve them sooner.
We welcome this review. If there are ways we can strengthen
that by partnering more thoughtfully, whether it is with the
International Trade Administration at Commerce or others, I
think we should welcome that. But that is a judgment frankly--
--

TRADES BLOCS

Mr. Fattah. Let me ask you my last question in this round,
and it will be a more general question. So you see the world
now in which the markets are kind of aggregated themselves
together as trading blocs. You mentioned the EU, and they have
gotten beyond language and other barriers to gather themselves
together in a way in which they could be a force economically
in the world, these European countries. And you see now in, as
we look at the world, particularly as we think about China and
India and countries much larger than ours in terms of
population. So as we see South America, and even the African
continent, how do you see us as a long term matter? Not in the
short term, but over the next ten, fifteen years, how do we go
about approaching our interactions in the world related to
trade? Right now we have been doing these trade agreements,
right? Country specific. Do you see that at some point moving
to a broader platform in which we might engage markets that are
not bound by these kind of, these individual national
boundaries?
Ambassador Kirk. Well as we say in Texas, my friend, that
may not be a question as much as it is an answer. Let me, if I
can do two things. One, part of our mission of the export
initiative was to try to move away from a tactical approach, of
just sort of obsessing on, ``Are we going to do this FTA?'' to
taking that broad look. And one, just to be frank, is where are
the markets? And the best example that I can give you is that
is the rationale behind our efforts in this Trans-Pacific
Partnership. Recognizing most economists tell us this is a
region that is going to dominate and drive global economic
growth for the next ten to twenty years. It is a region in
which there have been almost 200 trade agreements done among
other economies in the Pacific, none of which included the
United States. We thought that was unacceptable. So our work in
the Trans-Pacific Partnership is a part of that.
Secondly, when you ask about our competitiveness relative
to the EU, we examined that. We do not often think about it,
and I know among some, depending on where you live in the
United States, we think of NAFTA as a dirty word. But the
reality, NAFTA created an integrated manufacturing model in
North America. And if you look at it in terms of continental
competitiveness, what we gained, what we have learned from
NAFTA has been helpful to us as we export to other markets
around the world.
Third, when you talk about emerging markets, that is what
we are focusing on as part of the export initiative as well.
And maybe in the interest of time, we will be submitting a
report to Congress both on our overall progress in some of
these strategies. I think that will be coming to you in the
next several weeks.
Mr. Fattah. We will look forward to your submission. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Wolf. Mr. Bonner.

EXPORTS TO CHINA

Mr. Bonner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Ambassador,
welcome. Let me pick up on I think an answer that you gave to
Mr. Fattah, but also the original line of questioning about our
relationship with China that was started by the chairman. I
want to make sure that I have the numbers right. You said that
the President's goal of doubling our exports to China by 2014,
that--I do not want to put words in your mouth. We are well on
our way to that?
Ambassador Kirk. The question was about our goal of
meeting, in the national export initiative. Which is our
exports everywhere. That is not country specific. The goal is
to increase our ability to export and, you know, within the
broad framework of the President's strategy about winning the
future. What he said in both this year's State of the Union and
last year's is America has to make more. We have to save more,
and we need to invest in our education, invest in innovation,
and use that to sell more of what we make in these markets
around the world. But I want to make it, that was not limited,
that is not a China specific goal.
Mr. Bonner. Well let us talk about China, though. Because
China is certainly a big player in this conversation. Is it
safe to say that we have a goal of increasing our exports to
China?
Ambassador Kirk. Absolutely. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bonner. But how would that compare with the imports
coming from China?
Ambassador Kirk. Well that is our challenge. You know, it
is one of those good news, bad news conundrums. Our exports to
China-- and look, I want to make sure, we absolutely share
every one of your concerns, frustrations about doing business
in China. But the reality is, it is a market, it is an economy
too big to ignore. The good news, our exports have exploded to
China. They are now our second largest market. Our ag exports
are going in every area. Now, the challenge is there is almost
this inverse relationship. The better our economy does, the
more we tend to buy from China. Some of it is because we are
buying, you know, cheaper consumer goods that they tend to
dominate the production of. But what President Obama said, what
we focus on at every one of our engagements with China through
the strategic economic dialogue and JCCT, is we think there
needs to be a healthier balance in that. And we have advocated
that in every case. And we believe, just by raw science, I
mean, you see in our Census numbers. I think we are, what, 309
million now? China is one-point-whatever billion. With their
goal of moving 600 million people from an agrarian society in
which they make in most cases less than two dollars a day, we
think we offer them enough in a complementary way because of
where we are in the manufacturing process and our productivity
and innovation, if they will open up their markets and see us
as a partner, and as they begin to develop more of a
consumptive base model rather than an export model, we think
within that that is a great way to help them grow, help us
sell, and we should see a healthier, you know, rebalancing of
that trade deficit.
Mr. Bonner. Shifting gears but staying in the same area,
you mentioned manufacturing. It is very important to every
district in this country and to every state. Certainly to my
district in South Alabama. But as a country we have lost
thousands of manufacturing jobs in the last decade, tens of
thousands, due in large part to unfair foreign trade practices.
When we enter into trade agreements we expect our trading
partners to live up to their obligations and to not dump their
goods or provide government subsidies that distort trade or
adversely affect American businesses. When these violations
occur, and they do, we must stand up for our rates by
aggressively enforcing our anti-dumping and countervailing duty
laws.

KOREA FREE TRADE AGREEMENT

However, it has come to some of our attention that there
are some provisions in the trade remedies chapter of the Korean
FTA that may affect our existing trade laws. Will these
provisions-- three questions. Will these provisions change in
any way how our trade laws are enforced? Secondly, if not how
do you intend to inform the members of Congress of this? And
then third, would you include language on this issue in the
statement of administrative action that will accompany the
Korean FTA when it is sent to Congress?
Ambassador Kirk. I have not revisited that language in a
while, but broadly speaking we have not had any departure from
our overriding policy on application of countervailing duties,
and anti-dumping laws in course, or any other FTA. And if I
find out differently, Congressman Bonner, I will get that to
you.
Second, I would say on the issue of enforcement I do
believe very strongly this is an area that the Obama
administration has distinguished ours from previous
administrations, Democrat or Republican. We felt very strongly
that one of the legitimate concerns that we hear from Americans
all over the country, and parenthetically if I might, Mr.
Chairman, last year I made the deliberate decision that as
much, as engaging as it is for me to go to Geneva and Paris and
Africa that we were not going to be able to move America's
trade agenda with me over there. And so last year I have spent
for the most part traveling around the country. I think I have
been to now sixteen states, and forty-five cities including in
your state. And one of the biggest concerns I heard about trade
policy, both from those of us who are more forward leaning, was
people just felt like we were not enforcing the agreements and
everybody else was gaming them. We have made enforcement a
hallmark of our policy, just as we have negotiating new
agreements. And I think we have a very strong record on that.
But our frustration on the countervailing duties laws
frankly is not here, but it is in Geneva. As you know we have
had nine cases that we have rules against us in the manner in
which we apply those. And we are 0 for 9 in those. And so
Secretary Locke and I have been meeting with industries and
others to see if we cannot fashion a remedy that meets the
concerns of manufacturers but at the same time does not put us
in jeopardy of being hammered the way we have been in the WTO.

INCREASES IN PRODUCTIVITY

If I might also say, and I understand and I know there is
the prevailing wisdom out there that most of the job losses in
manufacturing have been from trade. I know there is an
economist for everything but the reality. You have probably had
five times as many job losses in the manufacturing sector due
to the productivity than you have the trade, when you study all
of the economic modeling. Trade has been a part of it, and that
is one reason why we are so dogmatic about asking Congress to
pass trade adjustment assistance. But the reality, one of our
biggest challenges, we are very good at what we do. When
manufacturing is up, and in the context of your question, Mr.
Chairman, about China. Every American worker is about eight
times as productive as their Chinese counterpart. We can
produce with 11 million workers what it takes China 100 million
workers to do. And so part of our challenge is making sure we
continue to innovate and invest so we create the next
generation of industries that we can dominate and continue to
sell to these new markets.
Mr. Bonner. We can produce them, but not at the same price.
Ambassador Kirk. Well but we are producing, if we are on
the cutting edge and ahead of them, and at the same time doing
as we are. Asking countries to improve their laws and
respecting intellectual property rights, combating piracy, we
can create a world in which we can own that. And again, that is
one of the reasons the President is focusing I think wisely on
making sure that even as we try to make very difficult budget
decisions we do not want to do things that hinder our
competitiveness in the future. We have to continue to invest
and research in development and innovation. Because that is
where we are going to win the future.
Mr. Bonner. And I would add just as an observation, we also
have to look at the burdens we are putting on American
manufacturers and American companies. When I got elected to
Congress, I was not intending to give this aside, but when I
got elected in 2002 I wanted to have some coffee mugs that had
the seal of Congress and my name on it to give to our friends
from Alabama who came up to see us. I had to pay $1.50 more to
get a coffee mug made in America over one that I could have
bought made in Mexico. I just did not think it looked good to
put the Great Seal of the United States and made in Mexico at
the bottom. But whether it is Mexico or China, therein lies
part of the problem. Those companies have gone out of business
because of added rules and regulations and burdens and mandates
that we have put on them over the years. That is certainly not
just during your tenure. Just finally, if you could share. You
have been a mayor, so that is about as retail of politics as
you can get in our country, and of an important city,
obviously. How important, we talk a lot about exports and
imports and trade imbalances. How important, though, in your
current position is foreign investment? And I am going to go
ahead and tee it up.

FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN THE U.S.

Ambassador Kirk. You know in Alabama better because of the
strength, not just in Alabama, you look in Alabama, South
Carolina, Texas. You know, the notion that we are not making
cars in America is not true. We are making a lot of cars. We
are having production move, Mercedes Benz, for example, is
moving either the E or C class----
Mr. Bonner. C class.
Ambassador Kirk [continuing]. Entirely to Alabama. Now our
friends at Ford call me every week and remind me BMW sort of
fudges the numbers because they exclude non-FTA partners. But
one of the larger American automotive exports is the BMW X
series, all made here in the United States. And then they
export over 100,000-something cars. So we like the idea, and
welcome the idea. Whether it is Germany, China, Brazil, of our
partners bringing money here and doing it. We talk a lot about
China. One of the issues we have engaged them on is this race
for green energy. And our frustration, this Congress wisely has
done a lot to try to incentivize the next generation of
development of clean energy. But China sort of owned the wind
turbine production. Well we fought with them, nudged them, and
they have agreed one of the bigger investments they are going
to make here, they are now going to move that plant here. I
think in this case it is actually going to go in Texas, but
that now means those 1,500, 2,000 jobs are going to be here.
And so you can find examples.
We just came back from Latin America. The President had a
very successful trip to Brazil, and Chile, and El Salvador. And
the Brazilian businesses are very shrewd, but welcome the fact
we do not have any constraints on their investments. And we
probably, you know, in your state I would guess you have got
100,000 workers who are working for foreign-owned companies.
That is good investment and we think that is a smart part of
our trade policy as well.
Mr. Bonner. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador Kirk. And you can correct me on whether it is
the, I think, is it the Mercedes that is made in Alabama? Not
the BMW----
Mr. Bonner. It is Mercedes, Honda, and Hyundai, and Toyota
truck engines. And quite frankly, fifteen years ago we did not
make any automobiles in Alabama. And so the conflict that many
of us have is, probably everyone around this table is Buy
American. And yet the Ford Explorer that I just traded a few
years ago was actually made in Mexico. I am not knocking Ford.
I believe it is a great company. But you do have to look at
those foreign investments and put that in the equation when you
are seeing those are jobs. 55,000 people in Alabama have jobs
in the automotive industry today that did not have them fifteen
years ago because of those foreign investments. So it is part
of the balance. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you. Mr. Schiff.

TRADE BALANCE WITH KOREA

Mr. Schiff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ambassador, I want to
ask you about a couple of areas, Korea and Russia. On Korea,
what is your expectation in terms of the Korean Free Trade
Agreement and its impact on our trade balance with Korea? You
know, questionably our exports would grow to Korea but our
imports would as well. Do you anticipate that Korean imports
would outpace any increase in American exports to Korea? If
that is the case, would the increased number of imports from
Korea be displacing imports from other countries? And to what
degree would they be displacing goods that would be
manufactured here? And can you give us a sense of what
industries you think win, and what industries you think are
going to be adversely impacted by the trade agreement?
Ambassador Kirk. Well if I can address Korea first. We
believe, because the President was stubborn enough to not take
the deal that we inherited on the table, that frankly a lot of
people wanted us to just sign. And we went back and we got a
better deal, in this case in the automotive sector. Because
there was such an extraordinary imbalance in terms of the
openness of our market and the access to theirs. But we think
we have a much healthier agreement that is going to allow us, I
think, and forgive me but when I get into numbers is when I get
into the most trouble, Congressman. But I think our balance
trade deficit with Korea is now about $10 billion. But I will
get you a more precise number. We think we have the ability to
correct that and have a much healthier relationship because as
the President expressed it, the United States is now supported
in the unique position, because our economy is so open and our
tariffs are so low. In just about every trade agreement that we
are going to negotiate going forward, including Korea, they are
going to be moving from a base where in agriculture, for
example, their average agricultural tariff is in excess of 58
percent. Ours is at 6 percent. So that is going to be a huge
win for farmers, ranchers, beef, soybean, across the board. We
talk about----
Mr. Schiff. So Ambassador is it your expectation, or is it
the analysis of your office, that with the trade agreement our
deficit with Korea would go down?
Ambassador Kirk. It would certainly go----
Mr. Schiff. Our exports to Korea would go up faster than
any new imports from Korea?
Ambassador Kirk. We believe they will, sir. And if I might
say, the numbers that we have given you we do not produce. You
know, the International Trade Commission does those
independently. And in my opening I mentioned they estimate
Korea is about an $11 billion opportunity. If you want a
comparison, that is larger than the last nine free trade
agreements we have done.
Now what it does not capture is the opportunity in the
service market, since you asked about what sectors. And Korea
has a half a trillion dollar service economy. And we are seeing
a lot of interest from everything from our express companies,
banking, finance, insurance, architecture. But manufacturing,
to Congressman Bonner's point, still dominates, is about 80
percent of our exports to Korea. So we think there is a great
opportunity for growth across all sectors.
Mr. Schiff. And you know, because every trade agreement has
this, what industries do you anticipate are adversely impacted?
Ambassador Kirk. On the----
Mr. Schiff. On the American side.
Ambassador Kirk. On the, negatively?
Mr. Schiff. Yes.
Ambassador Kirk. Or positively? We did not revisit, to be
honest. You will hear from some of your friends in Congress
that they are still concerned about, they have grave concerns
about the impact on the textile industry. But we did not reopen
that particular provision. That is the one industry we have
heard the most. You will hear from some discrete industries
within ag. And just about every major agricultural association
in the country has endorsed the Korean Free Trade Agreement.
Some would have liked for us to get more in rice. There are
some that wanted us to do more in fresh orange juice, I can go
on. I mean, I can get to a level of detail that might numb you
here. But we think on balance it is a very strong forward
leaning agreement for the United States.

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IN RUSSIA

Mr. Schiff. Let me turn to Russia. I understand that the
administration may ask Congress to lift Jackson-Vanik as it
applies to Russia, paving the way for PNTR. And that process is
hand in hand with Russia's WTO assession. When the Vice
President visited Russia last month this was a major part of
the conversation and I think many members of Congress, myself
included, would like to support PNTR but still have many
unanswered questions about Russia's commitment to uphold its
end of the bargain. And from my point especially, coming from a
district that is so completely dependent on intellectual
property. A lot of the studios and production houses are in my
district.
Russia has appeared on the priority watch list of special
301 reports every year since its inception. I wrote to him
along with my co-chair of the Anti-Piracy Caucus urging him to
raise this issue. And just as one illustration, our letter
highlighted VKontakte, a notorious Russian website, that you
mention in your notorious markets report, and I want to
compliment you on those reports which I think have a great
impact, as one of the five most visited sites in Russia. It is
popular for social networking but also because it features
copyrighted music and video without permission or compensation.
And you know, for me there has to be a level playing field if
this is going to happen. And where some of our dominant
industries in the export business, i.e. the entertainment
industry, cannot compete because you have these rogue websites
it is not a level playing field.
Have you seen any progress from Russia on IP? Is there any
reason to think when we have been basically trying to hold
Russia's feet to the fire regarding WTO assession and PNTR that
they need to improve their IP, and frankly I do not see much.
Is there any reason why we should believe that if they do get
PNTR they are going to change their behavior? Or frankly are
they doing to feel that they got what they wanted, and did not
have to change, and there is even less reason to do so after
PNTR. Did any concrete steps come out of the meetings that the
Vice President had with Prime Minister Medvedev?
Ambassador Kirk. Well first of all Congressman, let me
thank you. I know you were, you have been a leading advocate
for stronger intellectual property rights enforcement. And we
actually hosted a very successful roundtable with a number of
your businesses that I understand you were helpful in
facilitating. On Russia----
Mr. Schiff. And I want to thank you and your staff for
that, who were excellent.
Ambassador Kirk. I appreciate your support of that.
Mr. Schiff. And your deputy administrator was wonderful.
Ambassador Kirk. There is nothing I can say that will blunt
any of your concerns about Russia and their behavior. Now I can
tell you it may seem counterintuitive but one of the reasons we
believe it is important to have the largest economy in the
world not in a rules based system in is that all of the things
you expressed your frustration about right now we are very
limited in our ability to hold Russia accountable because they
are outside of the WTO. And one of the factors that weighs in
favor of us asking you to do this, at least if we get them in a
rules based system, as we have done with China and others, then
we have the ability where the facts are appropriate to go and
hold their feet to the fire and make that case.
Now I would tell you that not only did the Vice President
raise this on that trip. More importantly, if you recall
President Medvedev was here last June and met with President
Obama. And President Medvedev has been, you know, perhaps the
most vocal proponent of the need for Russia to join the global
economic community. And President Obama directed our office to
work over the next several months to resolve our bilateral
issues with Russia. A number of them were around the IPR issue.
I can tell you in that forum we were very successful in getting
Russia to adopt the commitments we ask them to, to strengthen
their intellectual property regime. Their Duma has in fact
moved on many of those. And part of our reason for encouraging
this conversation on granting them Permanent Normal Trade
Status is because of the good work we have done it is now more
likely than not that Russia will finally accede to the WTO. If
not by the end of the year, next year. And if they do, not
withstanding all of our concerns, we then would have the unique
situation, the only businesses that would not have the full
benefit of Russia being in that system would be ours. So yes,
we have those concerns. We made very good progress with them in
the bilateral fora. But if we want to really reap the benefits
of them we need to get them into a rules based fora such as the
World Trade Organization.
Mr. Schiff. Thank you, Mr. Ambassador.

CHINA PNTR

Mr. Wolf. I am going to go to Mr. Austria. But you know,
and you are so persuasive when you say that. Except when you
look at the reality our trade deficit with China until they got
in, they got, in the old days they called it Most Favored
National Trading Status.
Ambassador Kirk. Right.
Mr. Wolf. They changed it because they wanted to confuse
everybody. But PNTR. But once they got PNTR it got worse. It is
just, and the numbers, our trade deficit with China alone was
$273.1 billion. Since 1999 our trade deficit with China has
increased nearly four-fold. So what you say, and I know you
believe it, and I know it is logical and makes sense, but the
reality was that that is how China really took off. I mean, and
we used to hold them every year. We would give them a one-year
opportunity, and then we could open up the prisons, and have
people released, and put pressure. Now there is no pressure.
And the other, and then I want to go to Mr. Austria, but
the problem is, and I am not going to ask you if you will ever
go out working for China. I am not going to ask you that. But a
lot of your predecessors have gone out. And a lot of the
American people have lost confidence in Republican
administrations. R-E-P, I can spell it, Republican
administrations. I mean, Bush made a terrible mistake when he
went to China. There were Catholic priests and bishops being
tortured in jail. And he was sitting in the stadium watching
the venue for the Olympics.
Now the guy who just designed, I had a question for him. I
am not going to ask you. Just designed the Olympic stadium is
in jail. He is missing. And we don't know where he is. So as a
Republican, let me say, you don't get too offensive and say
this guy is a Republican. He is coming after us Democrats and
both administrations.
But the American people have lost confidence, because they
have seen prominent people in both administrations. Clark Randt
who was our ambassador in China I believe is now working for
the Chinese government.
So when an auto manufacturer, laborer, AFL-CIO guy, UAW guy
in Ohio, in Pennsylvania says, ``Hey, the powerful, the
wealthy, they work in administrations and then they go out.'' I
mean, you look at the number of law firms in the city and in
New York City that are representing the Chinese. It is immoral.
Now some will say immoral? It is immoral.
I mean, when you have Congressman Chris Smith took holy
communion from Bishop Su, he has never been seen since, and you
can represent that government? That government that are doing
cyber attacks against us? And that government that has--we had
a meeting in China. I went over there with Chris Smith a month
before the Olympics. And we had a meeting one night, a dinner
meeting, with a lot of religious leaders. Every one but one got
arrested on their way there and before they got there. And the
one who made it was arrested the next day.
Well the embassy never really spoke out on it. They were
interested in it. They were sympathetic to it. But I don't
think they wanted to sort of keep them from getting an economic
opportunity later on. So the American people they see these
numbers. And they say well I hear that same thing over and over
and nothing ever changes.
Apple, you probably have an iPhone; you probably have an
iPod; you probably have an iPad, or if you don't I am sure a
lot of people. Why can't Apple make them in the United States
if the productivity--and you have been a very impressive
witness. You seem like an awfully nice person. Every time I
hear something good about you, it is a good--no, I mean it.
Ambassador Kirk. I am going to try my best not to dissuade
you of any of that for the remaining time I have--maybe I
should--if you will give me permission not to speak for the
rest of the hearing. Hopefully I won't--I won't do anything to
dissuade you from that.
Mr. Wolf. Why couldn't Apple do those jobs here in America
based on the statistics that you gave us? Why couldn't they
have them here?
Ambassador Kirk. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Wolf. And we see the administration, and I want to get
to you, but I just got to get this off my chest to say this
thing. President Obama appointed Jeff Immelt, the guy from GE,
as his job's guy. One they pay no taxes. GE paid no taxes. That
is not good. That is not good.
But secondly I saw an article in the paper three months
ago, we will try to dig it out and put it in the record here,
that GE signed an agreement with China to develop an avionics
program that will really hurt Boeing. Now we want Boeing, and I
appreciate the numbers you told me, we want Boeing to be the
number one manufacturer, because I want to create jobs at
Boeing.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Wolf. And so the American people see this. And so they
say well here is Immelt. He is creating jobs in China. He is
not paying any taxes. Steve Jobs and Apple now they are doing
the iPad, the iPhone, the iPod in China. And they are taking it
away from American workers, Republicans, Democrats,
independents, people who just want to raise their family,
educate their kids.
And so I think there is a cynicism that really develops.
And when they see high-level officials and people who came to
town to do well, stay to do good, to make a lot of money, they
get very discouraged.
We find former ambassadors that are now working for the
countries that they were supposed to be advocates for us for.
We find it in the trade rep's office. I bet your alumni, the
number of people that are going out now working for--and I
probably shouldn't mention the law firms. I am tempted to but I
won't. And I think--I don't know how you live with yourself.
You know, I say when I leave here, and I have no intention
of leaving soon, but when I leave here, I will never go lobby.
And I am certainly not going to go on to lobby for a foreign
power that arrests Catholic bishops, and puts house church
leaders in jail, and has plundered Tibet.
In 1997, I snuck into Tibet with a young Buddhist monk in a
trekking group. And what they have done to Tibet. Hu Jintao,
the guy that President Obama had that state dinner for, what he
has done to Tibet.
And there is the Simon and Garfunkel song, ``The Boxer.''
You know, ``man hears what he wants to hear but disregards the
rest.'' And we can't disregard. So when somebody goes out and
goes with a big law firm to represent the Chinese that are also
spying against us and doing it.
The number one supporter, and then I am going to go to Mr.
Austria, I promise, the number one supporter of the genocide in
Darfur--I was the first member of the House to go to Darfur.
Genocide. Congress says it is genocide. The Bush administration
says it. The number one supporter of the genocidal government
of the Bashir administration, who is under indictment by the
war crimes, is China.
So you can leave, not you, a person could leave and go out
and work for China. And so I think the American people are just
saying wow. So, you know, hopefully, you know, you will do
these things and make sure that we keep the jobs here and bring
the jobs back.
Mr. Austria now.
Mr. Austria. And I thank you, Mr. Chairman, because I think
you are hitting on some very, very important points.
Ambassador, thank you for being here.
Ambassador Kirk. Thank you, sir.

U.S. AND CHINA'S ECONOMIES

Mr. Austria. And I want to follow up a little bit on what
the chairman has said from an economic standpoint, because I--
let me ask you your opinion as to where China is economically
compared to the United States. Have they passed us technology
wise in your opinion? You know, they have now--I think most
indicators show they have the second strongest economy.
When you look at the deficits that we are running, if you
look at the President's budget. I think it reduces the federal
deficit to a low I think roughly of $600 billion in 2015. But
then it starts expanding after the years after that, which
means more borrowing, more spending.
And China, you know, obviously controls a large amount of
our debt. And how is that impacting us economically?
Ambassador Kirk. Well first of all, Mr. Austria, thank you
for your questions. You asked a number of questions. Let me try
to break them down.
One, in terms of where China is, I think we have been--to
some degree we don't give ourselves enough credit for what we
do. China's economy is growing. We think that is a good thing.
I mean, look they have got 600 million people in China, another
600 million in India, another 600 million in Africa, all living
on less than $2 a day. You can see that as a threat. You can
see that as an opportunity for the United States to help them
grow those economies, build the middle class. So it is nothing
for us to fear.
But by a wide margin, I want to make this plain, we are
still, by an extraordinary margin, the largest and most
dominant economy in the world. Now the chairman had asked
earlier about reports that China had surpassed us in
production, manufacturing and production. In raw numbers, yes;
technology, no.
The evidence of that, every American worker in a
manufacturing facility is eight times more productive than
their Chinese counterpart. I think the numbers that we showed
that for what it takes 11 million American workers to do, the
Chinese have to take 100 million. So, I mean, we have to be
careful when we just look at a raw number. But what they have
right now is the ability they can throw 100,000 people. And I
don't mean to make light of it.
You know, I tell them in China you get promoted if you can
take something that we do 10,000 workers in Mr. Fatah's
district and you can do 100,000 workers in China. The only way
you get promoted is if you can figure out how to do it with
125,000 workers, because they have a premium on putting people
to work in mass manufacturing where we have the edge.
And where the President I think has wisely called for us,
even as we make these tough decisions to continue our edge, is
in innovation, in technology, in research and development in
which China doesn't excel.
Now what we have to do and what we have done, and it
addresses a little of your question and the chairman's as well,
we have to make sure we have a multi-pronged, very disciplined
response to China in which we fight them on their lack of
enforcement, of their intellectual property rights. We
encourage them, as we have done, to make sure they combat
piracy. We have to watch what they are doing on indigenous
innovation.
Our Treasury Secretary and the President engaged them on
human rights, on currency, all of those things, because at the
end of the day, with an economy with 309 million people versus
a combined 3 billion people in India, Africa, and China, the
United States is going to win by our ability to develop the
products that services the technology that not only drive only
growth but that are going to help them meet their objective to
move people from poverty into a middle income.
And we think our budget within the context of what I am
here visiting with you about helps us drive our part of that.
Mr. Austria. Let me ask you this. With those types of
disputes, you are talking about intellectual property concerns,
government procurement of market, the fact that we are so
reliant on China to help finance our debt, is that--how is that
impacting our ability to enforce and our ability to deal with
them on these particular disputes, you know, on a level playing
field or is it impacting it?
Ambassador Kirk. Well it has not. And forgive me, I know I
have a story for everything. The ranking member knows that I
was a former mayor of Dallas. And most people----
Mr. Austria. I can tell by your voice.
Ambassador Kirk. Like our friends from Alabama, if you are
from Dallas, Washington, you tend to be more forward leaning on
trade. And I am proud of the record we built.
But I said to the President, and I say in every hearing, I
think one of the greatest things I have brought to the job is I
married an extraordinarily talented and good looking woman who
got her degree from the Wharton School at Penn but grew up in
Ohio. And all my in-laws, and I have been married 23 years,
that means I have had 23 years of going to Detroit, and
Columbus, and Cleveland, and honestly I think I can more
honestly see the other side of trade and your frustration, Mr.
Chairman, in which I hear people that don't think our trade
policy works.
And when you ask China, our administration did something no
other administration did with China, Democrat or Republican, we
filed the first safeguard case last year over tires. And them
dumping in this market. In seven previous cases, the
International Trade Commission, separate us, had found similar
circumstances, presented those to previous administrations.
None had ever decided to pull the trigger. We did that. And the
Chinese didn't like it.
And I will tell you we were pilloried in the press. We were
going to start a trade war. But we thought it was the right
thing to do to combat all the cynicism the chairman said. And
we still believe.
That is why I talk so much about enforcement. For us to
have a holistic balanced trade policy, which the United States
has to. We can't grow our economy the way we want in the future
if we think we can roll our self off from the 95 percent of the
rest of the world who doesn't live here.
But we do have to honestly address that cynicism, that
concern the chairman and you mentioned. We think that is one
area the Obama Administration has distinguished our self. And I
am happy to come back. I don't want to drag it out.

NAFTA

Mr. Austria. Well let me ask you about, you know, another
important part of that, and I am sure you hear it in Ohio, is
NAFTA. What is the administration's position on NAFTA, or are
what are your thoughts on NAFTA?
Ambassador Kirk. We have worked under the directive of our
three leaders to look at everything we can do in that to
strengthen it and make it work better, particularly as it
relates to our labor and environment provisions.
I know in Ohio you are especially concerned about the
labor----
Mr. Austria. Well excuse me, sir. Well you have the
President. When he was campaigning there as a Senator he was
opposed to--I believe in NAFTA. And that is where I want to
make sure that--maybe if that is not correct, please, you
know----
Ambassador Kirk. Well I will let you go back and speak for
that. But I tell people I would like to believe his selection
of me as U.S. Trade Representative, knowing the passion that I
had for trade, was deliberate and not accidental.
But what we have done, and we have worked with our
Secretary of Labor, Hilda Solis, and our counterparts in Mexico
and Canada, is looking at how we can strengthen that model and
make it better. Beyond that we are doing a number of other
things in NAFTA to recognize. There are a lot of ways we can
increase trade. And NAFTA is still our largest trading
partners, including for Ohio.
For all of the criticism I know there is about trade in
Ohio, and I have been there several times. I am going back with
Senator Brown. I was there with the governor and others. A
quarter of all our trade with Canada goes across that
Ambassador Bridge in Detroit.
So what we have heard----

AGRICULTURAL EXPORTS

Mr. Austria. The theory I wanted to get to, and I apologize
because of time, manufacturing as you know, you have been to
Ohio, along with agriculture, is our number one industry in
Ohio. So I want to also talk a little bit about agriculture,
because that is very important.
I know some of the other members have talked about the
manufacturing side. But in my district, you know, I have one of
the strongest agriculture industries that are represented in
Ohio and I think probably across the country. There is a lot of
agriculture in my district and a lot of agriculture across the
State of Ohio.
I believe that America has the best farmers in the world.
And I have had an opportunity to see the production. And I
think they can outgrow, and outproduce, and out compete any of
our foreign competitors. But we have to give them, in my
opinion, the legal framework in order to do that. In other
words, level the playing field to give them an opportunity to
do that.
What is your office doing to promote the passage of the
free trade agreements with, for example, Columbia, Panama,
South Korea? And what impact will the upcoming trade agreements
between South Korea and the EU, Canada, and Columbia have on
the U.S. agriculture or exports if our own FTAs are not
implemented?
Ambassador Kirk. Well the good news is you are right. And
our agricultural exports are very strong, Congressman. We are
at the highest level this year, I mean for 2010, than we have
been in almost 15 years.
Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack is somewhat bullish
that if we can continue on the path that we are going, opening
new markets, being rigorous in our enforcement, we have the
potential to hit $135 billion in agricultural exports this
year, which is extraordinary. That would be an almost, I think,
a $17 billion increase. So we are doing well.
Part of it is because we have brought a holistic approach
to what we are doing in trade. And we work with the Department
of Agriculture and Commerce every day. I mentioned the work we
did to reopen markets after the H1N1 scare. I gave an example
earlier of our resolving a long-time dispute with the European
Union that got us back into that market.
With respect to the three FTAs, as you know we have
concluded our negotiations with the Koreans. That agreement is
ready for this Congress to act on. And we have made that aware
to our committees of jurisdiction.
But the agricultural community, just about every sector of
the agricultural industry, has supported and asked Congress now
to move forward on course. Korea, I think the number are right,
their average tariff on agriculture products in Korea is 58
percent. Ours is less than 6 percent.
So I think you can see agricultural will be a big winner.
About half of those will come to zero almost immediately. The
rest are going to come down over the next several years. So
with respect to Korea, the agriculture community is very, very
happy. Not only beef, but grains, and seeds, and others.
We have intensified our work with Panama and Columbia. We
believe those are great markets for agriculture. And we are
very, very close to be in a position hopefully we can resolve
those as well.
Mr. Austria. And, Ambassador, I thank you for that. And I
do appreciate the hard work you are doing. And I agree with the
chairman. I think you personally are working hard. I understand
this. And I appreciate that very much and you being here to
testify in this committee.
Mr. Chairman, I will yield back. Thank you for your time.

JOBS REPATRIATION BILL

Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Austria.
I want to follow up on one or two issues that the
congressman raised. But, you know, I have a bill that I have
asked the administration for over a year to get back to me. We
have actually given a copy to Secretary Locke.
And now I know I am a Republican member. And so probably
they don't want to deal with a Republican member. But I have
asked. And it is a good bill. It creates jobs. And what it does
is it sets up a program of repatriation. We will repatriate
jobs back. Not using punishment, but using a stimulus, and
using taxes, and things like this.
And so if you could take a look at it and see if it got
lost behind a filing cabinet down there. Now the cosponsor in
the Senate will be Senator Warner, Mark Warner. He is a good
Democrat, good fellow. I can't get an answer out of the
administration. It has been over a year.
So if you could take the bill back. We will give you the
number. But we want to introduce it, reintroduce it again. And
what we are doing is at three different levels, basically no
punishment involved. At EDA they can have an opportunity for
grants to a locality that wants to bring a company and let us
say from Mexico or whatever that water and sewer or something
like that.
Secondly, we are asking governors to change their tax code
to give incentives to a company that returns. They have to be
an American company, and they have to return. It is the
repatriation.
And lastly, we are working with Chairman Camp at the Ways
and Means Committee to do the same thing. But if you could have
someone look at that and give us some comments. We have been
trying to get some thoughts, ideas. And a job is a job. A job
coming back from Mexico, or China, or Bangladesh will be good
for whatever political party you are in. So if you could do
that for me.
Ambassador Kirk. We will pass on your concern. And I think
since you mentioned Chairman Camp, I think he will tell you for
me that I don't particularly care a whole lot for partisanship.
I care about fighting for America's rights and creating jobs.
We have worked with him, and we worked very well.
I am proud of the fact that it was because of the
partnership we had with Chairman Camp and Ranking Member Levin
that we were able to get a Korea agreement. That we had both
strong support. And for the first time not only the
manufacturers in the chamber but forward in the UAW.

NORTH KOREAN KAESONG INDUSTRIAL ZONE

Mr. Wolf. Okay. We will get that to you.
Now you set up the Korean issue. I want to get and ask you
a question about that. And I support the Korean Trade
Agreement. Let me just state again. I am a strong supporter.
But this information I was given, maybe you can clarify it,
with regard to the U.S.-Korea Free Trade Agreement, which I
continue to support, could you discuss the issue of the
treatment of products from the North Korean Kaesong Industrial
Zone, the duty free processing zone where South Korean
companies pay the North Korean government to have their
citizens produce products for export to South Korea? Keep in
mind they are gathering nuclear weapons----
Ambassador Kirk. Right.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. And they have gulags there that when
that government falls and the people see what they have done to
the people it will be brutal.
The employees in North Korea work under terrible conditions
and are essentially used as slave labor. It is my understanding
I have been told that the FTA currently would allow component
products from Kaesong to be included in South Korean goods that
would be eligible for export to the U.S. with preferential
treatment.
While the U.S. can stop products from North Korea from
entering the U.S., that appears to only cover final products
and not South Korean products from Kaesong products. Could you
tell us if that is accurate or not? Because if we are taking
something that we can import into the United States that was
made by slave labor or violating workers' rights, that would
not be good. Are you aware of that?
Ambassador Kirk. I am aware of that. And this is a bit
confusing, so if you will just give me a minute. First let me
start here. Nothing in the Korea FTA makes a provision for
goods from Kaesong to come in.
More importantly, nothing in the Korea FTA changes U.S.
policy and law relative to goods coming from North Korea to the
U.S. Now there has been in place a long-standing policy that
basically you cannot have goods, component goods, from North
Korea come to the U.S. except for on a very limited exception.
And this is, as I understand it, it is language that is
administered by the Department of Treasury. That provision
expired I think in February of this year. Treasury and State
are in the process of updating that.
But even within that, whatever exceptions there are are
exceptions that Congress would have to approve. We didn't do
anything. There is nothing I could do in an FTA that would
override your congressional authority to say no goods from
North Korea.
Now the confusion, well not the confusion, one of the
challenges there is language in the FTA that allows us to have
a commission that would look at the issue of bringing
components in from Kaesong. The commission would have to make a
determination. They would want to ask for that exception. But
the commission would only exist, and it would be essentially
U.S. governmental officials and South Korean officials, but
they wouldn't have the ability to say the goods couldn't come
in. That commission would only exist for the purpose of saying
we are going to recommend that Treasury hears an exception. And
then Treasury would still have to come to Congress.
The bottom line is unless Congress changes your mind and
allows goods from North Korea to come in, nothing we do in the
FTA changes that. The ultimate authority still resides in the
U.S. Congress.
Mr. Wolf. So those goods could not come in.
Ambassador Kirk. Not unless this Congress was to make a
determination. You would grant an exception under whatever this
new standard that Treasury would present to you.
Mr. Wolf. Well if you could give me a letter to that
effect. And what I will do is send it to the Ways and Means
Committee, and making sure, and give it to Mr. Camp, because we
want to make sure that we certainly don't import goods made.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

If you could just explain it. Okay. And just explain it,
and say pursuant to the question and this is--these are the
circumstances. And unless Congress did, they cannot. And then I
will pass it on.

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY PROTECTION

Intellectual property issue: In 2010 the three largest U.S.
companies by market capitalization were Exxon, Microsoft, and
Apple with a combined market capitalization of nearly a
trillion dollars. When two of these three companies, the
biggest companies in America, are in the IP business,
protecting intellectual property rights is crucial.
Could you provide the committee your plans with regard to
IP with regard to China enforcement? As Mr. Schiff, he is not
here, with regard to Hollywood, with regard to some of the
recording devices and others, is there--can you sort of flesh
out what you are actually doing on IP?
Ambassador Kirk. Yes, we are. We are attacking this on a
number of fronts, because it is so critical to us. And I know,
and I appreciate your kind comments about me, but I appreciate
your work. I know this has been a matter of concern for you.
And you have studied this.
We raised this and confronted China with this in every
form, both the strategic economic dialogue, the Joint
Commission on Commerce and Trade, and President Hu's business.
We had a number of we think positive steps forward. If I could
give you three examples.
One, I know you in particular have highlighted the use of
pirated software by the Chinese government themselves. Well we
have been banging on them to reduce that number to a more
acceptable level if not have them use legal software for years.
As a result of our advocacy on this, during President Hu's
visit for the first time, they have agreed. They are going to
have a campaign to encourage. And they are going to audit the
use of legal software by their government. But more
particularly at the sub-central level.
Now the important things we got this year, because they
have made this commitment before but never done it because they
never funded it. So this year we got a commitment they would
agree that they are going to increase their use of legal
software. They are going to extend it to sub-central
governments. And they are going to give them money to purchase
legal software.
And this is a huge, again, lost opportunity, since you
mentioned Microsoft, for Microsoft. If we could just get that
number from 92 percent down to 70 or 60, billions of dollars
and thousands of jobs for us here in the U.S.
Secondly, I mentioned the issue of indigenous innovation.
It is one area that most concerns our American businesses,
because China basically tries to force you to say you can have
work, but we want you to move your factory here.
Mr. Wolf. Right.
Ambassador Kirk. Not only do we want you to move your
factory here. Then we won't allow you to sell anything in China
unless you agree that it is made. It is a license transfer. We
have gotten them to agree to do two things. One is to de-link
their legitimate, you know, efforts in government to try to
foster innovation. But de-link that from government
procurement, which is where most of their purchasing is done.
And secondly, one of the commitments that they made when we
granted them most-favored-nation status, now PNTR, was that we
wanted them to join the government procurement agreement within
the WTO. And they have drug their feet on that. They have
agreed. They will submit a revised offer and join, you know,
make an effort to join the Government Procurement Act by the
end of the year.
And we had a number of other areas I can--I feel like I am
going on too long. We would be happy to go through them. We
worked with them to make an agreement in their energy sector.
They have an exploding investment in that. One of the
requirements was non-Chinese businesses could only bid on that
if they demonstrated that they had experience. But it had to be
in China.
Well we thought that was ridiculous. We have American
companies that are building projects all around the world. They
have now agreed they would take that relevant experience from
around the world. And we made other progress on issues that----
Mr. Wolf. When did that go into effect?
Ambassador Kirk. That one would go into effect immediately.
That they will allow us to bid on that and demonstrate that.
Mr. Chairman, we share your frustration. We know we are
going to have to continue to stay on top of China and monitor
these. But the intellectual property rights area is one that we
pay particular attention, not only software but copyrights and
patents.
And they do have a campaign that is being run by Deputy
Vice Minister Yang Xueshan who oversees both their strategic
economic dialogue and ours in which they are really
highlighting the importance of recognition of intellectual
property rights. But they are going to enforce it and bring
people to justice.
Now the challenge is what they always do. It is a six-month
campaign. We are pushing them to try to make that longer. But
slowly our best ally is the fact China is beginning to develop
an indigenous innovation community that is putting as much
pressure on their government to respect and protect
intellectual property.

CYBERSECURITY

Mr. Wolf. Have your computers been hit with cyber attacks?
Ambassador Kirk. Not to my knowledge. I hope not.
Mr. Wolf. When, and I don't want to put you in the spot
here, but I want to ask you. When your people go to China, do
they take BlackBerrys and laptops with them?
Ambassador Kirk. We do not.
Mr. Wolf. Good. And had there been instructions from the
FBI? Have you been personally briefed by the FBI as to the
activity?
Ambassador Kirk. That might be a conversation perhaps we
might more appropriately have in private.
Mr. Wolf. Okay.
Ambassador Kirk. But we are very, very careful.
Mr. Wolf. Well let us have it if we can.
Ambassador Kirk. Yes, sir.
Mr. Wolf. So this is not just an okay. But okay I would
like to have that with you.
Let me go to Mr. Fattah.

EXPORT PROMOTION

Mr. Fattah. Thank you, sir. I am going to ask one question.
I have to step out and take a phone call in a second. But let
me ask this one question. And you can supply it to the Chairman
or to the committee.
But I was out a few weeks ago in a neighborhood that the
chairman would be quite familiar with over around 70th and
Elmwood. I was at a place called CoverSports. Now the last
question actually was about this global aggregation, because
this is----
Ambassador Kirk. You are not going to brief me in Cowboys
and----
Mr. Fattah. No, no, no.
Ambassador Kirk. We are not going to go that far.
Mr. Fattah. We are not going into that. CoverSports has
been in Philadelphia for 100 years. They make tarp out in
southwest Philadelphia. And it is a great story of a family-
owned business that has been out there. And they make the tarp
for the Washington Nationals and for the Philadelphia Phillies.
They only have one competitor, and it is in China. They got
some new equipment under the small business depreciation----
Ambassador Kirk. The tax credit?
Mr. Fattah [continuing]. The deal that we did last year.
And they bought some heavy equipment from Ohio that now allows
them to make even larger pieces of tarp and do it more quickly.
And they got some very significant innovation going on there.
And they obviously are going to be here for another 100 years.
But the point now is to get to the export side. You know,
before they were getting beat from China dumping cheap tarps
into the U.S. market. Now they are fine. And they are making
tarp for a lot of the college teams.
But this is the point, in terms of the President's export
initiative, is that making the opportunities available for them
now to start to compete around the world and not just here.
And what I want to know is, I know we have all these trade
agreements, and we got all these things we can and we can't do.
We, through the Commerce Department, helped manufacturers with
creating the efficiencies that you talk about when you compared
the 11 million to the 100 million.
But the question is, could you supply for the committee
what it is that we can't do to help the manufacturing sector
because of trade agreements? You know, where we get too close
to the line, or what we can do, or a little bit of both,
because I think that we are very interested in what we can do.
We have some 1,300 manufacturers in Philadelphia. The
Philadelphia area has 5,000.
Now we have lost--in 27 years, we have lost 200,000
manufacturing jobs. But we still have lots of manufacturing
jobs. In fact, it was just reported last week that we had a 27-
year high in Philadelphia of manufacturing jobs. In the last
two years, the Philadelphia Fed has documented major increases
in manufacturing. It has really led the recovery in our area.
But those manufacturers need to have markets that go
beyond. So we don't have to get into the rhetorical jousting
about it now. But it would be very interesting to me to know
where the--where we can do more. And what, if any, legal
restrictions we are under relative to these various trade
agreements about how we can help our manufacturing sector
continue to compete.
Ambassador Kirk. I can give just a couple of quick
examples. And frankly in your question again you mentioned one.
In the tax compromise that Congress wisely passed last year----
Mr. Wolf. I voted against it.
Ambassador Kirk [continuing]. But the extension of those
depreciation, I have heard from small businesses all around the
country that are using that ability to buy new equipment and
depreciate, that is completely legal.
Within the WTO, what is usually prohibited is if you are
doing something expressly for the purpose of having a business
export and not any domestic component. If you just--which is
principally what a lot of other countries do.
If you are giving a tax depreciation credit that is going
to help you grow, and you are going to continue to expand your
market like this company is here in the U.S., you happen to
also export, that you can do.
Part of what we are doing through the export initiative is
to go to companies like that and say let us make sure you are
aware of the combined resources we have to help you find
customers through Commerce, to finance it through Export, and--
--
Mr. Fattah. Because as big as baseball is in South America
and Latin America, they probably could use some tarp. You know,
so we could sell it.
Ambassador Kirk. I was just in Austin. We did another one
of these. I visited a company called Formaspace that you can
read about. And they are a small company growing.
But 30 percent of their market now are markets around the
world. And the guy said a big part of him being able to stay
ahead of the curve was he bought a very advanced cutting-edge
machine that helps him make--he basically makes these tables
that other manufacturers put components on. But they are
exploding. But that depreciation credit was hugely important to
him. And he is being financed through the Export-Import Bank.
Mr. Fattah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf. Thank you.
I think Mr. Fattah voted against it. And I think we both
would have supported that provision. I thought the portion on
the $112 billion loss to the government on giving a two percent
payroll tax to Jimmy Buffett and Warren Buffett was a little
too much. And I think, if you recall, that was part of that
package. And that, I think, creates a problem.

TRADE PREFERENCES

On the trade preferences: the U.S. offers a program that is
designed to encourage economic development in lower income
countries by offering preferential duty-free income, U.S. duty-
free, U.S. market access to imports from countries covered by
these programs. The imports cannot be the same as any products
manufactured in the United States.
An example would be coffee from Ethiopia. So if imports
total $80 billion in 2010, up 33 percent. What are the
benefits? But I guess equally important, how do you ensure
these imports are not hurting U.S. businesses?
Ambassador Kirk. Because the program is reauthorized now by
Congress every year, we go through a fairly exhaustive process
with our committees of jurisdiction. And we are required to go
through a notice and filing period in which we publish in the
Federal Register that any industry for example that may say--
that feels like they are being harmed because of these products
has a right to petition us to say that product should be
removed.
Broadly it is a very valuable tool that we use to help some
of the truly poorest countries in the world create some economy
and create some wealth. And then as they mature hopefully they
become markets for our products.
One of the best examples is Colombia. Colombia is a
preference country under the Andean Trade Preference Act. In
that case not only are we helping them to send goods here we
don't make, but we have the added benefit we are getting
farmers that otherwise might have been involved in growing
crops that were used in the drug trade to go to a more
productive behavior.
In other cases, not only do we have the objective, I think
the one legitimate one and humanitarian one, of helping these
really desperately poor societies, but there is also a case
that in many of these some of the inputs coming from these
countries are used by American manufacturers. So it has a dual
value and benefit.
But there is a fairly structured process, Mr. Chairman, by
which we examine the impact on American businesses.
Mr. Wolf. Do you also look at their record on workers'
rights, and human rights, and things like that?
Ambassador Kirk. We will remove that. We have three broad
programs. The one, the generalized system of preferences,
covers a number of poor countries. AGOA, which is the African
Growth and Opportunity Act, covers I think 38 economies in sub-
Saharan Africa. And then we have Andean.
Our administration has removed a couple of countries from
AGOA and others and one in South America where their behavior
just gets to a point where they are engaged in activities that
I think you or I would find----
Mr. Wolf. Could you supply the committee with the list of
the countries?
Ambassador Kirk. Yes, sir.
Again, these usually go to our committees of jurisdiction.
But we are required by law when we make those determination we
provide notice to the Ways and Means and Senate Finance
committees.
And one of our concerns though in terms of the holistic
strategy we are trying to bring to trade is just as much as we
are being pressured. And we want to work with Congress to pass
the pending free trade agreements with Korea, and Panama, and
Colombia. We do think it is equally important that we pass
these preference programs and fair trade.
You know, just so you get both sides of it, one of the big
challenges we have in our preference programs is because they
are only authorized every year, it is hard for a business to go
out and get capital, make an investment when you are not sure
of whether or not Congress is going to allow that program to
continue but on an annual evaluation.
Mr. Wolf. It sounds good obviously. Gum arabic comes from
Sudan. Is that part of this program?
Ambassador Kirk. If I might get a more, I don't recall that
Sudan is a part of AGOA, but I'd like to get you a more precise
answer.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE GRANTS

Mr. Wolf. The other issue on that is there was a program
developed under the Bush Administration called the Millennium
Challenge Grant. Are you familiar with the Millennium Challenge
Grant?
Ambassador Kirk. Yes, sir. I served on that Board by a
matter of Congressional authority.
Mr. Wolf. You served on the Board?
Ambassador Kirk. The Millennium Challenge? Yes, sir.
Mr. Wolf. Now we're getting reports, which we'll send you,
when I say, I hope you're going to look at these and get back
to us because these are all serious questions. So sometimes
witnesses come and they go but, so I would like you to look at
this and maybe if you can give me a call. We're giving about
$600 million dollars to Morocco, in Millennium Challenge and
Morocco just expelled about 50 Christian missionaries. We also
have had reports from the American companies that some
companies in Africa, and I want to be sure that I have the
right countries so I'm not going to say. We'll share it with
you. We have given them foreign aid through the Millennium
Challenge grant and they then have turned around and these, the
grants have gone to Chinese companies to do what they're
anxious to do.
Ambassador Kirk. May I speak to that one?
Mr. Wolf. Yes, sir.
Ambassador Kirk. Because that one, that is one issue I
raised directly and we got a report on it, and forgive the
number, I want to, I think the numbers have less than three
percent.
Mr. Wolf. I don't know that that's accurate. We have an----
Ambassador Kirk. It's a fairly, I was surprised. I was
frankly surprised.
Mr. Wolf. When was that given? When did you get that?
Ambassador Kirk. This was within the last six months. I'll
get the report. We have studied that and I specifically raised
that.
Mr. Wolf. We have an idea, investigation now. They, the
Millennium, I forget the director's name. You would know him
well.
Ambassador Kirk. Daniel Yohannes.
Mr. Wolf. Yes.
Ambassador Kirk. Under our authorization, our statutes, we
try to make sure, well first, we're trying to help those
countries create an infrastructure that helps them do more than
just build roads.
Mr. Wolf. But to give American taxpayer dollars to country
X and then turn around and give those grants to China.
Ambassador Kirk. It is a huge concern of ours.
Mr. Wolf. Are you currently on the Board?
Ambassador Kirk. I am on the Board and our general policy
is unless you have a case where there's no American company who
bids on it, and there is no domestic capacity in that country,
then there is a provision that they can go out and bid then
those countries come in.
Mr. Wolf. Well----
Ambassador Kirk. The numbers on China are much less than
what they have been.
Mr. Wolf. Well, I'm not, just not referencing China. I'm
referencing all, I mean a country like China. We will send you
a report. Maybe you can have someone from your office call Tom,
Mr. Tom Culligan, and we'll give you the IG at the Millennium
Challenge Corporation is doing an investigation, and a number
of companies have come forward, and we believe it is deeper.
Also, since you are a voting member, have you looked at the
numerous letters that I've sent over there with regard to
Morocco?
Ambassador Kirk. We get, usually we get a summary of those.
But we do a fairly thoughtful review of all of our challenge
grants, and part of what we're doing with the Millennium
Challenge grants is now more broadly wrapped up in the
initiative President Obama started last year to have a more
rational approach to what we call all of our aid in trade work.
But it is a, on balance, I think it is a good program. It is
well run and we have a number of criteria that we examine
before we issue them. But we do look at the impact of labor
rights and of the concerns you raised, say in a case whether
it's Morocco, or Philippines or others.
Mr. Wolf. Well, but do you think that the test that they
have to meet is only for that one year in order to get in on
the challenge.
Ambassador Kirk. No. We look at----
Mr. Wolf. Well, but we're seeing slippage and I think once
the grants are given out, it almost seems like they begin to
look other places, and so you're the person I should call.
Ambassador Kirk. I'll be happy to follow up with Tom and
get him with our director on that.

COLUMBIA FREE TRADE AGREEMENT

Mr. Wolf. Okay, and if you could comment on these cases
with regard to the country, specific? Very good. Columbia has
free trade agreement. Do you believe that Columbia has
sufficiently addressed the concerns regarding the anti-labor
violence?
Ambassador Kirk. We are in the process. When I testified
before Ways and Means Committee, I think it's been about a
month ago, we, I informed them that the President has asked us
to undertake the same diligence that we used to produce the
agreement with Korea with respect to Columbia and Panama. Since
then I can tell you we have had very productive engagement with
Columbia. President Santos, frankly, has made addressing the
issues of violence, assassinations against labor leaders and
strengthening frankly their administrative capacity of their
labor ministry and looking at enforcement, and our work, we
have engaged with them every week over the last five weeks and
we are making very strong progress, and there was a press
report yesterday in which frankly President Santos outlined
many of what we had asked him to do, but highlighted the fact
that he thought this was important for Columbia. So what I've
said, and in many cases we feel like we're pushing on an open
door. But we are making very good progress.

TRADE STATISTICS

Mr. Wolf. Okay. We have a couple on the commerce
reorganization, but I, you sort of covered that. We'll just
submit that for the record. In December, the Wall Street
Journal reported on a study that found that the U.S. and other
countries do not accurately track balanced trade. They found
that trade statistic models are outdated and do not reflect
many complex modern trade flows. According to a subsequent
editorial in the Journal that, ``The study ought to be required
reading on Capitol Hill. Most importantly, they raised the
question how much anyone really knows what a meritous trade
with China is.'' Has your office studied this issue, and what
were they conclusions, and do you believe we need to revisit
how we collect and analyze those trade statistics?
Ambassador Kirk. Well, my office does not have the
responsibility. I haven't seen this Wall Street Journal study,
but as a general rule I try not to use the Wall Street Journal
as my sort of guiding light on which direction because they
usually whack us over the head. Particularly on, I love
reminding them, they were the most critical of our efforts when
we held China's feet to the fire on the 421 case.
Mr. Wolf. I'm glad, that I said the record, I'm glad that
you did.
Ambassador Kirk. Yes, we did. But let me say we are, part
of what we're doing through the National Export Initiative is
reexamining every export of our trade. The ITC and Commerce do
a pretty good job. We can track shipment of goods. Where we are
deficient is in services, and we intuitively know that in the
service sector, in which now over 80 percent of Americans work,
we have a trade surplus with just about every country we have
an FTA or strong trade relationship. But it's very difficult to
track, to track those numbers, and we are, I know that Commerce
and others are looking at different models on how to strengthen
that and better track it.

TRADE DEFICIT

Mr. Wolf. Well, top ten countries for what's U.S. trades,
where's the one that we have the negative? Top ten countries
with U.S. has a trade deficit. China, wow. Off the charts. Off
the charts. Japan, Mexico, Canada, Germany, Nigeria, Venezuela,
Russia, Ireland, and Saudi Arabia, and that ought to be the
target reach list. I mean, the Saudis want to help, friends
help friends, if you will, and is this your target list----
Ambassador Kirk. Well, we, we're looking both at the
markets, we aren't just looking at the deficits per se, but
we're looking at markets where we have an opportunity and we
have a strength and they have a need, and that's one reason,
for example, we're so strongly focusing on the Trans-Pacific
Partnership. That's one reason the President made the recent
trip to Latin America. That is a huge opportunity for us that
we haven't built. We think the relationship allows us to
explore that and what's sounding with some of these countries,
and you are right. China represents over half of our deficit.
If you look at some of the rest of them, even Canada, Mexico,
and Saudi, a big component of that, frankly, is oil, because we
are so dependent on other countries for energy. But we are
examining all of that and trying to take a more thoughtful
approach, not just necessarily how do we reduce our deficit
with those countries, that's what's component, but where are
the best opportunities, where are the best markets?

SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY BARRIERS

Mr. Wolf. I just have two more and then go to Mr. Fattah
and Mr. Austria. The Chinese have indicated that one of their
trade priorities is U.S. market for fresh apples. I'm concerned
that the Administration's decision to share a list of invasive
pests and diseases associated with Chinese apples telegraphs
the desire to quickly move an agreement, even though the
Chinese have a terrible track record, even when approved
sanitary import protocols are in place. For example in 2004, a
researcher happened to discover quarantined pests on Chinese Ya
pears while shopping at his local grocery store in Washington
state. Sound scientific principles indicate that one should
take a deliberate and cautious approach to allowing fresh
apples into our nation. I strongly urge the Administration to
be careful to make sure any fresh apple imports meet the SPS
standards. In December you chaired a meeting of the U.S. China
Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade. I understand that one
issue on the agenda was our desire to import beef into, or
export beef into China. Was it a Chinese request that that
meeting, or have they talked to you about importing fresh
apples into America?
Ambassador Kirk. Yes. You, Mr. Chairman, many of our
trading partners, one of our frustrations frankly in this
business is they almost feed us as tit for tat. You let our
beef in, I mean you let our apples in, we'll let your beef. I
will tell you, we do not yield on our basic principle in one.
In order for a rules based system to work, everybody's got to
rule by the rules and live by the rules, and nowhere is that
more critical as it relates to sanitary and phytosanitary
standards, and for us, we just ask that everyone comply with
internationally accepted standards, and that means if we meet
them, you let our goods in. If your goods meet them on the
other hand and they meet the requirements of APHIS, which is I
think you know, separate from us through the Department of
Agriculture, we should let them in. But we do not trade off one
for the other in that sense. But just as we ask China to do
things, they, you know, will come to us and say, ``Well, you
won't let our apples in'', and we usually direct them to APHIS
and tell them if they meet their standards and meet the test.
Mr. Wolf. Well, in most cases most of the apple concentrate
that you drink comes from China, and they planted millions of
apple trees now and basically the workers that are working on
them are paid almost nothing, and so I would like if you could
look into this apple issue and have somebody come by my office
and sort of just tell me where we are on the apple issue and
maybe at the same time bring somebody from the USDA to come
along.
Ambassador Kirk. I would, on that one, I mean I will be
happy to take that to Secretary, but APHIS, we keep them, I
mean Congress wisely has kind of kept that separate from us so
that, you know, whatever our trade imperatives are don't at all
get factored into what should be purely an issue of science and
health and good sanitary practices. So we stay out of APHIS's
way in that process.
Mr. Wolf. Well, maybe this would be, let me cover this
other issue too, then. For the last three years China has been
rejecting poultry exports from the Commonwealth of Virginia in
response to a single isolated case of Subtype H5N1, a low
pathogen Avian Influenza reported in a commercial Virginia
turkey flock. The flock was depopulated, the premise was
cleaned and disinfected under Federal and State supervision,
and the farm has long since been raising turkeys with no
further incidence of Avian Influenza. I'm concerned that the
research is contrary to the WTO. Do you know much about that?
Have you been in contact with the Chinese with regard to the
ban?
Ambassador Kirk. We have been. We agree with you that we
think that this is, that they are using their rules creatively
to block our export. I'm not sure because I feel like I'm
filibusting----
Mr. Wolf. No, I think you're----
Ambassador Kirk. Well, I will tell you, Mr. Chairman, we
are concerned enough about this, and it may not be to your
attention. We just transmitted to Congress, I was concerned
enough about this. You wisely require us to make a report to
you every year called the National Trade Estimate, in which we
have to kind of tell you how our partners are meeting their
requirements. It has been a very good tool, particularly to get
partners that we identify as being not compliant within
intellectual property rights. It's been a great tool, some say
to name and shame them into doing with it. We made the decision
last year to include two new reports, one on non-tarriff
barriers in manufacturing, one on sanitary and phytosanitary
issues, and so a lot of the questions you raise, I think if we
can maybe get you an executive summary. We just submitted that
report to you last week. But this is critically important. I
would tell you we believe China moved to block our poultry,
unfortunately based on two things. One when we did the 421
case, but second, we had a deal where Congress put a rider on
the Appropriations bill in 2008 that blocked APHIS's ability to
do the study on Chinese poultry, and when Congress did that
then they, we think, acted in a manner that wasn't consistent
with the WTO. We challenged them in the WTO, China challenged
us, but we were able to show and demonstrate we worked with
Congress to have that rider removed. So we're still pressing
this. We're acutely aware of it.
Mr. Wolf. Could you have somebody, when they come up on the
apples, tell us also on the turkey, because that is Virginia.
It's not from my Congressional district but I, I am very, very
interested. We have a number of questions we're just going to
submit for the record. Okay, I go to Mr. Austria, do you have
any?
Mr. Austria. I'm fine.
Mr. Wolf. Well, I want to thank you. I appreciate it. I
think you've done a very good job. I hope, and I'm not going to
embarrass you, but I hope you do not go and work as effective
as you are and as persuasive as you are, I hope you do not
ever, ever, ever even consider representing the Chinese
government. I would be very, I would be very disappointed in
you. I was very impressed in your testimony.
Ambassador Kirk. I would not want to disappoint you.
Mr. Wolf. I looked at your background and so I would not.
What we're going to do is a letter to the CRS asking if they
have the ability to go back and see where all our former trade
reps are at this moment, and who they're representing. But
anyway, thank you very much for your testimony.
Ambassador Kirk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Members.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

W I T N E S S E S

----------
Page
Gallagher, Dr. Patrick...........................................   269
Kappos, David....................................................   183
Kirk, Ambassador Ron.............................................   465
Locke, Hon. Gary.................................................     1
Lubchenco, Dr. Jane..............................................   337

I N D E X

----------

Department of Commerce
Gary Locke, Secretary of Commerce

Page
2010 decennial census............................................ 63-67
BIS funding levels...............................................    72
Commerce revenue opportunities................................... 79-80
Cybersecurity.................................................... 69-70
Department of Commerce:
Budget cuts.................................................. 80-82
Efficiency................................................... 31-32
Funding levels............................................... 30-31
Reorganization............................................... 71-72
Federal budget concerns.......................................... 20-21
Free trade agreements............................................ 32-34
Gulf oil spill................................................... 24-27
Human rights training............................................    71
Impact of budget cuts............................................ 67-68
Manufacturing and the economy.................................... 70-71
National debt.................................................... 29-30
NOAA funding levels.............................................. 22-24
NOAA satellite briefs to Congress................................ 16-19
Opening statements:
Mr. Dicks....................................................     2
Mr. Fattah...................................................    21
Mr. Wolf.....................................................   1-2
Secretary Locke..............................................  2-14
Poverty measurement.............................................. 62-63
Questions for the Record:
Mr. Bonner................................................... 93-97
Mr. Fattah...................................................98-110
Mr. Wolf....................................................111-181
Telecom spectrum.................................................    34
Trade enforcement with China..................................... 74-77
Tsunami warning network.......................................... 15-16
U.S. manufacturing............................................... 27-29
U.S. PTO patent automation....................................... 73-74
U.S. PTO planned funding carryover............................... 72-73
Weather satellites............................................... 68-69
World manufacturing leader....................................... 34-60

United States Patent and Trademark Office
David Kappos, Under Secretary of Commerce for Intellectual Property

Hiring...........................................................   195
Independent inventors support...................................200-201
Information technology..........................................201-202
Intellectual property theft.....................................202-203
Opening statements:
Mr. Fattah...................................................   183
Mr. Kappos..................................................184-189
Mr. Wolf.....................................................   183
Operating reserve...............................................190-191
Patent and trademark operations.................................197-198
Patent appeals to USPTO.........................................196-197
Patent application filings......................................194-195
Patent automation...............................................237-238
Patent information..............................................192-194
Patent operations studies.......................................223-237
Publication of patent applications..............................209-217
Questions for the Record:
Mr. Aderholt................................................263-268
Mr. Fattah..................................................255-260
Mr. Schiff..................................................261-262
Mr. Wolf....................................................239-254
Reducing fees for micro entities.................................   195
Reducing the patent backlog.....................................198-199
Revenue projections.............................................191-192
Satellite office................................................219-220
Satellite offices...............................................199-200
Telework........................................................218-219
USPTO resources.................................................203-209
USPTO's impact on innovation....................................220-223

National Institute of Standards and Technology
Dr. Patrick Gallagher, Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and
Technology

Baldrige program................................................304-305
Cloud computing.................................................301-304
Construction of research facilities.............................293-295
Green technologies..............................................285-286
Homeland security: information sharing technologies.............282-283
Manufacturing...................................................291-293
Manufacturing Extension Partnership:
Cost-share..................................................306-308
Program.....................................................295-298
National earthquake hazard reduction program....................284-285
National strategies for trusted identities in cyberspace........286-289
Nuclear reactor safety review...................................289-291
Opening statement of Dr. Gallagher..............................269-281
Postdoctoral research associateships program....................305-306
Questions for the Record:
Mr. Fattah..................................................309-310
Mr. Graves...................................................   311
Mr. Wolf....................................................311-335
Radiation detection and measurement..............................   283
Smart grid......................................................300-301
Technology innovation program...................................298-300

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Dr. Jane Lubchenco, Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and
Atmosphere

Catch share programs............................................377-379
Climate services................................................382-383
Fiscal challenges................................................   355
Gulf of Mexico disaster response.................................   393
Gulf of Mexico restoration......................................372-375
Joint Polar Satellite System....................................355-367
National Weather Service........................................367-369
NextGen.........................................................390-393
NOAA's education programs.......................................407-408
Opening Statements:
Dr. Lubchenco...............................................337-350
Mr. Wolf.....................................................   337
Pacific salmon..................................................398-399
Questions for the Record:
Mr. Aderholt................................................460-463
Mr. Fattah..................................................451-455
Mr. Graves...................................................   456
Mr. Serrano.................................................457-459
Mr. Wolf....................................................411-450
Satellites......................................................369-372
Seafood imports.................................................402-407
Seafood safety..................................................379-381
Stock assessments...............................................375-377
Tsunami warning program.........................................351-355
Working Waterfronts.............................................408-410

Office of the United States Trade Representative
Ambassador Ron Kirk, United States Trade Representative

Agricultural exports............................................501-502
China PNTR......................................................494-498
Colombia free trade agreement....................................   516
Cybersecurity....................................................   509
Export promotion................................................510-511
Exports to China................................................487-488
Foreign investment in the U.S...................................490-491
Human rights and religious freedom in China.....................481-484
Increases in productivity.......................................489-490
Intellectual property in Russia.................................493-494
Intellectual property protection................................508-509
Internet censorship in China.....................................   484
Jobs repatriation bill..........................................502-503
Korea Free Trade Agreement.......................................   489
Millennium Challenge grants.....................................515-516
NAFTA...........................................................500-501
North Korean Kaesong Industrial Zone............................503-507
Opening Statements:
Ambassador Kirk.............................................466-479
Mr. Fattah...................................................   465
Mr. Wolf.....................................................   465
President's export initiative...................................484-485
Proposed reorganization of trade agencies.......................485-486
Questions for the Record:
Mr. Dicks...................................................546-547
Mr. Fattah..................................................537-546
Mr. Graves..................................................536-537
Mr. Wolf....................................................521-536
Sanitary and phytosanitary barriers.............................518-520
Trade balance with Korea........................................491-492
Trade blocs.....................................................486-487
Trade deficit....................................................   517
Trade preferences...............................................511-514
Trade statistics................................................516-517
U.S. and China's economies......................................498-500
Vacancies in IP enforcement.....................................480-481


