- ADVANCES IN DEEPFAKE TECHNOLOGY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ADVANCES IN DEEPFAKE TECHNOLOGY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY, AND GOVERNMENT INNOVATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND ACCOUNTABILITY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 8, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-74

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-071 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Ro Khanna, California
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Katie Porter, California
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Cori Bush, Missouri
Byron Donalds, Florida               Jimmy Gomez, California
Kelly Armstrong, North Dakota        Shontel Brown, Ohio
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
William Timmons, South Carolina      Robert Garcia, California
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Maxwell Frost, Florida
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Greg Casar, Texas
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Dan Goldman, New York
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Chuck Edwards, North Carolina        Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
Nick Langworthy, New York
Eric Burlison, Missouri

------
Mark Marin, Staff Director
Jessica Donlon, Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel
Raj Bharwani, Senior Professional Staff Member
Lauren Lombardo, Senior Policy Analyst
Peter Warren, Senior Advisor
Mallory Cogar, Deputy Director of Operations and Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5074

Julie Tagen, Minority Staff Director

Contact Number: 202-225-5051
------

Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government
Innovation

Nancy Mace, South Carolina, Chairwoman
William Timmons, South Carolina      Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Tim Burchett, Tennessee                  Ranking Minority Member
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Ro Khanna, California
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Chuck Edwards, North Carolina        Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Nick Langworthy, New York            Jimmy Gomez, California
Eric Burlison, Missouri              Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Vacancy                              Vacancy

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

Page

Hearing held on November 8, 2023.................................     1

Witnesses

----------

Mr. Mounir Ibrahim, Vice President of Public Affairs and Impact,
Truepic
Oral Statement...................................................     5
Dr. David Doermann, Interim Chair, Computer Science and
Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo
Oral Statement...................................................     7
Mr. Sam Gregory, Executive Director, WITNESS
Oral Statement...................................................     8
Mr. Spencer Overton (Minority Witness), Professor of Law, George
Washington University School of Law
Oral Statement...................................................    10

Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are
available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Ibrahim; submitted by Rep.
Connolly.

Documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

ADVANCES IN DEEPFAKE TECHNOLOGY

----------

Wednesday, November 8, 2023

House of Representatives

Committee on Oversight and Accountability

Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government
Innovation

Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:41 p.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Nancy Mace
[Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Mace, Timmons, Burchett,
Langworthy, Burlison, and Connolly.
Ms. Mace. Good afternoon, everyone. The Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government
Innovation will come to order.
Welcome, everyone, and without objection, the Chair may
declare a recess at any time.
I recognize myself for the purpose of making an opening
statement.
Good afternoon, and welcome to this hearing of the
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and
Government Innovation.
The groundbreaking power of artificial intelligence is a
double-edged sword. That is nowhere more evident than in AI's
capacity to generate realistic-looking images, audio, and
video. The latest AI algorithms can be used to make synthetic
creations nearly indistinguishable from actual faces, voices,
and events. These creations are referred to as deepfakes.
Deepfakes can be put to a variety of productive uses. They
are used to enhance video games and other forms of
entertainment, and they are being used to advance medical
research as well, but deepfake technology can also be
weaponized and cause great harm. It can be used to make people
appear to say or do things that they have not said or done. It
can be used to perpetuate various crimes, including financial
fraud and intellectual property theft. It can also be used by
anti-American actors to create national security threats, and
these are not hypothetical harms.
It must be me today.
OK. A few weeks ago, AI-generated pornographic images of
female students at a New Jersey high school were circulated by
male classmates. A company that studies deepfakes found more
than 90 percent of deepfake images are pornographic. Last
month, the attorneys general of 54 states and territories wrote
to congressional leaders urging they address how AI is being
used to exploit children, specifically through the generation
of child sexual abuse material, or CSAM, pronounced ``Cee-
Sam.'' They wrote, ``AI can combine data from photographs of
both abused and non-abused children to animate new and
realistic sexualized images of children who do not exist but
may resemble actual children. Creating these images is easier
than ever,'' the letter states, ``as anyone can download the AI
tools to their computer and create images by simply typing in a
short description of what the user wants to see.''
Falsified videos and photos circulating on social media are
also making it difficult to separate fact from fiction in
conflicts taking place around the world. Videos purportedly
taken from the ground in Israel, Gaza, and Ukraine have
circulated rapidly around on social media, only to be proven
inauthentic. One AI-generated clip showed the President of
Ukraine urging troops to put down their arms. I am not
interested in banning all synthetic images or videos that
offend some people or make them feel uncomfortable, but if we
cannot separate truth from fiction, we cannot ensure our laws
are enforced or that our national security is preserved. And
there is more insidious danger that the sheer volume of
impersonations and false images we are exposed to on social
media lead us to no longer recognize reality when it is staring
us right in the face.
Bad actors are rewarded when people think everything is
fake, thus called the liar's dividend. The classic case of the
liar's dividend is the very real hunter Biden laptop, which
many in the media and elsewhere falsely attributed to Russian
disinformation, but the risk from deepfakes can be mitigated.
We will hear about one such effort today being pursued by a
partnership of tech companies interested in maintaining a flow
of trusted content. Voluntary standards can enable creators to
embed content provenance data into an image or video, allowing
others to know if the content is computer generated or has been
manipulated in any way.
Our witnesses today will be able to discuss these
standards, along with other ideas, for addressing the potential
harms caused by deepfakes. With that, I would like to yield to
the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee, my friend, Mr.
Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you
for having this hearing. Very timely. I will begin by noting
our disappointment on the Minority side, yet again, the lack of
a hearing on the scorecard for implementation of FITARA. This
Committee initiated that legislation, created that scorecard,
has had 15 hearings--a record for Congress--and it has produced
over $25 billion of savings. We believe strongly that we need
to continue that oversight and continue to press the executive
branch for progress. I would note that until now, that effort
over the last 7 years has been completely bipartisan. I have
worked with my colleagues on the other side of the aisle--Mr.
Meadows, Mr. Issa, Mr. Hice, Mr. Hurd--to make this happen, and
we have always collaborated in a bipartisan way to make it
happen. So, I hope we can revisit that issue and continue to
make progress and keep what I think is a very proud record by
this Subcommittee and by the full Committee in holding the
executive branch's feet to the fire when it comes to IT
modernization, updating cybersecurity encryption, and moving to
the cloud.
[Slides shown]
Mr. Connolly. With that, with respect to this hearing, when
most people hear the term ``deepfake,'' this image may jump to
mind. While images like this, His Holiness, Pope Francis, in a
puffy coat, seems innocuous, most are, as the Chairwoman just
indicated, quite insidious. Take the AI-generated image, for
example, the Gaza image on the screen. Since the armed conflict
between Israel and Hamas first broke out, false images created
by generative technology have proliferated throughout the
internet. As a result, these synthetic images have created an
algorithmically driven fog of war, making it significantly more
difficult to differentiate between truth and fiction. Just last
year, at the outset of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, a
fabricated video of Ukrainian President Zelensky calling for
Ukrainian soldiers to lay down their weapons, also referenced
by the Chairwoman, circulated on social media very widely. It
was a deepfake, but thanks to Ukraine's quick response to
Russian disinformation, it was quickly debunked. Welcome to the
new frontier of disinformation.
Politics are one realm of deepfakes, but let us look at
some numbers. According to one study, 96 percent of deepfake
videos are of non-consensual pornography--96 percent. Another
report confirmed that deepfake pornography almost exclusively
targets and harms young women. Knowing this, it should be no
surprise that the very first deepfake ever created depicted the
face of a famous female celebrity superimposed onto the body of
an actor in a pornographic video. These kinds of manipulated
videos are already affecting students in our schools. In one
instance, a group of high school students in New Jersey used
the images of a dozen female classmates to make AI pornography.
This is wrong. It threatens lives and self-esteem among young
people, and it needs to be stopped.
Earlier this year, Ranking Member, Joe Morelle, introduced
a bill called the Preventing Deepfakes of Intimate Images Act.
The bill bans non-consensual images. The order instructs the
Secretary of Commerce--whoops, I am sorry--of sharing synthetic
intimate images and creates additional legal courses of action
for those who are affected. I am a co-sponsor of that
legislation and urge all of my colleagues to join us in this
important effort.
Congress must not shy away from preventing harmful
proliferation of deepfake pornography, but it is not just
deepfake videos that we have to worry about. With AI, scammers
have the ability to easily create audio that mimics a person's
voice, matching, age, gender, and tone. Thousands of Americans
are scammed over the telephone every year using this very
technology, and deepfake capabilities further exacerbate the
problem. So, what can we do? AI image detecting tools are being
developed and used to help verify the authenticity of machine-
generated images. Other tools place watermarks on AI-generated
media to indicate that the media is synthetically created.
While these tools improve and evolve, both the public and
the private sector must cooperate to educate the public on
where these tools are and how to use them. Government and the
private sector must collaboratively highlight the dangers and
consequences of deepfakes and teach how to combat this
misinformation and its abuse. Private developers must implement
policies that preserve the integrity of truth and to provide
transparency to users. That is why I joined the letter, led by
Representative Kilmer and the New Democratic Coalition AI
Working Group, that requests leaders of prominent, generative
AI and social media platforms to provide information to
Congress outlining efforts to monitor, identify, and disclose
deceptive synthetic media content, and the public sector is
already taking bold, consequential steps toward collaboration
and comprehensive solutions.
I applaud the efforts of the Biden Administration to secure
commitments from seven major AI companies to help users
identify when content is, in fact, AI generated and when it is
not. The Biden Administration took a resolute and unprecedented
step last week when it issued its executive order on artificial
intelligence. The sweeping executive order speaks directly to
the issues we seek to examine today. It leans on tools, like
watermarking, that can help people identify whether what they
are looking at online is authentic as a government document or
tool of disinformation. The order instructs the Secretary of
Commerce to work enterprise-wide to develop standards and best
practices for detecting fake content and tracking the
provenance of authentic information. I trust this Subcommittee
will conduct meaningful oversight of these efforts because we,
as a Nation, need to get this right.
I am proud that the Administration has taken the first step
in performing its role as a global leader in addressing
generative technology. I also look forward to hearing more
today about existing and evolving private sector solutions and
suggestions. We already know Congress must continue to fund
essential research programs that support the development of
more advanced and effective deepfake detection tools. Funding
for research through DARPA and the National Science Foundation
is critical. That requires a fully funded government. I once
again urge all of my colleagues on this and the other side of
the aisle to fulfill our constitutional duty and work with us
to pass a bipartisan, long-term funding agreement.
I thank the Chairwoman, Ms. Mace, for holding this hearing
and emphasizing the harm of deepfakes and disinformation, and I
look forward to any legislative action that may follow this
endeavor. I yield back.
Ms. Mace. Thank you, Mr. Connolly. Today, I am pleased to
introduce our witnesses for today's hearing. Our first witness
is Mr. Mounir Ibrahim, Executive Vice President of Public
Affairs and Impact at Truepic. I would like to next introduce
Mr. Langworthy to introduce the second witness.
Mr. Langworthy. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I am
pleased to have the opportunity to introduce our witness from
Western New York. Dr. David Doermann is the interim Chair of
the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at the State
University of New York at Buffalo. He is also a professor of
empire innovation and the Director of the Artificial
Intelligence Institute at UB. Prior to UB, Dr. Doermann was a
program manager at the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency, or DARPA, where he developed and oversaw $150,000,000
in research funding in the areas of computer vision, human
language, and voice analytics technologies. Dr. Doermann is a
leading researcher and innovative thinker in the areas of
document image analysis and recognition. Welcome to the
hearing, Dr. Doermann. We look forward to your testimony today,
and I yield back.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. Our third witness is Mr. Sam Gregory,
executive director of WITNESS, and our fourth witness today is
Mr. Spencer Overton, professor of law at George Washington
University School of Law. Welcome, everyone, and we are pleased
to have you here this afternoon.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 9(g), the witnesses will please
stand and raise your right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you God?
[A chorus of ayes.]
Ms. Mace. Let the record show the witnesses all answered in
the affirmative. We appreciate all of you being here today and
look forward to your testimony.
Let me remind the witnesses that we have read your written
statements, and they will appear in full in the hearing record.
Please limit your oral statements to 5 minutes. As a reminder,
please press the button on the microphone in front of you so
that it is on, and the Members can hear you. When you begin to
speak, the light in front of you will turn green. After 4
minutes, the light will turn yellow. When the red light comes
up, your 5 minutes has expired, and we would ask that you
please wrap it up.
I would like to recognize Mr. Ibrahim to please begin his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MOUNIR IBRAHIM

VICE PRESIDENT OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS AND IMPACT

TRUEPIC

Mr. Ibrahim. Thank you, Chairwoman Mace, Ranking Member
Connolly, and Members of this Subcommittee for the opportunity
to brief today. My name is Mounir Ibrahim, Executive Vice
President for Truepic, a technology company that focuses on
digital content transparency and authenticity. Prior to my time
at Truepic, I was a Foreign Service officer with the U.S.
Department of State. My time as a U.S. diplomat was one of the
greatest honors of my life and led me to my work today.
I was posted at the U.S. Embassy in Damascus at the start
of the Arab Spring. I saw protesters risk their lives, being
beaten and attacked in front of me, as they attempted to
document the violence with smartphones. It was there I saw the
power of user-generated content. Later, as an advisor to two
different U.S. permanent representatives to the United Nations,
I saw similar images from conflict zones around the world enter
into the U.N. Security Council, but regularly undermined by
countries, critics, and bad actors that wanted to undermine
reality by simply claiming those images were fake. Today, that
strategy, as the Congresswoman noted, is referred to as the
liar's dividend, and it is highly effective, simply claiming
user-generated content is fake.
In my opinion, in addition to the horrible, non-consensual
pornographic threat that we have from generative AI, the liar's
dividend is one of the biggest challenges we have because we
have digitized our entire existence. Government, business, and
people all rely on what we see and hear online to make
decisions. We need transparency and authenticity in that
content to make accurate decisions. There is no silver bullet
to transparency or authenticity online, but there is growing
consensus that adding transparency to digital content so that
content consumers--the people who are seeing those images and
videos--can tell what is authentic, what is edited, or what is
synthetic, will help mitigate the challenges.
A lot of this work is taking place by a coalition of
organizations known as the Coalition for Content Provenance and
Authenticity, C2PA, by which Truepic is a proud member. The
C2PA developed the world's first open standard for digital
content provenance, which is often referred to as content
credentials. The basic concept of provenance is attaching the
fact or history of that image, that video, that audio that you
are interacting with online to the file itself, so the content
consumer is informed of the artifacts associated with that,
like time, date, how it was created, how it was edited, et
cetera. The standard is interoperable, which is critical, so
digital content can flow from one platform, one device to
another so as long as they align to the same standard.
Truepic supports the C2PA because we believe
interoperability is critical to help mitigate the challenges
that you all laid out today. Our technology and our approach
boils down into two areas: we help secure what is, in fact,
authentic and captured from a smartphone, and we help add
transparency to a synthetic or generative piece that is created
from a platform.
From the authentic side, we created a technology called
Secure Controlled Capture. It is used by hundreds of businesses
every day, ranging from Equifax to Ford Motor Company, to add
transparency into their operations. It has also been used in
150 countries. We have deployed this technology on the ground
in Ukraine with Microsoft to help USAID partners document
destruction to cultural heritage and national infrastructure.
On the generative AI side, the C2PA standard has been
recognized by the Partnership for AI as one of the lead
disclosure mechanisms for generative AI. We are also a proud
supporter of the Partnership for AI, and we strive to work
toward this goal.
In April, we worked with Nina Schick, an author, and
Revel.ai, to launch the world's first transparent deepfake so
when you actually see the video, you see the content
credentials and know it is, in fact, generated by AI. This past
month, we launched two other partnerships with Hugging Face to
democratize these tools to add content credentials so anyone
can use them on their open-source models, and with Qualcomm,
the chipset manufacturer. We think that is a watershed
innovation because generative AI is going to move to your
smartphone, and this chipset has this transparency technology
added to it. It is worth noting that it is not only Truepic
working on this. Microsoft, Adobe, Stability AI have all either
launched products or made commitments to add the same
transparency. This is a growing ecosystem.
In closing, if possible, I would like to offer some
thoughts on how government might help mitigate these AI
challenges with transparency and authenticity in mind. First,
government has a unique platform, and I applaud you for having
this hearing. Events like this will raise awareness and help
educate the public and give an opportunity to ask the right
questions. Second, legislation can be powerful. We have seen in
the National Defense Authorization Act, the bipartisan Deepfake
Task Force Act, and the recent Executive Order Section 4.5, all
of which point to transparency and authenticity in digital
content. We have also seen it abroad in the U.K. and the EU.
Finally, government should consider how it can use content
credentials to authenticate its own communications and prevent
constituents from being deceived, and also reap the same
benefits that the private sector does in cost reductions, risk
reductions, and fraud reductions.
Thank you for your time, and I welcome any questions.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Doermann to please
begin his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DR. DAVID DOERMANN

INTERIM CHAIR

COMPUTER SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING

STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK AT BUFFALO

Mr. Doermann. Chairwoman Mace, Ranking Member Connolly, and
honorable Members of Congress, I appreciate the opportunity to
testify before you today on the pressing issue of deepfake
technology, creating and distributing computer-generated
images, and voice cloning.
In 2014, only a decade ago, when DARPA began the Media
Forensics Program, commonly known as MediFor, the primary goal
was to detect and characterize image manipulation at scale.
This was consistent with DARPA's mission of preventing
strategic surprise. Although we imagined a world where our
adversaries would become better at manipulating images, few
imagined the pace at which automated manipulation would develop
and the impact the technology would have on our society as a
whole. The introduction of generative adversarial networks, or
GANs, kicked off a plethora of tools that can generate images
of people and objects that do not exist, synthesize speech that
clones voices of others, implements real-time puppeteering to
control talking heads, and, as we hear most, the ability to
generate deepfake videos. The surprise we missed perhaps is the
automated tools that are becoming more accessible and user
friendly. They require a lot less data and a lot less technical
expertise. Open-source software can be downloaded today and run
by any one of us on a commodity laptop.
As these technologies advance at an unprecedented rate, it
is crucial to recognize the potential for both positive and
negative implications. We hear its use at both ends of the
spectrum every week. This week we heard about AI being used to
finish a new Beatles song and, as we have heard from the
Ranking Member and Chairwoman, that a group of students in a
New Jersey high school used it to generate pornographic videos
of their classmates. Despite the President's executive order
and the testimony of our thought leaders and business leaders,
we are not moving fast enough to curtail the continued damage
this technology is doing and will do as it evolves. Not only
has it been used for non-consensual pornography, cyberbullying,
and harassment, causing great harm to individuals, but the
potential for national security implications are grave.
Deepfakes can be used to impersonate government officials,
military personnel, or law enforcement, and, in general, lead
to misinformation and potentially dangerous situations.
Today, this is no longer a problem that can be solved by
simply detecting and removing generated content from our social
media and content provider sites. I urge you to consider
legislation and regulation to address the misuse of deepfake
technology as a whole.
Striking the right balance between free speech and
safeguards to protect against malicious uses of deepfakes is
essential. First and foremost, public awareness and digital
literacy programs are vital to helping individuals learn about
the existence of deepfakes and how to ensure that they do not
propagate this type of misinformation. It may seem obvious that
people want to know what type of information is being
generated, and you would hope that they would be able to hold
it upon themselves not to spread it, but we find that that is
not the case. We should consider including school media
literacy education and promote critical thinking.
Collaboration between Congress and technology companies is
essential, and I am glad to see that that is happening to
address the challenges posed by deepfakes. Tech companies
should be responsible for developing and implementing the
policies to detect and mitigate this type of content, including
what we were hearing today, on their platforms and sharing,
most importantly, what they learn with others. We have
addressed this type of a problem with our cybersecurity, and we
should be doing that same thing with our misinformation. More
robust privacy and consent laws are needed to protect
individuals from using their likeness and voice in deepfake
content without their permission, and continued research and
development in AI deepfake technology are necessary, as is
funding to counter deepfake misuse.
We have created these problems, but I have no doubt that if
we work together, we are smart enough to figure out how to
solve them. I look forward to taking your questions.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Gregory to please
begin his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF SAM GREGORY

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

WITNESS

Mr. Gregory. Chairwoman Mace, Ranking Member Connolly, and
Members of the Subcommittee, I am Sam Gregory, Executive
Director of the human rights organization, WITNESS. Since 2018,
WITNESS has led a global effort--Prepare, Don't Panic--to
inclusively prepare for deepfake and related synthetic media
and generative AI technologies. The capabilities and uses of
deepfakes have often been overhyped, but with recent shifts,
the moment to address them more comprehensively has come.
First, I will cover technological advances.
Commercialization and accessibility characterized changes
in the last year. Deepfake technologies are now available in
widely used consumer tools, not just niche apps. Furthermore,
they are easy to use and, particularly for audio and image, can
be instructed with plain language and require no coding skills.
Realistic image generation has improved dramatically in its
quality and customization in a year. With widely available
audio cloning tools, 1 minute of audio is enough to fake a
voice. While video remains harder to do in complex real-world
scenarios, consumer apps can swap an individual's face onto
another's body, strip the clothing from a woman's body.
Matching lip movements to a new audio track in a video is being
demoed by Google, and live deepfakes are feasible. As a result,
we are seeing an increased volume and ease in creating
variations of realistic synthetic photos, audio, and,
eventually, video of specific real individuals and contexts.
I would like to flag four future trends. These are
increasing ease in instructing these tools in plain language;
two, more ability to tailor outputs; three, more realistic
outputs; and four, eventually similar advances in video to what
we now see in audio and images.
Moving on to the risks and harms, deepfakes are causing
harms in the U.S. and globally, with disproportionate impacts
on groups already at risk of discrimination or vulnerable to
offline harms. Women and girls are widely targeted with
nonconsensual sexual images, and this problem is escalating.
AI-generated child sexual abuse material, CSAM, is increasing.
Simulated audio scams are proliferating, as are misuses of AI
audio in political contexts. My organization frequently sees
claims of AI generation used to muddy the waters and dismiss
critical real content, while actors and others have their
likenesses stolen to use in non-satirical commercial contexts.
Political processes are likely to be impacted by deepfakes,
and recent polls find the American public is fearful of their
impact. However, it is unreasonable to expect individuals to
spot deceptive, yet realistic, deepfake imagery and voices.
Guidance to look for the six-fingered hand or inspect visual
errors in a pope in a puffer jacket does not help in the long
run. Meanwhile, under resourced newsrooms and community leaders
across the political spectrum are under pressure and do not
have access to reliable tools that can detect deepfakes. That
is because deepfake detection efforts are not yet reliable at
scale or across multiple different ways of creating deepfakes,
nor are there widely shared methods to clearly indicate how AI
was used in creating content.
This leads me to what Congress should consider, to address
these advances in technology and accompanying misuses. First,
enact Federal legislation around existing harms, including
nonconsensual sexual content and the growing use of generative
AI and CSAM. Incorporating broad consultation with groups
working on these existing harms while safeguarding
constitutional and human rights would help you craft
appropriate steps. Second, since people will not be able to
spot deepfake content with their eyes or ears, we need
solutions to proactively add and show the provenance of AI
content and, if desired and under certain circumstances, human-
generated content. Provenance, such as the C2PA standard
mentioned before, means showing people how content and
communications were made, edited, and distributed, as well as
other information that explains the recipe. The best choices
here will go beyond binary ``yes''/``no'' labels.
Overall, these transparency approaches provide a signal of
AI usage, but they do not, per se, indicate deception and must
be accompanied by public education. Critically, these
approaches should protect privacy and not collect, by default,
personally identifiable information. For content that is not AI
generated, we should be wary of how any provenance approach can
be misused for surveillance and stifling freedom of speech.
My third recommendation is on detection. Alongside
indicating how the content we consume was made, there is a
continuing need for after-the-fact detection for content
believed to be AI generated. From witnesses' experience, the
skills and tools to detect AI-generated media remain
unavailable to the people who need them the most, including
journalists, rights defenders, and election officials
domestically and globally. It remains critical to support
Federal research and investment in this area to improve
detection overall and to close this gap. It should be noted
that both provenance and detection are not as relevant to
nonconsensual sexual deepfakes where a real versus fake is
often beside the point since the harm is caused in other ways.
We need other responses to that.
As a general and final statement for both detection and
provenance to be effective in helping the public to understand
how deepfake technologies are used in the media we consume, we
need a clear pipeline of responsibility that includes all the
technology actors involved in the production of AI technologies
more broadly, from the foundation models, to those designing
and deploying software and apps, to the platforms that
disseminate content. Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I will now recognize Mr. Overton to
begin your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF SPENCER OVERTON

PROFESSOR OF LAW

GEORGE WASHINGTON SCHOOL OF LAW

Mr. Overton. Chairwoman Mace, Ranking Member Connolly,
Subcommittee Members, thanks for inviting me to testify. My
name is Spencer Overton. I am a professor at GW Law School and
GW's Equity Institute. My research focuses on civil rights law,
democracy, and disinformation.
Now, while deepfake technologies offer many benefits, they
also threaten democratic values, and they produce harms
disproportionately borne by women and communities of color.
Nina Jankowitz, for example, is a 34-year-old researcher. She
specializes in state-sponsored disinformation and gendered
online abuse. Earlier this year, she found out she was featured
in at least three synthetic videos that appear to show her
engaging in sex acts. Now, she wrote about these videos.
She wrote, quote, and I will just use her words, ``Although
they may provide cheap thrills for the viewer, their deeper
purpose is to humiliate, shame, and objectify women, especially
women who have the temerity to speak out. Users can also easily
find deepfake porn videos of the singer, Taylor Swift; the
actress Emma Watson; and the former Fox News host, Megyn Kelly.
Democratic officials, such as Kamala Harris, Nancy Pelosi,
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, and Republicans Nikki Haley and Elise
Stefanik, and countless other prominent women. By simply
existing as women in public life, we have all become targets,
stripped of our accomplishments, our intellect, and our
activism, and reduced to sex objects for the pleasure of
millions of anonymous eyes.''
Deepfake pornography accounts for, as you all said, over 90
percent of all deepfake videos online. Women are featured as
the primary subjects of 99 percent of deepfake pornography,
while men are the primary subjects in only 1 percent.
Nonconsensual deepfake pornography does not simply hurt women's
feelings. It is an anti-democratic form of harassment designed
to silence and undermine public confidence in women as
legitimate public policy leaders. Deepfake technology is also
fueling racial harassment. Earlier this year, a deepfake video
showed a middle school principal saying that Black students
should be sent back to Africa, calling them monkeys and the
``N'' word, and threatening gun violence. User-friendly and
affordable, deepfake technology could allow bad actors to be
even more effective in dividing Americans and undermining
democracy.
So, when we think back to 2016, the Russians, we know, set
up social media accounts pretending to be Black Americans. They
posted calls for racial justice, developed a following, and
then, just before Election Day, they targeted ads at Black
users, encouraging them to boycott the election and not vote.
Now today, in this world, the Russians or domestic bad actors
could spark social upheaval by creating deepfake videos of a
white police officer shooting an unarmed Black person. Indeed,
earlier this year, just before Chicago's mayoral election, a
deepfake video went viral of a candidate casually suggesting
that regular police killings of civilians was normal, and that
candidate lost. Now, the private sector is definitely
important, but the market alone will not solve all of these
problems. Initial studies, for example, show that deepfake
detection systems have higher error rates for videos showing
people of color.
In conclusion, as deepfake technology becomes more common,
women and communities of color bear increasing burdens. Members
of Congress should come together, understand these emerging
challenges, and really take action to protect all Americans and
our democracy from the harms. Thank you.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I would now like to recognize myself
for 5 minutes for questioning, and my first question is for
every member of the panel. So, let us not do 5 minutes each
because we only have 5 minutes today, so if you could just keep
it brief.
I am very concerned about deepfake technology being
weaponized against women and children. Mr. Overton, as you made
your point, the overwhelming majority of deepfakes circulating
are pornographic. Most of these involve images of women. Some
are images of children. As a woman in a public position and the
mother of a teenage daughter, it is alarming to me how easy it
has become to create and distribute realistic pornographic
images of actual women and girls. These images can cause
lifelong and lasting humiliation and harm to that woman or
girl. So, what can we do to protect women and children from
being abused in this manner? Mr. Ibraham, and we will just go
across the panel.
Mr. Ibrahim. Thank you, Congresswoman. Indeed, this is, as
everyone noted, the main issue right now with generative AI,
and there are no immediate silver bullets. So, several
colleagues have noted media literacy and education and
awareness. Also, a lot of these nonconsensual pornographic
images are made from open-source models. There are ways in
which open-source models can potentially leverage things, like
provenance and watermarking----
Ms. Mace. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Ibrahim [continuing]. So that the outputs of those
models will have those marks, and law enforcement can better
detect, better trace down and take down such images. Those are
just some thoughts to begin with.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. Mr. Doermann?
Mr. Doermann. One of the challenges that we have is that we
do not have a culture where a lot of these things are
unacceptable. In the case of New Jersey, I understand that
there were parents even that said boys will be boys. These are
not the kinds of things that we have today that should allow
these types of things to progress from a technology point of
view. We do have the ability to do partial image search. As
another panelist here said, we have the original source
material, and we could check that something has been
manipulated in that way. It just requires that we do it at
scale. It is not an easy solution, but those are the types of
things that we have to think sort of outside the box.
Ms. Mace. Mr. Gregory? Microphone.
Mr. Gregory. There is a patchwork of state laws at the
moment. There is no Federal law at the moment that would
protect women and girls. We need to make it clearer where there
is individual liability that can be applied here. I should also
note that recent research indicates how easy it is to find
these deepfakes on search engines. Just type in a name plus
``deepfakes,'' and you will come up with a deepfake of a public
figure. So, addressing the responsibility of platforms within
to make sure that, it is less easy to do that because at the
moment, it is very hard for individuals to chase down all the
examples of their deepfakes online with individual requests.
Ms. Mace. Mr. Overton?
Mr. Overton. The proposed Preventing Deepfakes of Intimate
Images Act is a good start. Having both criminal and civil
penalties is important. Not having overly burdensome intent
requirements to establish a violation and also focusing on both
creators and distributors, those are some important factors.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. My next question is about laws. Do we
need changes in law enforcement practice? And there are revenge
porn laws, as an example, that do not cover deepfakes
necessarily. On the Federal level, 15 U.S. Code, Section 6851--
I happened to be reading about it today
-is civil action related to intimate images and videos, but
it relates to real images and videos, not to deepfakes. And so,
I see a huge gap in law and even law enforcement practice, and
what are your thoughts on that? Mm-hmm. We have a minute, so
everybody gets, like, 20 seconds.
Mr. Ibrahim. I would encourage examination of laws and what
generative AI platforms and models can do----
Ms. Mace. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Ibrahim [continuing]. To pre-mark their content output
so that we can better effectively take things down and track
them.
Mr. Doermann. I think I am not a legal scholar, but, you
know, it is my understanding that, you know, the same way as
our first generative algorithms targeted very high-level
individuals, it might not be just pornographic. It might be
just showing somebody in another type of compromising
situation.
Ms. Mace. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Doermann. We need comprehensive laws to address these
things.
Ms. Mace. Mr. Gregory.
Mr. Gregory. Extending Federal law to cover synthetic
content----
Ms. Mace. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Gregory [continuing]. That fulfills the same purpose as
a revenge porn and making sure it is accessible globally. We
encounter cases of this all over the world.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. Mr. Overton?
Mr. Overton. Yes. I concur with Mr. Gregory.
Ms. Mace. That was easy. All right. Thank you, and I will
yield for 5 minutes to my colleague, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. You know, it
seems to me that this is not as simple as it seems. Let us take
AI for pornography. So, if somebody is a caricaturist and uses
AI, and they want to make fun of a political figure and they
make him to be the emperor with no clothes, crown on the head,
and he is walking around with no clothes to make the point that
he is empty, he is without merit or politically lost, now that
is not pornography. It is AI-generative technology. It is not
the real thing, but the parameters of the law, being a public
official, you have got to put up with a fair amount. On the
other hand, if somebody took that same individual and used it
clearly as, not a caricature, not fun, but in a pornographic
AI-generative technology, has he crossed a line in terms of the
law, Professor Overton?
Mr. Overton. So, I think the answer is yes. Obviously, we
have got to be very sensitive in terms of these First Amendment
issues, including satire and parody, that type of thing. I
would say, though, that even if we have disclosure in terms of
deepfakes, this targeting of women who are political figures,
even if it is satire, I think that it is a problem and
something that we really need to hone in on.
Mr. Connolly. I agree with you, but you are the professor
of law, not me. Surely you appreciate the delicacy of that----
Mr. Overton. Right.
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. However, under our
constitutional system.
Mr. Overton. Correct.
Mr. Connolly. We have limits for public officials to be
able to seek redress in terms of libel.
Mr. Overton. That is right.
Mr. Doermann. You can defame us----
Mr. Overton. New York Times v. Sullivan.
Mr. Connolly. Yes. You can defame us in a way you cannot
defame some other citizens, New York Times v. Sullivan, so we
have high standards for public officials.
Mr. Overton. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. So, I put that as a category of complexity.
Mr. Overton. Right.
Mr. Connolly. Not so simple in terms of regulating.
Mr. Overton. It is something we have got to grapple with. I
really refer you to Mary Anne Franks, my colleague at GW, did a
great Law Review article in 2019 where she really chronicled
these harms as not really contributing to free speech and the
marketplace of ideas and truth. And so, there is something else
that is here, and we have got to really grapple with it.
Mr. Connolly. Right. I agree with you. I do not think it is
as simple----
Mr. Overton. Right.
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. As we would all like.
Mr. Overton. Yep.
Mr. Connolly. Now, that is public officials.
Mr. Overton. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Connolly. Private individuals, such as the girls we
talked about in New Jersey, are pure victims of somebody else's
perverse sense of fun or pleasure, and they suffer real harm.
Legally, what is their protection? What is their redress right
now?
Mr. Overton. Yes. Right now, the problem is a lot of law
does not cover this, and some states have laws with regard to
deepfakes, but many states do not. Even though almost all
states have revenge porn laws, this activity does not clearly
fall under that, so often, there is no recourse.
Mr. Connolly. So, we could maybe use the sort of underage
piece of law to get at this if these victims are under a
certain age.
Mr. Overton. I think that that is correct, but even the
CSAM issue that we talked about before is not always clearly
covered here in terms of existing laws with regard to child
pornography. So, you know, we have got some real holes in the
law.
Mr. Connolly. Yes. OK. Well, I think that is really worthy
of an explanation, not only by us up here, but by your
profession and by the academic community. Dr. Doermann, let us
send you back in time. You are back at DARPA, and you are in
charge of all AI research and projects. What are we not doing
that you want to see funded? You know, pick two or three that
we really ought to be doing right now because it could have a
beneficial effect if we plow this ground in terms of its
promise in protecting ourselves from deepfakes.
Mr. Doermann. Absolutely. It is not just deepfakes, you are
right. It is AI in general. We have gotten to the point where
these large language models, where these models that we have
are completely unexplainable. People believe that AI is somehow
an answer, and everything is always right that comes out of
these systems. We cannot converse with these systems, and they
cannot explain why they made a decision or how they made
things, I think the explainability issues. And these are things
that DARPA is looking at now, but we need to have the trust and
the safety aspects explored at the grassroots level for all of
these things.
Mr. Connolly. I would just say, Madam Chair, my time is up,
but I think there is a huge difference between the pope in a
puffery jacket, which does not do much harm, and the example of
Ukraine, where deepfakes has him saying we are putting down our
arms and surrendering. You know, that can cause or end a
conflict in an undesirable way, and so clearly protecting
ourselves and being able to counter that disinformation in a
very expeditious way, if not preventing it to begin with, I
think is kind of the goal. I thank you.
Ms. Mace. Thank you, Mr. Connolly. I now recognize Mr.
Timmons for 5 minutes.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Madam Chair. It seems we have two
main issues here. One is attribution--a lot of people would see
a deepfake video and not know whether it was fake or real--and
the next issue is updating our legal structures to address the
core purpose of them. We have revenge porn laws in many states.
The update to the Violence Against Women Act that Chairwoman
Mace just mentioned gives a civil cause of action for $150,000.
The purpose of that was to address this issue, and the
legislative intent did not really keep in mind the possibility
of a deepfake. If you cannot distinguish it, there is no
difference.
So, I guess my first question, Dr. Doermann, is there any
way that we can, one, mandate identification to show that it is
an altered image or a fake image, and then, two, is there a way
to mandate that in the Code? Just like a photo on my iPhone
says where it is and the GPS location it was taken, could you
do the same thing with an IP address, and a location, and a
time, and a date stamp on the video, and mandate that and make
it illegal to create images using this technology without the
attribution component? Does my question make sense?
Mr. Doermann. Yes. I think you actually have two parts
there. Well, first of all, you know, if you mandate creating
content or creating things that require you to disclose, for
example, that it is a deepfake, the adversaries and the people
that are doing these bad things in the first place, they are
not going to follow those rules anyway. I mean, that is a much
lower bar than actually creating pornographic images.
Mr. Timmons. Well, we got to take the first step of U.S.
citizens within our jurisdiction.
Mr. Doermann. We can, yes.
Mr. Timmons. So, I mean, we could easily say if you create
this, there is a civil penalty that is available, and that if
you do this, there is a criminal penalty, just like states have
done with revenge porn.
Mr. Doermann. Again, there is also a continuum between the
things that are used for good and the things that it is used
for bad, so just saying that you are going to, you know,
identify it.
Mr. Timmons. OK. Deepfake porn, we could literally use AI
to say whether something is considered porn or not and then
whether that is----
Mr. Doermann. I am not sure about that. I think we will
have a continuum of these----
Mr. Timmons. Well, you are going to have to take a photo of
somebody initially of their face or their likeness to then give
the AI the ability to create something that is resembling the
original human, and you could then----
Mr. Doermann. Well, the face is, but the original content
can come from a legal pornographic film, for example, and that
is what is happening.
Mr. Timmons. But you are putting someone's face on it that
is not the same face----
Mr. Doermann. That is----
Mr. Timmons [continuing]. To make it look like them in an
attempt to do the same thing that we have revenge porn laws to
do.
Mr. Doermann. That is what my colleagues here are saying,
that there are holes in these laws that do not necessarily
allow you to do that, those----
Mr. Timmons. Mr. Overton, is there any argument that you
could use the existing statute to file a Federal lawsuit
against somebody for sharing a deepfake?
Mr. Overton. There is an argument. I think the question is,
does it hold water.
Mr. Timmons. We have got some judges in this country that
do just about anything. All right.
Mr. Overton. Right, but, you know, we want certainly some
consistency in enforcement of law.
Mr. Timmons. Sure. We could also maybe expand the Code
section, too, but, I mean, I guess then it becomes the whole
purpose of revenge porn law is, theoretically, you were
complicit in the initial video but not complicit in the
sharing, and it has to be done for retribution of some kind.
So, I guess it becomes a lot more complicated when you are
talking about celebrities and whatnot, but they also deserve
the same degree of privacy and respect that we are seeking for
everyone else. OK. Let us go back. I mean, I----
Mr. Overton. Well, let me just followup here. Disclosure
under the court is much more acceptable than complete
restrictions here, you know, in terms of the First Amendment.
Mr. Timmons. OK. And I guess, Dr. Doermann, back to the
attribution issue. I mean, it is not unreasonable to try to
create a legal framework through which a photo that is taken on
my iPhone has all of this metadata. I mean, theoretically, if
that metadata is not present in a video, then we would know
that it is a malicious and does that----
Mr. Doermann. Yes. Yes. In theory, yes. The problem comes,
again, with enforcing this because you now are forcing
individuals to mark their content. It is a----
Mr. Timmons. Could we use AI to seek out and automatically
delete videos that do not have the----
Mr. Doermann. Absolutely, and you could forge this type of
stuff as well. Even camera fingerprints, these things can be
forged, so we just have to be careful about what we rely on,
and we make sure that everybody is playing by the same rules in
being able to enforce those types of things.
Mr. Timmons. Theoretically, we could mandate certain
websites to use AI to identify deepfakes and automatically
delete them if they are deemed pornographic. Theoretically.
Mr. Doermann. Theoretically.
Mr. Timmons. OK. All right. Sorry, Madam Chair. Thank you.
I yield back.
Ms. Mace. No. Thank you. I will now recognize Mr. Burchett
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Chairlady. Several questions. I am
just going to ramble, if it is all right with you all. This is
a question to all of you all, and I would like to discuss how
criminals are using this deepfake technology to produce child
sex abuse material, just child porn. And when these criminals
use this deepfake technology to make this material of children,
rather than alter the images that already exist, how can law
enforcement agencies determine the age of the subject in the
material?
Mr. Ibrahim. Yes, sir. We have seen a rising amount of
cases. The New Jersey one was noted. There was also a recent
case in Spain in which these models were used for underage
young girls. In terms of how can law enforcement potentially
use that information and detect, there is some growing thinking
that if the models themselves add some watermark or provenance
to everything----
Mr. Burchett. And explain to me the watermark. What is
that?
Mr. Ibrahim. So, it----
Mr. Burchett. I know what it means, but maybe explain it.
Mr. Ibrahim. It would be an invisible algorithm that is
attached to every image that is spit out of the generator,
whether it is a benign or malicious image, and which could be
decoded by a law enforcement agency or has some sort of chain
of custody, that could potentially be useful. That is something
that a variety of organizations are looking at.
Mr. Burchett. All right.
Mr. Doermann. We also have to educate our legal system on
how to use these things. I was on a panel at AAAS about a month
ago, and very simple things such as the use of face recognition
as an AI tool, which we know has been controversial, to say the
least. So, we just have to make sure that our content providers
or service providers are on board and that they are sharing
this type of information with each other, and that is
definitely something that is doable.
Mr. Gregory. The problem this is creating in CSAM has
similarities to other problems. It is a volume problem where
you then have a triage problem for the people who have to do
the investigation because of creating synthesized images and
adapting existing images. So, investing in tools that are
available to law enforcement as well as others who have to do
that triage work would be a critical next step.
Mr. Overton. I just would note these evidentiary issues are
very challenging for law enforcement.
Mr. Burchett. Yes. I think the court cases are that if they
just generate, like, a fake face, that they cannot be held for
child porn. Is that correct?
Mr. Doermann. It is my understanding that those laws are
changing, but the previous laws--again, I am not a legal
scholar--required a victim, and that was really the loophole
there.
Mr. Burchett. Yes.
Mr. Doermann. But they are closing those.
Mr. Burchett. OK. Well, how can we prevent this technology
from being used to create child sex abuse material? Mr.
Overton, we will start with you first, brother.
Mr. Overton. I think that legislation is very important
that directly deals with the CSAM issue.
Mr. Gregory. I will agree with Mr. Overton. It is
legislation around CSAM. There are clear reasons to legislate
and include this alongside non-synthetic images.
Mr. Doermann. And I will just emphasize from the technology
point of view, this is a genie that is out of the bottle. We
are not going to put it back in.
Mr. Burchett. Yes.
Mr. Doermann. These types of technologies are out there.
They could use it on adults, consenting adults, the same way,
and it is going to be difficult to legislate those, but the
technology is there. It is on the laptops of anyone that wants
to download it from the internet, and so the legislation part
is the best approach.
Mr. Ibrahim. I echo my colleagues, and I would just note
the majority of these materials are often done through open-
source models. So, the more models you can get to sign up to
frameworks and guardrails, pushing bad actors into other models
that are harder to use would be beneficial.
Mr. Burchett. Do you all agree that these AI-generated
images of children, real or not, should be illegal?
Mr. Ibrahim. I do.
Mr. Doermann. Absolutely.
Mr. Gregory. Yes.
Mr. Overton. Yes. We assume they are not hurting children.
They are, yes.
Mr. Burchett. Yes. You know, I sponsored some legislation
in Tennessee where actually people that abused children were
given the death penalty, and my statement was that they had
given these kids a lifetime sentence, and there is no coming
back from that. It is a lifetime of guilt, and you see a lot of
the kids self-inflict wounds and take their own lives, and it
is just brutal. So anyway, thank you all. Chairlady?
Ms. Mace. Yes, thank you. I will now recognize Mr. Burlison
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you. I will begin with Mr. Doermann.
Can we talk about the technology that is possibly available to
recognize or identify AI and how that might be applied in a
commercial setting?
Mr. Doermann. Well, the biggest challenge of any of these
technologies is the scale. Even if you have an algorithm that
works at 99.9 percent, the amount of data that we have at scale
that run through our major service providers makes the false
alarm rates almost prohibitive. We need to have a business
model that our service providers, our content providers have
that makes them want to take these things down. If they get
clicks, that is what is selling ads now, and if it is not
illegal, if we cannot hold them responsible in any way, it
makes it very difficult to convince them to do anything.
Mr. Burlison. Given that currently, today, there is the
ability to identify graphic content, violent content, and then
to often block it or require a person to take some action to
basically break the glass and go through and see that content,
can that not be applied to deepfake images or things that are
created with it? That way, the individual would at least know
that there is no truth to this image.
Mr. Doermann. Absolutely, I mean, but the places that this
content is showing up are on those pay sites or onsites where
it is mixed in with other type of content, so just detecting it
is not necessarily the issue.
Mr. Burlison. And they do not have a self-interest, a
financial interest in identifying the deepfakes.
Mr. Doermann. Correct.
Mr. Burlison. OK. I understand what you are saying. So let
me ask, the technology is capable. We just need to identify----
Mr. Doermann. Not necessarily the deepfake part. If you do
a reverse image search, for example, in a number of different
sites, you can do it for the entire image, but if you take just
the face of an individual, that is what we really need. We need
to be able to say, OK, we are not going to look at the entire
video because this video is not real, right? Well, part of it
is real. The video part of the nude body is real, and the face
is generated. So, if we could identify those people, make sure
that we have that consent before it gets spread, that might be
one thing, but, you know, just to detect something as being
pornographic, we are still not detecting the fact that it was
generated with a fake.
Mr. Burlison. The deepfake. You are saying that there is
technology, AI, that can view videos and images and ascertain
whether it is a deepfake?
Mr. Doermann. Not reliably enough.
Mr. Burlison. There currently is not any.
Mr. Doermann. This is 85 percent maybe, and every time we
release a tool that detects this, our adversaries can use AI to
cover up that trace evidence. So, no, that is why I said in my
opening statement that detection and trying to pull this stuff
down is no longer a solution. We need to have a much bigger
solution.
Mr. Burlison. Mr. Gregory, how do we authenticate the
content without creating a surveillance state or suppressing
free expression?
Mr. Gregory. The first thing I would say is, as we are
looking at authenticity and provenance measures, ways that you
can show how something was made with AI and perhaps with human
inputs, and I think we should recognize that the future of
media production is complex. It will not just be a yes or no of
AI. It will be, yes, AI was used here, no, AI was not, here is
a human. So, it is really important that we actually focus this
on the how media was made, not the who, right? So, you should
know, for example, that a piece of media was made with an AI
tool, was altered perhaps to change an element of it, and that
might be the critical information rather than a political
satirist made this piece of media, which, you know, certainly
would not be something we would want to see here in the U.S.
and globally when you look at how that could be misused.
So, I think we are entering a complicated scenario where it
is both the authenticity tools and also detection tools, my
experience, of a very messy reality where we need to focus on
both, but we have got to do it with civil liberties and privacy
at heart.
Mr. Burlison. OK. As I understand it, there is--and this is
a question for Mr. Ibrahim. What is the difference between
detecting deepfakes and content authentication?
Mr. Ibrahim. Detecting deepfakes would be something you do
after the fact. It would be a system that would look at a video
and try to spit out a binary or results-based response. Content
authentication or provenance does it while it is being created.
That is what Truepic does. So, as the image is being captured
from a phone or a smartphone or a piece of hardware, you are
attaching and cryptographically hashing the time, the date, the
location, et cetera, into the media file while it is being
created, so it is a proactive measure versus a reactive
measure.
Mr. Burlison. My time has expired.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I want to thank all of our witnesses
for being here today. In closing, I want to thank you for your
testimony again.
So, with that, and without objection, all Members will have
5 legislative of days within which to submit materials and to
submit additional written questions for the witnesses, which
will be forwarded to the witnesses for their response.
Ms. Mace. So, if there is no further business, without
objection, the Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:43 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
