- CUTTING COMPETITION IN CONTRACTING:

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

______

CUTTING COMPETITION IN CONTRACTING:

THE ADMINISTRATION'S PRICEY PROJECT

LABOR AGREEMENT MANDATE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY, AND GOVERNMENT INNOVATION

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND ACCOUNTABILITY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 27, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-120

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-321 PDF         WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Michael Cloud, Texas                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Ro Khanna, California
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Katie Porter, California
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Cori Bush, Missouri
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Shontel Brown, Ohio
Byron Donalds, Florida               Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Robert Garcia, California
William Timmons, South Carolina      Maxwell Frost, Florida
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Greg Casar, Texas
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Dan Goldman, New York
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
Nick Langworthy, New York            Ayanna Pressley, Massachesetts
Eric Burlison, Missouri
Mike Waltz, Florida

Mark Marin, Staff Director
Jessica Donlon, Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel
Peter Warren, Senior Advisor
Lauren Lombardo, Senior Policy Analyst
Raj Bharwani, Senior Professional Staff Member
Ellie McGowan, Staff Assistant and Administrative Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5074

Julie Tagen, Minority Staff Director

Contact Number: 202-225-5051
------

Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government
Innovation

Nancy Mace, South Carolina, Chairwoman
William Timmons, South Carolina      Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Tim Burchett, Tennessee                  Ranking Minority Member
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Ro Khanna, California
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Nick Langworthy, New York            Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Eric Burlison, Missouri              Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Vacancy                              Ayanna Pressley, Massachesetts
Vacancy                              Vacancy
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

Page

Hearing held on June 27, 2024....................................     1

Witnesses

----------

Mr. Ben Brubeck, Vice President of Regulatory, Labor and State
Affairs, Associated Builders and Contractors, Inc.
Oral Statement...................................................     5
Mr. Glenn P. Ledet, Jr., P.E., Executive Director, Louisiana
Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority
Oral Statement...................................................     7
Mr. Aric Dreher, Vice President and General Manager, Cianbro
Oral Statement...................................................     8
Mr. Jacob Snyder (Minority Witness), Chief Operating Officer,
Enerfab
Oral Statement...................................................    10

Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are
available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

* Letter, to SMACNA, re: Final Rule Endorsement; submitted by
Rep. Connolly.

* Letter, to OMB, re: PLA Exec. Order; submitted by Rep.
Connolly.

* Letter, to SMACNA, re: Support for E.O. 14063; submitted by
Rep. Connolly.

* Letter, to TAUC, re: Support of PLAs; submitted by Rep.
Connolly.

* Letter, to Construction Employers of America, re: Views on
PLA Hearing; submitted by Rep. Connolly.

* Memorandum, re: AGCA Lawsuit Ruling; submitted by Rep.
Connolly.

* Letter, to Taxpayer Protection Groups, re: Coalition Support
for PLA Hearing; submitted by Rep. Mace.

* Letter, to PCI and NPCA, re: FOCA Support; submitted by Rep.
Mace.

* Letter, to Business Groups, re: Opposing Biden Project Labor
Agreement; submitted by Rep. Mace.

* Letter, to USCC, re: Support of FOCA; submitted by Rep. Mace.

* Statement, PLA Mandate and Hearing - IEC; submitted by Rep.
Mace.

* Report, Green Justice and Community Labor United, ``Building
Strong Careers and Lasting Infrastructure''; submitted by Rep.
Pressley.

Documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

CUTTING COMPETITION IN CONTRACTING:

THE ADMINISTRATION'S PRICEY PROJECT

LABOR AGREEMENT MANDATE

----------

Thursday, June 27, 2024

House of Representatives

Committee on Oversight and Accountability

Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government
Innovation

Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:55 p.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Nancy Mace
[Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Mace, Comer, Burlison, Connolly,
and Pressley.
Also present: Representatives Gosar, Foxx, Grothman,
Higgins, Perry, Fitzgerald, and Allen.
Ms. Mace. The Subcommittee on Cybersecurity Information,
Technology, and Government Innovation will come to order.
Welcome everyone.
Without objection, the Chair may declare a recess at any
time.
I recognize myself for the purpose of making an opening
statement.
Good afternoon and welcome to this hearing. We are here
today to expose the Biden Administration's Project Labor
Agreement rule that took effect in January. This rule is
nothing more than a scheme to funnel billions of dollars in
Federal construction contracts to political allies. It is about
ditching full and open competition. It is about ditching the
free market and overriding the expertise of government
acquisition professionals, wasting taxpayer dollars, delaying
crucial projects, and discriminating against nearly 9 in 10
construction workers who are not part of a union.
Let us look at the facts. The rule mandates all contractors
and subcontractors on large-scale Federal construction projects
work under a single project labor agreement. Project labor
agreements, or PLAs for short, are a type of pre-hire
collective bargaining agreement with one or more unions that
governs employer-employee relations on a construction project.
But why insist that construction firms arrange project work
through unions? After all, only 11 percent of the Nation's
construction workforce is actually unionized. Marginalizing the
other 89 percent undermines the pursuit of full and open
competition. It undermines the free market, a core tenet of
Federal procurement codified 40 years ago in the Competition
and Contracting Act.
Now, President Obama put a thumb on the scale back in 2009
by encouraging agencies to require PLAs on large-scale Federal
construction projects, but it was not a mandate. If agencies
did not think requiring a PLA was in the best interest of
taxpayers, they could opt not to use one, and guess what? They
almost always opted not to. Contracting officers chose to
require PLAs on only 1 out of every 167 large construction
projects during the duration of the Obama and Trump
Administrations, and it is no wonder. PLAs had their heyday
before and during World War II when the Nation's construction
workforce was mostly unionized. Today, it is overwhelmingly
not. So, to impose PLAs today by fiat is intrusive and
inefficient.
That explains why research has shown that where politicians
have required PLAs for state and locally funded public
construction projects, they actually raise the cost of such
projects by 12 to 20 percent by discouraging merit shop bidders
and imposing inefficient union work rules. That means fewer
public schools are renovated, and fewer public housing units
are built. Even the Boston Globe Editorial Board last month
concluded that project labor agreements are bad policy, and
half of all states, including my home state of South Carolina,
do not even permit PLA mandates on state-funded projects. Thank
God we are a right-to-work state, but we are not here to second
guess how states and localities spend their public funds. We
are here to talk about a nationwide PLA mandate for big Federal
construction projects and why.
Since Federal procurement officers have not mandated PLAs,
the Biden Administration decided to make that choice for them,
favoring political expediency over professional judgment. This
rule forces agencies to require PLAs unless they can jump
through vague high bar hoops. Even showing that fewer
contractors will bid on a PLA required project is not enough,
according to OMB's memo.
Let us be clear. I have no issues with the contractor
working with unions or under PLAs. That is why I support the
Fair and Open Competition Act, or FOCA, a bill that Chairman
Comer introduced and that we voted out of the full Oversight
Committee. FOCA says you cannot discriminate for or against
contractors or grantees based on their use of PLAs, but the
Biden Adminisntration is not interested in a level playing
field. They want this mandate to funnel taxpayer dollars and
non-union construction workers earnings into union coffers,
into the back pockets of union bosses. I worry that in states
like mine, the local construction workforce, which is
overwhelmingly non-union, is going to find it hard to get work
on Federal projects right in their own backyard. That is
because PLA hiring is typically done through union hiring
halls, and even if non-union workers do get hired, they often
suffer wage theft because they are forced to pay into union
pension funds they do not actually benefit from.
The President is in the pocket of labor unions, plain and
simple. The PLA rule is a blatant move to repay his union
buddies by funneling billions of dollars in Federal contracts
their way. This Administration is not interested in fair
competition or relying on professional judgment. It is about
political favoritism and keeping President Biden's union bosses
happy--fat and happy, by the way. The American people deserve
better than a President who prioritizes union coffers over the
livelihoods of hardworking non-union construction workers
across the country. I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses today who will testify to the damage of this PLA
mandate and the kind of damage it will inflict, but before I
introduce them, I will first yield to Ranking Member Connolly
for his opening statement.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Madam Chair. I am here because
somebody had active COVID, and I am not willing to expose
myself or my spouse to it.
I have seen firsthand in my district what happens when
project labor agreements are excluded from construction
projects because of unfounded scare tactics and attacks on
labor unions. For more than 2 decades, I supported and helped
advance the Silver Line extension of Metro to Dulles Airport
here in the Nation's Capital. This construction project was
vital to regional mobility and our local economy. Phase 2 of
the Silver Line's construction, unlike Phase 1, was performed
without a PLA because of the partisan anti-labor actions of
Republicans in my state, and it suffered quality and safety
setbacks that led to litigation, delays, and cost increases.
There were scheduling problems from the start. More than
400 concrete rail ties had flaws that could cause tracks to
tilt outwards. More than 1,700 defective concrete panels were
installed and accompanied falsified records after skirting
quality control requirements, which resulted in the company
being barred from working on Federal construction projects for
3 years. None of those problems occurred in Phase 1, which had
a PLA.
The project directors blamed the contractors, the
contractors blamed the subcontractors, but who should really be
blamed were the Republican leaders in Virginia who prevented--
actively prevented--state agencies from requiring a PLA
agreement on Phase 2. If a PLA had been in place for Phase 2 as
it was for Phase 1, I do not think we would have had anywhere
near the magnitude of problems we encountered and the huge
delays that ensued.
That is why I applaud the pro-work policies of the Biden
Administration. Last week, the Administration issued a final
rule to address the workforce skill shortages within the
construction industry. The final rule requires that
infrastructure projects funded to the Inflation Reduction Act
pay prevailing wages to the workers on the projects. That means
good-paying, high-quality jobs for local workers and
communities across the Nation. President Biden's infrastructure
investments are revitalizing and creating local jobs in every
congressional district. Our Chairwoman, for example, praised
the $26 million Federal grant her district received for public
transportation investments from the Inflation Reduction Act,
despite voting against that very bill.
In December 2023, the Biden Administration finalized a rule
to ensure that large-scale Federal construction projects have
PLAs in place to make sure they are completed on time and on
budget. That is because PLAs have a proven track record of
success, which is why they were created during World War II.
PLAs promote worker safety and guarantee a well-trained,
highly-skilled workforce. PLAs can help prevent the kind of
setbacks we incurred in Phase 2 of the Silver Line
construction.
Using PLAs can also attract new private sector businesses.
Just ask Micron. Micron is using a PLA to construct a $15
billion semiconductor manufacturing plan in Boise, Idaho, a
right-to-work state, I believe, but had Idaho not built up its
local construction workforce through decades of Federal
investments from the Department of Energy in PLA constraining
projects, Micron might not have been ready and had a ready-made
workforce in which to invest, and the good-paying local jobs
that come with Micron's construction project would not have
materialized. These investments are how we rebuild communities
and the middle class.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today,
including Mr. Jacob Snyder, Chief Operating Officer of Enerfab.
Enerfab is a construction company that knows PLAs offer real
investments into workers and communities while completing
construction jobs to the highest quality. Enerfab uses PLAs on
90 percent of its projects, both government and private sector
contracts, and Mr. Snyder has the unique qualification of being
the only witness here today who negotiates and uses PLAs. I
look forward to hearing his insights.
And, Madam Chairman, before I finish, I ask unanimous
consent to enter into the record a statement from SMACNA and
from the Construction Employers of America, supporting PLAs.
Ms. Mace. Without objection.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the Chair, and I yield back.
Ms. Mace. I ask unanimous consent for the following members
to be waived onto the Subcommittee for today's hearing for the
purpose of asking questions: Representative Gosar from Arizona,
Representative Foxx from North Carolina, Representative
Grothman from Wisconsin, Representative Higgins from Louisiana,
Representative Perry from Pennsylvania, Representative Casar
from Texas, Representative Allen from Georgia, Representative
Fitzgerald from Wisconsin.
Without objection, so ordered.
I am pleased to introduce our witnesses for today's
hearing. Our first witness is Mr. Ben Brubeck, Vice President
of Regulatory, Labor, and State Affairs with the Associated
Builders and Contractors. Is Mr. Higgins here? He is not. OK.
Our second witness is Mr. Glenn Ledet, Executive Director of
the Louisiana Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority. Our
third witness is Mr. Aric Dreher, Vice President and General
Manager of Cianbro, and our fourth witness today is Mr. Jacob
Snyder, Chief Operating Officer at Enerfab. We welcome
everyone, and we are pleased to have you this afternoon.
Pursuant to the Committee Rule 9(g), the witnesses will
please stand and raise their right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony that you
are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
[A chorus of ayes.]
Ms. Mace. Let the record show that the witnesses all
answered in the affirmative. We appreciate all of you being
here today and look forward to your testimony. You can sit back
down.
I will remind the witnesses that we have read your written
statements, and they will appear in full in the hearing record.
Please limit your oral statements to 5 minutes today. As a
reminder, please press the button on the microphone in front of
you so that we can hear you, and when you begin to speak, the
light in front of you will turn green. After 4 minutes, the
light turns yellow. At 5, it turns red, and your time has
expired and we would ask that you please wrap it up.
I will first recognize Mr. Brubeck to please begin your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF BEN BRUBECK

VICE PRESIDENT

REGULATORY LABOR AND STATE AFFAIRS

ASSOCIATED BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS, INC

Mr. Brubeck. Chairwoman Mace, Ranking Member Connolly,
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for holding this
hearing.
The American public deserves to know how the Biden
Administration's policies requiring and promoting project labor
agreements are undermining taxpayer investments in the
construction of infrastructure, clean energy, and manufacturing
facilities. They deserve to know that President Biden's pro-PLA
policies will result in needless delays, project cancellations,
and are likely to increase construction costs 12 percent to 20
percent.
They deserve to know that PLA mandates exacerbate the
construction industry's skilled labor shortage of more than
half a million people by locking out 90 percent of the U.S.
construction workforce, those who are not members of labor
unions, because their employers are unable to compete for
contracts subject to PLA mandates. They deserve to know that
the Biden Administration's pro-PLA schemes benefit special
interests by steering taxpayer-funded construction contracts to
unionized contractors and unionized labor, key political donors
in a Presidential election year.
My name is Ben Brubeck, and I am the Vice President of
Regulatory Labor and State Affairs with Associated Builders and
Contractors. ABC is a trade association whose 23,000-member
companies and their millions of employees in the commercial/
industrial segments of the U.S. construction industry want
nothing more than to compete on a level playing field to
deliver to taxpayers the best possible construction product at
the best possible price. For more than 20 years, I have fought
for free enterprise and fair and open competition so ABC
members, and the entire construction industry, have a real
opportunity to build America. This Administration's new rule
mandating PLAs on Federal construction projects of $35 million
or more is devastating to the hardworking men and women who
earn a living building their communities and are the backbone
of America's economy.
I have talked with many ABC members, small and minority-
owned businesses, who are worried they will have to lay off
workers because they can no longer build projects at their
local military bases unless they execute a PLA with unions. To
ABC members, a PLA means they would not be able to use all or
even most of their own employees on the job. Instead, these
companies must hire unfamiliar workers from union halls and
follow inefficient union work rules, and if any of their own
employees are even allowed to work on the job, the employees
must join a union or pay union dues or agency shop fees as a
condition of working. Astonishingly, employee contributions
made to union benefits plans will be forfeited, which subjects
workers to wage staff of almost 34 percent of their total
compensation unless they join a union and meet vesting
requirements.
In addition, I have received inquiries from Federal agency
contracting officers and professional procurement folks in each
agency about the status of the lawsuit ABC filed in March in a
Federal court in Florida against the PLA rule. They are
frustrated that the new policies reducing competition from
qualified Federal contractors, like ABC members who have built
more than half of the Federal Government's large-scale
construction projects during the last 15 years, projects worth
$240 billion in total. Contracting officers are concerned that
because there is less competition under PLA mandates, bid
prices will be higher, and that will force agency projects to
be delayed, rescoped, or canceled until agencies can get more
money from Congress or the PLA policy is defeated in Congress.
They know firsthand that PLA mandates injure the economy and
efficiency in government contracting.
They had a chance to require PLAs on 3,200 projects built
between fiscal years 2009 and 2024 under an Obama
Administration policy that encouraged PLA use on an optional
case-by-case basis. They did so just 12 times. Contracting
officers say their hands are tied by this new rule's
dysfunctional PLA exception process. They say this rule is
actually an across-the-board PLA mandate right now. They hope
ABC's lawsuit is successful.
Everyone in the construction industry who is not
compromised knows government-mandated PLAs are a political
solution in search of a problem, yet the White House continues
to expand their use. Just last week, they weaponized the IRS to
coerce private developers to mandate PLAs on clean energy
construction projects receiving Inflation Reduction Act tax
credits. Independent of this rule, the Biden Administration is
pushing, but not requiring, PLAs on billions of dollars' worth
of federally assisted projects via Federal agency grant
programs, which incentivize PLAs on infrastructure and
microchip manufacturing facilities. So, why is this
Administration pushing these anticompetitive, inflationary,
union-only PLA policies? Perhaps it is because President Biden
has repeatedly said that he wants to be the most pro-union
President in history, and it is a shame this ambition comes at
the expense of taxpayers, safe and experienced contractors, and
the livelihoods of 9 out of 10 construction industry workers
shut out from rebuilding America because they do not want to
affiliate with unions.
In closing, I have detailed concerns with the Biden
Administration's PLA policies on Federal and federally assisted
construction projects in my written testimony, in comments ABC
submitted to the FAR Council during the rulemaking process, and
in media coverage posted on the construction industry's
coalition website, BuildAmericaLocal.com.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I recognize Mr. Ledet to begin his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF GLENN P. LEDET, JR.

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

LOUISIANA COASTAL PROTECTION AND RESTORATION AUTHORITY

Mr. Ledet. Thank you. Chairwoman Mace, Ranking Member
Connolly, and members of this Committee, thank you for the
invitation to testify on Executive Order 14063 and the
potential impacts to Louisiana's Coastal Program. My name is
Glenn Ledet, and I am the Executive Director for the Coastal
Protection and Restoration Authority of Louisiana, known as
CPRA.
Louisiana is in the midst of a land loss crisis that has
claimed nearly 2,000 square miles of land since the 1930's.
This is equivalent to the state of Delaware. We are responding
to this coastal crisis by implementing a bold 50-year, $50
billion coastal master plan to achieve a more sustainable
coast. Since the founding of our agency in 2005, CPRA has
overseen the investment of over $20 billion of coastal
protection and restoration projects, including the construction
improvement of hundreds of miles of levee systems, rebuilding
of barrier islands, and restoring thousands of acres of coastal
marsh and wetlands.
To achieve this, we rely on our great partnership with the
Federal Government through the United States Army Corps of
Engineers. CPRA is proud to be one of the Corp's largest non-
Federal sponsors in the country with over $39 billion in
authorized civil works projects in our coastal portfolio. As
the non-Federal sponsor for these projects, we are typically
committed to providing 35 percent of the total construction
cost, with the Corps covering the remaining 65 percent.
We are here today to discuss the Executive Order 14063 and
the requirement of the signing of a PLA with at least one labor
organization before starting a Federal construction contract of
at least $35 million. This policy brings great uncertainty to
the cost, schedule, and labor availability of Louisiana's
Federal coastal projects. As the non-Federal sponsor of these
projects, if the Federal cost increases, then our expenditures
on these projects will increase as well. Our concerns are
founded on the basis that Louisiana is a right-to-work state,
and only three percent of our construction workforce is
unionized. This means that this PLA mandate has the potential
to discourage the participation of local businesses that employ
the remaining 97 percent of our construction workforce.
The stated benefits of this EO provide that PLAs can help
in avoiding labor disruption and secure skilled labor. These
are not problems for CPRA. To our knowledge, the Coastal
Program has never had issues with lockouts or strikes on our
projects. Additionally, counter to this goal, this EO will
instead likely limit our contractor and labor options in
Louisiana. We do not believe that this mandate is needed for
our state.
CPRA's top concern of this EO is the potential for cost
increases on our large-scale Federal projects. As stated, any
additional project cost affects our state's bottom line as we
would have to increase our cost share. Studies on government-
mandated PLAs have found that costs can go up by 12 to 20
percent. We simply cannot afford that.
Take, for example, one of our ongoing hurricane protection
projects known as West Shore Lake Pontchartrain. The project
cost of this project is $3.7 billion. Using those estimates,
PLAs could raise the cost of our project by $400 to $700
million with CPRA having to contribute 35 percent of that
increase. As you can imagine, we would rather put those dollars
to use on implementation of other critical coastal projects.
Additionally, we are concerned that this EO will reduce
competition for construction contracts in our state. While non-
union firms can still participate, this PLA requirement will
likely discourage local Louisiana companies from bidding. Any
opt-outs make bidding less competitive leading to higher cost.
As an example, on our first Federal contract with the PLA rule,
the project only received a single bid. CPRA shares the goal of
creating good jobs through infrastructure for our local
workers. Our coastal program does just that. This year, CPRA's
annual plan could result in over 10,000 construction jobs and
$580 million in labor income. We can do this without PLA's
mandates, utilizing our skilled local workforce that knows
coastal Louisiana best.
We have advocated for decades about Louisiana's coastal
crisis, gaining buy-in for this mission from the Corps,
Congress, and the Administration, and we are grateful for this
support. So, it is concerning to see any policy changes like
this PLA rule that slow down our shared momentum. Given this,
CPRA supports repealing this policy such as through Chairman
Comer or Chairman Higgins' legislation, or by exempting civil
works projects that relate to reducing life and safety risks.
Otherwise, our partnership with the Corps to protect our
communities and restore coastal ecosystems could become more
costly, slower to act, and, ultimately, less impactful. Thank
you.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. Mr. Dreher, you may begin your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF ARIC DREHER

VICE PRESIDENT AND GENERAL MANAGER

CIANBRO

Mr. Dreher. Chairwoman Mace, Ranking Member Connolly, and
members of the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information
Technology, and Government Innovation, thank you for the
invitation to testify this afternoon and for the opportunity to
discuss the impact of the Biden Administration's policies
promoting project labor agreements on Federal and federally
assisted construction projects. My name is Aric Dreher, and I
am Vice President and General Manager of Cianbro, a full-
service contractor that delivers industry-leading construction
services for complex civil infrastructure projects throughout
the country.
Founded in 1949, Cianbro is one of America's largest 100
percent employee-owned open shop construction and construction
services companies, operating in more than 40 states and
employing over 4,000 team members. Since Cianbro's humble
beginnings, when four brothers returned home after serving our
country in World War II to start what is today Cianbro, we have
believed in and continue to fight for open, fair, and
competitive bidding on public works projects.
Our teams have completed some of the company's most
innovative and challenging infrastructure projects, including
the phase development of the District Wharf in Washington, DC,
construction of the 175-foot-tall Capital Wheel at National
Harbor, and the U.S. Air Force Memorial overlooking the
Pentagon. We are proud to have projects underway right now
supporting our national security with the construction of two
new submarine dry docks at Portsmouth Naval Shipyard and a new
submarine refueling station at Norfolk Naval Shipyard. Here in
Washington, we are preparing to revitalize the National Mall
with reconstruction of the sea walls at West Potomac Park and
in the Tidal Basin.
Cianbro employs multiskilled tradespeople that can perform
work across many craft disciplines. The employment of versatile
tradespeople is a win-win for Cianbro, our clients, and the
taxpayers as it allows for enhanced labor productivity,
continued skills development, and increased workforce
retention. Cianbro hires and develops its own employees using
government-registered apprenticeship programs as well as in-
house workforce development programs to meet the industry's
ever-changing needs. In addition, Cianbro, like many other
well-respected American open shop contractors, provides
competitive compensation and benefits packages to its team
members.
As a merit shop contractor, Cianbro is genuinely concerned
about President Joe Biden's rule directing Federal agencies to
mandate PLAs on Federal construction projects that are $35
million or more in total value. This mandate is overreaching
and unfair. Provisions in PLA mandates are not in alignment
with Cianbro's values, infringe our team members' freedom of
association, and do not make sense for our efficient company
operations. President Biden's PLA policies are already having a
negative effect on our company. Due to the new rule, we have
been unable to pursue opportunities to secure work on Federal
projects, such as the recently advertised U.S. Navy Pier 31
extension project at Naval Submarine Base New London in Groton,
Connecticut. Unfortunately, we expect this trend to continue
due to the current PLA requirements.
The U.S. construction industry needs policies that are
inclusive and offer all qualified contractors and their skilled
workforces the opportunity to pursue projects without dictating
how the company must be run. Union and open shop contractors
should have equal right to pursue these opportunities and
perform the work the way that best suits their organizations.
In the past, PLA mandate advocates have alleged that PLAs
ensure safe workplaces, insinuating that open shop construction
companies have less safe workplaces. This is not true. The
truth is it takes leadership commitment and cultural
transformation to achieve industry-leading safety results, not
PLAs.
The construction industry is faced with a massive skilled
labor shortage of nearly a half a million people in 2024 alone.
There is no need to mandate PLAs given that nearly 90 percent
of the construction workforce does not belong to a union. The
PLA mandate only exasperates this industry-wide workforce
challenge, resulting in less competition on project bids and
increased cost to taxpayers. We need Congress and the Biden
Administration to champion policies that are inclusive and
encourage all qualified contractors and their skilled
workforces to compete to build long-lasting, quality projects
throughout America.
In closing, I ask all of you to consider the negative
effects of the Biden Administration's PLA policies on our firm,
our industry partners, and our skilled and qualified craft
professionals.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Snyder for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JACOB SNYDER

CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER

ENERFAB

Mr. Snyder. Thank you. Chairwoman Mace, Ranking Member
Connolly, and distinguished members of the Committee, I
appreciate the opportunity to be here. I am really here to
share a little bit about my experience and our organization's
experience with project labor agreements, project labor
agreements that we use on a daily basis for the vast majority
of our work.
Enerfab has been around since 1901, headquartered in
Cincinnati, Ohio. We work in most of the country, predominantly
covering about the Eastern two-thirds of the U.S. with some
density level there. We do work that is usually of pretty high
complexity, more in the private industry than in public. We use
project labor agreements on close to 90 percent of our work,
whether that is a private industry or with the government.
Some of our government contracting experience over the
years includes at Johnson Space Center, the Piketon Department
of Energy facility, the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, the Lake
City Ammunition Plant, Arnold Air Force Base, and the Tennessee
Valley Authority, all of which are projects, whether they have
been mandated or not, that Enerfab has performed under project
labor agreements. So, we do do Federal work on some basis with
project labor agreements, and we use those all across the
country. One of the things that I think is important to note,
too, as we go across the country, it does not matter to us
which state the work occurs in. It does not matter if it is
right to work or if it is not. We use project labor agreements
on nearly all of our work with great success.
One of the things that we think is important as we evaluate
the policy is giving the Federal Government the tools that are
available to private industry to allow and go make those smart
purchasing decisions on all of our behalves in how we spend our
money, and so we will talk a little bit about that as we go
today. One of the things that I think we all agree on is there
is a major shortage in the construction industry in skilled,
qualified people, and as we continue to grow that, we agree the
number is somewhere between 500,000 and 700,000 people short to
fill the needs of the construction industry as it exists today.
But I am happy to say that Enerfab on none of its projects,
which we typically run between 50 and a hundred job sites on
any given day, we have zero labor shortages on our projects at
Enerfab. In fact, Independent Project Analysis did a study in
2022, which we will talk more about in a minute, that says
projects are 40 percent less likely to experience a shortage of
skilled labor when union labor was sourced versus open shop
labor. It is one of the most important things we do as we
evaluate the projects we are taking on. We are going to have
the skilled people to do it. We are not talking about small
projects, and this executive order is not talking about small
projects. We are talking about large, complex projects, and how
we staff those and where we get the people to do them is
paramount to how we complete those projects on time and on
budget.
Speaking of IPA, if you are not familiar, they have 23,000
benchmark projects in their data base used by private industry
and Fortune 500 companies every day. They do 600 projects a
year. Seven hundred and fifty large companies subscribed to
their services and they are used in more than a hundred
countries, and all they do is study capital construction
projects. I want to read an excerpt from their study that they
completed in 2022. It says, ``This study expands on an earlier
study that found that union labor is more productive than open
shop labor, and projects that employed union labor cost less
despite the higher average all-in wage rate paid to union
labor.''
Other studies have found that higher craft labor costs for
union labor on prevailing wage projects do not result in higher
project costs than non-union prevailing wage projects. The
current study confirmed the findings from the earlier IPA study
and examined some of the underlying differences in union labor
versus open shop labor that may explain the differences in
productivity as well as the overall effect on project outcomes.
And it concludes with, ``The overall findings indicate the
combination of better skills, more reliable sourcing of
sufficient skilled labor, and better labor stability all
contribute to better productivity and better project
outcomes.''
The study also goes on to find that, on average, union
labor projects come in at four percent less cost than ones that
are completed merit shop. I have looked at the studies that say
12 to 20 percent. I think if you spend some time, you will find
some significant bias there. As a businessperson, I am spending
my time with IPA who uses industry-wide data all over the
world, and we have found that to be the case. We have certainly
found in our work that it is successful.
And I think as we continue to talk today, it is important
to know PLAs are a very flexible vehicle that can be tailored
to the individual project needs and the individual contractor
that is going to use them. And so, as we go to think about how
we are doing that, they have the ability to go and look at
local workforce, inclusivity, cost, all of those things that go
into making a project. Thank you very much.
Ms. Mace. And thank you. I now recognize myself for 5
minutes of questioning. All right.
I would like to start with you, Mr. Brubeck, today, this
afternoon. Non-union construction workers who managed to get on
a PLA project can lose one-third of their total compensation to
wage theft. According to one study, it found the rule could
result in a half billion dollars being stolen from non-union
workers employed on Federal construction projects. Is it fair
for non-union workers to be forced to pay union dues and
contribute to union pension plans for which they do not
benefit?
Mr. Brubeck. Thank you for the question. I will say that it
is rare for non-union construction workers to be allowed on PLA
projects.
Ms. Mace. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Brubeck. They can be allowed on PLA projects, but
typically what happens is that they have to pay fringe benefits
into the union pension and benefits plans, and those are
confiscated by the union unless they join a union and become
vested in those programs. So, the net effect of that is that
non-union contractors who want to use their own employees do
not bid on PLA projects.
Ms. Mace. Gotcha. Most of your members are small
businesses. Under the PLA mandate, all subcontractors on a
project must abide by the terms of the PLA, even if they had no
role in negotiating the terms. How do small businesses feel
about the PLA mandate?
Mr. Brubeck. They are devastated by it.
Ms. Mace. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Brubeck. I have been getting calls every day from small
businesses who are saying I cannot build Federal contracts in
my own backyard. I get 80 percent of my revenue from these
types of contracts. Once I work through my backlog, I do not
know what I am going to do. I am going to have to lay off
workers. There is no exemption in the rule for small businesses
at all. The PLAs are very complicated to negotiate for small
business direct contractors. A lot of the construction trade
unions are going to have a hard time negotiating these
contracts with small businesses because they have no
familiarity with doing so.
So, is a killer for small businesses, especially in a time
when the Federal Government is begging for Federal contractors,
especially small businesses, to compete for this work. We have
seen a massive decline in small business participation in the
construction industry for Federal contracts by more than 60
percent. So, this is going to make it worse on top of all these
other regulations that the industries are facing.
Ms. Mace. A heck of a lot worse. Mr. Dreher, in the past,
agency contracting officers, nonpartisan civil servants,
entrusted to get the best value for the government, have chosen
not to mandate PLAs even when encouraged to do so. Why do you
think that is?
Mr. Dreher. Fair and open competition, right? Getting more
contractors, whether they are union or open shop, giving them
the opportunity to bid the work and let the client decide what
the best value is for the American taxpayer and not mandate
that only union companies can bid the work, so.
Ms. Mace. The Biden Administration says PLAs are necessary
to ensure major projects are finished on time and without
stoppages. Is that actually true?
Mr. Dreher. No, absolutely not.
Ms. Mace. The Administration says that merit shop companies
and their employees can participate in PLA projects. However,
these typically require union work rules be followed and that
contributions to union pension plans be paid. Why is it a
problem for your workforce to be restricted to operating under
union work rules?
Mr. Dreher. We are 100-percent employee owned. Every one of
our team members, 4,000 strong, is an owner of a company, and
to take union workforce, right, then we have to pay into their
benefits and everything, that results in my team members not
having a job, right? So, that is a major issue for us and
certainly a challenge.
Ms. Mace. They are going to employ a lot of people with
this policy, are they not?
Mr. Dreher. Yes.
Ms. Mace. Yes. Mr. Ledet, since 97 percent of construction
workers in Louisiana are non-union, could this mandate result
in fewer state residents getting work on projects that the
state itself is helping to finance?
Mr. Ledet. Yes, we believe so, that it discourages local
businesses from competing in these large-scale projects.
Ms. Mace. How has your agency been able to successfully
contract out construction work without mandating PLAs?
Mr. Ledet. Well, since 2005, working with the Corps of
Engineers, we have built the largest hurricane protection
system in the Nation without PLA mandates. That is the Greater
New Orleans Hurricane Risk Storm Damage Reduction System. And
so, we believe there is precedent there, and that was done on
time and under budget.
Ms. Mace. Are you concerned about the additional costs and
budgetary risks the PLA mandate will create?
Mr. Ledet. Yes, our state is concerned.
Ms. Mace. Are you concerned that you will not be able to
work with some of the contractors you have worked with in the
past due to this mandate?
Mr. Ledet. Yes. Our concern is that for those Federal
projects, those contractors will be discouraged from
competition there.
Ms. Mace. This is a question for everyone on the panel. Mr.
Brubeck, is this mandate going to cost American companies,
private companies jobs? Are they going to have to lay people
off?
Mr. Brubeck. Yes, absolutely. We have been talking to our
membership about this, and they are very concerned once they
burn through their backlog that they currently have. Normally
they are earning work and winning work competitively in this
timeframe, and once that is over, they are not sure what they
are going to do. They got to make revenue somewhere else, and
this may result in them having to lay off people or find other
work elsewhere.
Ms. Mace. Thank you, and I have just run out of time, so I
will yield back. OK. We have not called votes yet, so, Mr.
Connolly, I would like to recognize you for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Madam Chair. I just want to point
out that Mr. Dreher and his company, Cianbro, belong to the
Associated General Contractors of America, which actually filed
a lawsuit to try to prevent this new rule from coming into
effect. The judge presiding dismissed the case. He was
appointed by none other than Donald J. Trump, and let me read
what he said: ``None of the individual plaintiffs can specify
what those projects are that might be harmed, where they would
take place, or the basis for their certainty,'' which we have
heard here today, ``that such projects will require PLA.
Furthermore, the individual plaintiffs' declarations are belied
by their histories of actual Federal contracting practices. And
without such a showing,'' he said, ``there is no basis to
believe the PLA rule would impact their businesses.'' That is
the ruling of the judge under a lawsuit brought by that group.
Well, your company, Mr. Dreher, is a member of that group.
Mr. Snyder, you heard the gentleman next to you say with
this rule in place, we are going to be prevented from actually
bidding on Federal work, and we have got a long history of
doing just that. Then I heard your testimony and you gave a
long list of Federal work you have done, and you have done it
with PLAs. How come you can make it work and others apparently
speculate they cannot?
Mr. Snyder. I certainly cannot speak for any other
business, but we have found through the process of doing this
that there is a step that goes into this collective process of
finding out what works best for the project and working with
partners that are going to be representing employees in the
workforce to come in and weigh in on what those issues are that
are going to make that successful. I am not sure why it would
be more difficult for someone else to go and do the exact same
thing. There are thousands of other employers that do what we
do. I just happen to be the one sitting here talking with you
today, and so I think the numbers of cost and scheduling and
the ability to staff projects speak for itself.
Mr. Connolly. And just to be clear about your testimony
here today, it is your testimony that your company, going back
to 1901, has, in fact, used PLAs as an effective tool
successfully, and you have found it to be a felicitous
relationship facilitating business. Is that accurate?
Mr. Snyder. Sure. We compete on a daily basis with open
shop contractors. That does not prevent us from bidding. We
compete in right-to-work states and work in them every day. It
is our preferred method of performing work. We have found it to
be the most efficient and cost-effective way to do work.
Mr. Connolly. And are you aware of the OMB letter for the
record with respect to the implementation of this, that makes
clear that union and non-union workers will be considered for
and work on Federal PLA projects?
Mr. Snyder. That is correct. Our understanding is that the
Federal Government cannot exclude non-union workers from
participation in the process. In fact, they are prohibited from
doing so.
Mr. Connolly. I ask unanimous consent to enter that letter
into the record.
Ms. Mace. Without objection.
Mr. Connolly. And is it further your testimony, if I heard
you correctly, independent of your own company, though your
experience would mirror this, that there is actually compiled
data empirically demonstrating that PLA projects actually tend
to come in lower in the cost estimate than non-PLA projects in
terms of labor especially. Is that correct?
Mr. Snyder. There are studies that indicate that in the
broadest, most widely recognized study was not specific to
project labor agreements, but collective bargaining agreements
in general. And that was commissioned by the Mechanical
Contractors Association through IPA.
Mr. Connolly. So, not just your company, but industry-wide,
that is what they found.
Mr. Snyder. That is correct.
Mr. Connolly. And would you say that PLAs, in your
experience, tend to smooth out both labor contracts and costs
and come in a better timeframe? Certainly that was my
experience. I mean, I literally had the experience of the
Silver Line. It was bifurcated. We had Phase 1. We had Phase 2.
Phase 1 was a PLA project, and it came in pretty much on budget
and on time. Phase 2 was horribly delayed by years with lots of
cost overruns, and it was a deliberate political decision, not
an economic decision, to do that in Phase 2 because we had a
change in the
Governorship in Richmond, Virginia. Your comment.
Mr. Snyder. That is our experience, and from the IPA study,
projects that are short on skilled labor are twice as likely to
have 10 percent or higher cost overrun and more likely to have
schedule slip of 25 percent or more.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Madam Chair, I would ask in
unanimous consent to enter into the record the U.S. District
Court ruling from the Western District of Louisiana, to which I
made reference earlier.
Ms. Mace. Without objection.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair. And finally, I would ask
unanimous consent to enter into the record the letter from the
Association of Union Constructors and more than 1,700 members
in support of project labor agreements.
Ms. Mace. Without objection.
Ms. Connolly. I thank the chair, and I yield back.
Ms. Mace. Votes have been called, and the Chair declares
the Committee in recess, subject to the call of the Chair. We
will plan to reconvene about 10 minutes after votes.
The Committee stands in recess.
[Recess.]
Ms. Mace. Good afternoon, and we are going to reconvene our
hearing this afternoon.
Before I recognize the Chairman of the Full Committee, I
want to submit into the hearing record several coalition
letters we have received that oppose the PLA rule, support
FOCA, and express appreciation for the hearing we are holding
here today. This includes a letter from 21 business groups,
including the Associated Builders and Contractors, the National
Federation of Independent Businesses, and the National Black
Chamber of Commerce; and a letter from a series of taxpayer
protection groups, including, among others, Americans for
Prosperity, Americans for Tax Reform, and the National
Taxpayers Union.
Finally, I want to submit a letter from the Independent
Electrical Contractors that opposes the PLA rule, supports
FOCA, and expresses appreciation for the hearing we are holding
today.
Without objection.
Ms. Mace. And then I did want to make one comment before I
recognize you, Mr. Chairman. I learned from multiple members of
this Committee today that we had one of our colleagues show up
with COVID this afternoon. In fact, staff was bleaching the
chair he was sitting in after he departed. He was on the floor
today voting. We do not want super spreaders in this hearing. I
would ask the Ranking Member, Mr. Raskin, not to spread COVID
in this hearing room, not to spread COVID on the floor of the
U.S. House of Representatives.
There are members of this Committee and members of this
body who are immunocompromised, who have spouses who are
immunocompromised. People like myself, have had long COVID and
have had devastating health consequences to getting COVID, and
I would ask our colleagues not to spread COVID.
So, with that, Mr. Chairman, I would like to recognize you
for 5 minutes.
Chairman Comer. Well, thank you, Madam Chairman, and thank
you for holding this very important hearing.
Mr. Dreher, your testimony states at your firm, which is
employee owned, and I might add that is my favorite kind of
ownership of any private business, just wants a fair
opportunity to compete and win Federal awards. But you say the
Administration's PLA mandates denies you and your employees
that fair opportunity, and you are right. Even the Boston Globe
Editorial Board last month wrote that, ``Although they do not
say so explicitly, PLAs, in effect, limit public work only to
firms whose workers belong to trade unions.''
If your firm wants to continue to perform Federal awards,
you need to convince a union, to which your employees do not
belong, to agree to work with you. Your testimony says this
gives the union maximum leverage to dictate the terms to you.
Is it accurate to say the PLA rulemakes your firm hostage to
outside labor union since you cannot perform Federal projects
unless you agree to cater to their terms?
Mr. Dreher. Absolutely.
Chairman Comer. So, what sort of provisions, harmful to
non-union contractors and their workforce, might a PLA include?
Mr. Dreher. So, just taking a step back, looking at the
whole picture here, all right, I think we can all agree that
the industry is short over a half a million workers right now.
Chairman Comer. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Dreher. And from 2009 to 2023, 12 out of 3,210
contracts had a PLA. We are not against PLAs. We do not want
PLAs mandated. This industry needs fair and open competition.
We have a lot of work to do rebuilding our bridges, our
highways, our naval infrastructure, and adding another
roadblock in like this mandating these requirements, it does
not make sense. It does not help this country achieve its
mission to improve our infrastructure.
Chairman Comer. I agree completely. Mr. Brubeck, Federal
contracting professionals seem to think the project labor
agreement mandate is unwise since they choose to use them on
only 12 out of more than 3,000 construction solicitations since
2009, even when encouraged to use them by President Obama. So,
do you think these contracting officers will try to obtain
case-by-case waivers from the PLA rule?
Mr. Brubeck. Yes, they are going to try to do that, but the
waiver process that has been constructed by the rule is
actually a bad-faith waiver process. I was talking to an Army
Corps of Engineers Executive Procurement Officer. They have to
get a waiver by going all the way up to the Senior Procurement
Officer of the Army Corps of Engineers. This is a gentleman who
oversees all procurement of missiles, weapons, tanks, all that
stuff. It is not even the head of the construction side of the
Army Corps of Engineers. By the time that goes all the way up
the chain of command and back down, that project solicitation
is going to be delayed immensely. It is designed to make sure
there are no exceptions. We have not heard of any exceptions to
this policy despite the contracting officers asking for those
or asking us to see if our litigation would be able to provide
an exception to this.
Chairman Comer. Mr. Dreher testified that his firm, which
has won many Federal construction awards, will not be able to
bid on many projects due to the PLA mandate. If an agency can
show a solicitation will get a lot fewer bids due to a PLA
mandate, does that qualify them for a waiver?
Mr. Brubeck. Apparently, the OMB memo says that if they get
three or fewer bids, then they could qualify for a PLA
exemption, but they have to go up to the Senior Contracting
Procurement Officer and ask for that, and then they have to
justify that in a written report. The Senior Procurement
Officer's decision is going to be published on a public website
for further scrutiny and perhaps intimidation.
Chairman Comer. Have any waivers been issued since January?
Mr. Brubeck. I am not aware of it. I am aware of about 50
solicitations in the pre-solicitation or solicitation phase
that have PLA language. I am not aware of one waiver being
offered so far.
Chairman Comer. OK. That is what we thought. Mr. Ledet,
your testimony states that the Coastal Protection and
Restoration Authority received only a single bid on the first
Federal contract issued under the PLA rule. How many bids do
you typically receive on projects?
Mr. Ledet. Yes, that is correct. We received a single bid
on the West Shore project that had the PLA. We typically
receive anywhere from four to five to even 10 bids on large
infrastructure projects.
Chairman Comer. That does not sound like a very good deal
for the taxpayers.
Mr. Ledet. That is right.
Chairman Comer. Will you have to re-bid the project?
Mr. Ledet. At this time, we do not believe that the Corps
will rebid the project, no.
Chairman Comer. So, will the fact that you just got one
bid, will that delay the timeline or any----
Mr. Ledet. Right now, we are working through that process
with the Corps, so there is uncertainty as to how it will move
forward. They are trying to award that project, but as soon as
we get more information----
Chairman Comer. Well, the Corps works so quickly, I did not
know if----
Mr. Ledet. Yes.
Chairman Comer. OK.
Mr. Ledet. Yes.
Chairman Comer. Well, I really, Madam Chair, appreciate you
holding this hearing. This is a serious issue, and hopefully we
can figure a better way out. So, with that, my time has
expired. I yield back.
Ms. Mace. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would now like to
recognize Congresswoman Pressley for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you and thank you to our witnesses for
being here today. I represent the Massachusetts 7th
congressional District. It is a district that is vibrant,
diverse, and also deeply inequitable. As we leverage Federal
funding flowing from the Biden Harris Administration's historic
investment in our Nation's infrastructure, we must do so in a
way that addresses longstanding inequities. In my district,
from Cambridge to Roxbury, household median income drops by
$50,000. Project labor agreements, or PLAs, will help us to
address these longstanding inequities, opening the doors for
women, people of color, and veterans to enter the trades.
Mr. Snyder, can you discuss how PLAs have been used
successfully to increase the participation of women and workers
of color in large-scale construction projects specifically?
Mr. Snyder. Sure. So, again, the uniqueness of a PLA is it
gives the ability to tailor that agreement for the community
and area that is going to be entertaining that project and that
investment, and so you will see lots of different vehicles to
do that. Some of them may be around how subcontracts get let to
different types of underrepresented businesses.
One of the things that every PLA does is it sets a standard
for classifications, whether that is a journey person, an
apprentice, a foreman, et cetera. Whether they are a woman, a
minority, any underrepresented population, if they are a
journeyman, they make the same as every other journeyman on
that job site makes. And so, from a pay equity standpoint, it
is almost a perfect mechanism to address those issues.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you. These opportunities hit close to
home. Massachusetts is really leading the way in opening career
paths for women in the trades with the Commonwealth achieving
greater gender diversity and inclusion in the construction
industry than anywhere else in the Nation. At the International
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local 103 in Dorchester, for
example, 51 percent of apprentices are women and people of
color. These achievements are no accident. They are the results
of state and company officials, union leaders, contractors, and
community organizers coming together to actively recruit women,
veterans, and people of color.
I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record this
report titled, ``Building Strong Careers and Lasting
Infrastructure,'' from Community Labor United and the Green
Justice Coalition in Massachusetts.
Ms. Mace. Without objection.
Ms. Pressley. This report clearly outlines the
transformative impact of essential community benefits, like
childcare and training, in PLAs, and they have enabled
Massachusetts to make strides in its equity goals. At the heart
of this data, however, are people, lives that have been changed
and families with a chance to finally build generational
wealth.
Mr. Snyder, how have PLAs helped ensure that your workers
feel valued and productive?
Mr. Snyder. So, workforce development is part of almost
every PLA I have ever seen. A lot of times that includes things
that are apprenticeship programs to bring folks in, but they
also set the standards for wages that help build the middle
class but also benefit packages that help to do that as well.
Those are retirement vehicles, health and welfare
contributions, that allow people to take care of their families
and grow that wealth.
There are also a number of vehicles that occur through that
process that help those people get the skills necessary to
advance through the classification system and the growth in the
industry. We see many, many small businesses that are grown out
of the trades that develop, as a result of PLAs, that bring
underrepresented populations into the workforce, teach them how
to do it, and then there are additional vehicles that help them
even start businesses. And so, those opportunities are pretty
significant in the workforce development front.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you. Valuing and affirming workers does
not have to come at the expense of profits. In fact, a study
found that projects with PLAs reduce costs compared to projects
without such agreements. At the same time, these agreements can
serve as economic justice documents, as gender equity
documents, and racial equity documents by investing in our most
valuable infrastructure, which is our people. Massachusetts is
making it plain. PLAs are the mechanism for finishing projects
on time and on budget while increasing diversity in the trades,
and I look forward to continuing this progress. Thank you, and
I yield back.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I would now like to recognize
Congressman Burlison for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you for hosting
this wonderful, very important Committee meeting. Mr. Brubeck,
most construction workers do not belong to the union. I think
the statistics are something in the area of only close to 11
percent are members of a labor union.
Mr. Brubeck. Right.
Mr. Burlison. In fact, and it is only getting smaller.
Fewer and fewer people are choosing to be members of a labor
union. Could you expand on the requirement will pressure
contractors to reverse course and then unionize despite the
fact that their employees may not want to be a member of a
union?
Mr. Brubeck. Yes. So, typical PLAs say that you have to get
most or all of your employees from a union hiring hall, and
follow union work rules, and paying into union pension and
benefit programs. And so, what that does is that forces
contractors to be unable to use their existing employees. Any
of their own employees they are able to use, they have to send
to the union hiring hall or if there is some sort of
arrangement where they are allowed work on. In our industry, if
you want to join a union, you can just go down to the local
union hiring hall and join. The barriers to unionization are
very low.
What we have here is the government forcing this on
contractors in order to get taxpayer-funded construction
contracts, and that is a problem. We heard earlier about
voluntary PLAs, contractors entering into them voluntarily
without undue course of pressure, but we are talking about
government-mandated PLAs. That is the issue here. That is what
this executive order does. That is what all the Biden
Administration policies do. They try to force contractors to
bargain with unions and sign a union agreement as a condition
of winning a taxpayer-funded construction contract that
increases costs, that reduces competition, and that reduces the
number of workers that are able to bid on these projects. We
have a skilled labor shortage of half a million people.
Mr. Burlison. And I am glad you said that it increases
costs and it reduces competition. I cannot see how anyone with
a straight face can say that requiring a project labor
agreement is somehow going to reduce costs and give more
options.
Mr. Brubeck. Well, in theory, it might reduce costs when
your only option is a unionized contractor base, but that is
not the case anywhere in this country. There is plenty of
competition from non-union contractors. In my experience, PLAs
are voluntarily entered into by contractors without government
coercion because it provides them some sort of exemptions from
problematic terms and collective bargaining agreements that
make them less efficient and more expensive. So, we are talking
about government-mandated PLAs, not voluntary PLAs.
Mr. Burlison. Let us also talk about the supposed
exemptions to the PLA requirements. The OMB memo implementing
the new rule mentions a process for Federal agencies to follow
in order to secure an exemption or exception to the Biden
Administration's new blanket PLA policy. Are you aware of any
Federal agencies who have successfully sought an exemption or
an exception?
Mr. Brubeck. No, sir, I am not.
Mr. Burlison. There are no reports. In fact, and I think
you have from your own personal observation, and also when you
go to the Federal Government's own website, it does not list
any agencies receiving an exception, so clearly the exception
policy is a joke. Would it be safe to say that the new rule is
reducing competition, that it is reducing the number of
applicants for these jobs?
Mr. Brubeck. Yes, absolutely. I hear both from contracting
officers and Federal agencies and our own members who say they
would want to pursue these contracts, but they cannot because
of the PLA requirement on there. I am aware of a number of
projects where they have already had a reduction in bidders who
are prequalified for Phase 1 of the solicitation, and they
dropped out the minute the PLA was added during Phase 2 of the
solicitation. So, there are going to be real-world examples
coming out, and projects are going to have to be re-bid and
that is going to delay more construction projects that we all
need.
Mr. Burlison. I also think that there is another aspect to
it. Just this week in a hearing, we learned that the United
Auto Workers Union was protesting on a college campus to make
sure that they had the rights to be basically antisemitic in
their protests. I cannot imagine how someone who just wants to
work, just wants to be employed is now going to have to pay
dues to something that is getting politically involved in
something they may totally disagree with.
Mr. Brubeck. Yes. That is certainly one of the reasons why
a lot of construction workers and contractors decide not to
affiliate with unions, and that is their choice. They want to
make sure that they can deliver projects on time and on budget.
Mr. Brubeck. And before my time expires, I just want to ask
what can Congress do? I know that we have Resolution 132
sponsored by Higgins from Louisiana. What bills are on your
radar that would help remedy this?
Mr. Brubeck. Chairman Comer has got an excellent bill
called the Fair and Open Competition Act that restricts
government-mandated PLAs on Federal and federally assisted
projects, and Congressman Higgins has a CRA resolution striking
down the Biden Administration policy.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you.
Ms. Mace. All right. I would like to recognize Mr. Gosar
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you, Madam Chair. Since January 2021, the
Biden Administration has implemented an executive order that
works to pay special interest at the cost of the American
taxpayer. The FAR Council rule mandating PLAs, which is the
subject of today's hearing, is another example of the Biden's
prioritizing special interests. This inflationary policy will
increase costs for all Americans, providing them less in
return. Mr. Brubeck, can you tell me what this could cost the
American taxpayer if it was enforced for every project over $35
million?
Mr. Brubeck. The FAR Council final rule suggests it could
be $14 to $16 billion worth of construction contracts subject
to this rule. We think it is probably going to be a little bit
more than that. The question then becomes how many of these
projects have PLAs required on them. It seems like all of them
will, unless the exception process changes. And then the next
question is, what is the cost increase as a result of the
project labor agreement reducing competition. Research suggests
it is 12 percent to 18 percent, but it might be much greater or
much less depending on the marketplace and a variety of
factors. So, we do not really know yet, but it is going to be a
lot.
Mr. Gosar. Now, ABC members have built 50 percent of the
value of large-scale Federal construction contracts over the
last 15 years. Will Federal agencies be able to rely on ABC
members to support the warfighter to defend our borders and
improve our infrastructure if this costly rule remains in
effect?
Mr. Brubeck. I do not believe so. I have been hearing from
both procurement officers and our own members saying they are
going to not work on Federal contracts anymore. I do not know
where those Federal contractors or the labor is going to come
from to be able to deliver those services that our government
and our warfighters need.
Mr. Gosar. Now, are the manufacturers of the fab chips--
this is really important to Arizona and other states
--but funded by the $50 billion in CHIPS and Science Act,
required to mandate PLAs, or are they being strongly pushed to
require them?
Mr. Brubeck. They are not being required to do so, but our
understanding after talking to a number of the CHIPS
manufacturers, construction folks, is that the Biden
Administration is really doing some arm twisting behind the
scenes to push them to sign PLAs. So far, some of the awardees
of the CHIPS money have signed PLAs. Some have resisted, and
some who have resisted have been the subject of pretty intense
campaigns from union organizers trying to make sure that they
sign a PLA on future of work.
Mr. Gosar. So, how is that going to affect the
semiconductor business?
Mr. Brubeck. Well, the good news is that it is not a
requirement. The bad news is that there is a lot of coercion
behind the scenes, and if you look at foreign investment in
this country related to CHIPS fabs, I think they are having a
hard time understanding how to operate under these types of
environments.
Mr. Gosar. Now, the Obama Administration did not mandate
these, right?
Mr. Brubeck. They had an executive order in place that
strongly encouraged on a case-by-case project labor agreements,
but they were not mandatory across the board like this policy.
There is a big distinction between the two.
Mr. Gosar. So, let us walk back through this. I thought I
heard the comment that some of these PLAs are actually more
cost effective, so being in the construction industry prior to
this, I do not see how that works. Can you walk me through it
where a PLA will actually be more cost effective than what you
do?
Mr. Brubeck. So, we have seen examples of projects bid with
and without PLAs, Federal contracts under the Obama
Administration. There was a great example in New Hampshire
where a project was initially bid with a PLA requirement and
then it was bid without, and we saw the bid numbers, and what
we found was that there were nine bidders instead of three when
the PLA was removed, and the costs were 16 percent less. And
so, what you got there was less competition in that situation,
and that is because contractors are limited on the number of
bids that they can submit on this issue. They have fewer
subcontractors that can participate that might be willing to
sign the PLA. They have got union work rules that increase the
cost of construction, make them less efficient. They got to pay
in the pension of union benefit plans, a lot of reasons why
these increase the cost of construction, especially when they
are mandated.
In a voluntary nature where you might enter into one
because it might streamline your collective bargaining
agreements, there may be some cost savings related to overtime
or holidays, but that is not what we are talking about today.
We are talking about when the government is requiring project
labor agreements in that case.
Mr. Gosar. So, let me ask you another question. Do you
coerce your employees as to who to vote for in an election?
Mr. Brubeck. No.
Mr. Gosar. Hmm. Would you see that as a complication of
this PLA?
Mr. Brubeck. I am not sure.
Mr. Gosar. Could it be?
Mr. Brubeck. It could be.
Mr. Gosar. When you join a union, do you turn over your
rights in many cases? I will retract that because there is a
better way to ask that. Are there other influencing factors in
regard to joining a union and involving a PLA?
Mr. Brubeck. Well, there are a number of situations where
private developers cannot get permits. Like, for example, in
California there is something called green mail where the
construction trade unions are seeking a PLA on a project. They
will file a number of frivolous environmental complaints to
stop a project from moving forward without a project labor
agreement. There are a number of tactics that are used to
extract PLAs from the private sector, and then, of course, we
are seeing the government side as well.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I would now like to recognize Mr.
Grothman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Grothman. Sure. Thank you. I would like to apologize.
Sometimes members of the other party, they get so used to
talking about union jobs, it implies nobody in Congress cares
about non-union jobs. I have a lot of good friends in the
unions, but I think it is embarrassing that we are getting to
the point. The hatred of diversity is so intense that they
cannot say we want to expand the government by all jobs. They
just, you are not a union, you do not count, but I got a
question here for you.
A new Biden Administration--and this is for Mr. Brubeck--a
new Biden Administration rule mandates that contractors and
subcontractors sign onto a project labor agreement to be
eligible to perform work on large-scale Federal projects $35
million and up. This discriminates against merit shop
contractors. In what ways do PLAs potentially infringe on the
freedom of choice for workers who may prefer not to join a
union?
Mr. Brubeck. Yes. Like I mentioned before, typical PLAs
will force contractors to hire most or all of their labor from
union hiring halls and leave their own employees, who are non-
union workers, on the sidelines and they cannot work on those
projects. They have to follow union work rules, and they have
to pay into union pension and benefits programs. So, it is
effectively telling non-union workers you cannot participate on
the projects, and if there is an exception that allows them to
participate, the non-union workers have to pay into these
pension and benefit plans, and they will never receive the
benefits that they pay into those plans unless they join a
union and become vested in those programs. Some of these PLAs
are in non-right-to-work states. They may require union
membership, but ones in right-to-work states typically do not
require union membership, but they do require the payment of
agency shop fees and other support of the union programs that
they may disagree with as a condition of working on a taxpayer-
funded project.
Mr. Grothman. You talk about work rules. This is kind of
going off script here a little, but you talk about work rules,
and I think there is a perception that the only difference
between union and non-union is maybe how much people are paid.
Could you elaborate on how work rules may raise the cost of a
project or make it more inefficient?
Mr. Brubeck. Sure. A number of contractors that are union
are a signatory to their collective bargaining agreements with
specific unions. What that means is that they have to follow
the work rules outlined in those collective bargaining
agreements for any of the work they perform. For example, if
they are building a sidewalk, they have to hire a carpenter to
do the carpentry forms around the sidewalk. They will have to
bring in someone from a different trade to do other aspects of
that sidewalk. On the non-union side, a lot of contractors are
able to do something called multiskilling where they are able
to bring in one or two people who can do the job tasks across
multiple trades, and that will allow them to be more efficient
and have more skills overall in the life of the project and for
the careers of the actual construction workers, too.
Mr. Grothman. OK. Mr. Dreher, since 2009, under a policy
initiated by the Obama Administration, Federal agencies have
been encouraged to consider mandating PLAs on Federal
construction projects, but they have rarely done it. Why do you
think that is so?
Mr. Dreher. Because it was the contractor's choice, right?
Twelve out of 3,210 contracts had PLAs, so I think that that
tells us that there was not a lot of interest during that----
Mr. Grothman. Left to their own devices----
Mr. Dreher. Correct.
Mr. Grothman [continuing]. People would not do them.
Mr. Dreher. Let the people decide. Let the contractor
decide. Create fair and open competition.
Mr. Grothman. Any studies indicating PLAs increase the
overall cost of public construction projects?
Mr. Dreher. Yes. Yes. The overall costs increase 12 to 20
percent, I think the statistics say.
Mr. Grothman. And the result then, of course, is more
infrastructure undone, not as good infrastructure.
Mr. Dreher. Yes. Yes, we are we are slowing up projects,
and right now the industry is so saturated. We are short
workers, there are a lot of projects to do, and this is just
adding, again, another hurdle that is going to prevent us from
achieving that mission.
Mr. Grothman. OK. Final question for Mr. Brubeck. The IRS
and Treasury Department have finalized prevailing wage and
apprenticeship requirements for certain incentives contained in
the Inflation Reduction Act, which is a big climate bill that
President Biden signed into law in 2022. While the
Administration characterizes the rule as a win for labor
unions, for blue-collar workers, they will most likely give a
significant advantage to labor unions. Can you explain to me
this weaponization of the IRS to push labor policies and
project labor agreements on the Inflation Reduction Act clean
energy tax credits? Is this in the statute?
Mr. Brubeck. The prevailing wage and registered
apprenticeship requirements on these clean energy projects
seeking enhanced tax credits, that is in the statute. What is
not in the statute is a new provision by the IRS that says
developers would be exempt or get-out-free jail card for the
willful and extreme penalties in the new statute if they sign a
project labor agreement, if they require all the contractors to
sign a PLA. So, they are getting an exemption through
regulation to the actual statute if they sign a PLA, and this
is going to create a lot of problems.
A lot of developers and a lot of people seeking these tax
credits are trying to understand the confusing rules behind
prevailing wage and registered apprenticeship requirements, and
so they are going to be basically pushed and coerced into
requiring project labor agreements. So, they are weaponizing
the IRS and the tax system to develop more union jobs and
unionized contractors getting----
Mr. Grothman. Hatred of non-union jobs. Maybe ``hatred'' is
too strong, but they do not want people having non-union jobs.
Mr. Brubeck. We are not welcome.
Mr. Grothman. Yep. OK. Thank you.
Ms. Mace. All right. I would now like to recognize Mr.
Fitzgerald for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. I want to thank the Chairwoman for allowing
me to waive on to the Committee. It is an important topic, and
when I saw it was coming up in the Subcommittee, definitely
wanted to participate. As my many years in the Wisconsin State
Senate, along with Congressman Grothman, by the way, we did do
some PLA reforms. And I think one of the things that was always
missed, and I am glad you are reiterating again and again, that
what you are talking about is if two organizations want to get
involved in a PLA, that is not what we are worried about. We
are worried about the mandate part. And there were significant
buildings. There is Lambeau Field in Wisconsin that was part of
a PLA agreement. We had the Fiserv Forum, which we are holding
the Republican National Committee Convention at, which there
was a PLA in place. That was fine. That is not what we are
talking about. We are talking about mandating it.
So, Mr. Brubeck, I wanted to just get your take on the
higher costs because that is what we saw. Even on those where
there was agreement, if you match that up with what the
construction costs might be on the front end compared to where
you end up, it is still a significant increase in the costs of
a project, right?
Mr. Brubeck. Yes. Typically, the costs are between 12
percent and 20 percent. At least that is what the research has
said on a number of school construction projects. There was an
independent study done out in California on a number of Los
Angeles affordable housing projects. What that study found was
that the PLA mandate actually added 14 percent of the cost of
affordable housing projects that resulted in 800 fewer
affordable housing units being built out there. They could have
had 11 percent more, 800 more units for affordable housing if
not for this requirement. So, it is certainly there. There is a
lot of research on this topic. I know there is other research
saying the opposite, but it is just basic common sense. You
reduce competition, you put new rules, you cannot use your own
employees, of course costs are going to go up for these
contractors.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Right, and I think that is something that
is being missed on it is because I am also a member of
Financial Services right now, so we will have the Fed in and
they will tell us, we will have the FDIC in, and we will grill
them about where we are in some of this financing stuff. And
right now it means that there is less projects being built,
right? I mean, we know there is a labor shortage, but along
with that, if there are less projects, if there is less work,
that is not good for anybody, right?
Mr. Brubeck. Yes. Stakeholders are worried that if their
costs go over their allotted budget, they are going to have to
find money elsewhere. They are going to have to get money from
Congress, or they are going to have to re-scope their existing
budgets or other projects, and that creates a lot of delays and
that adds more cost, too. So, yes, that means fewer
construction jobs created, fewer improvements to our roads,
bridges, and other types of infrastructure, and fewer clean
energy projects. I mean, the list goes on. This is a serious
issue.
Mr. Fitzgerald. And it is because federally assisted
construction is a much larger market of construction spending
than direct Federal contracts. I mean, that is the way it
works.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Yes. I do not know if I clarified. So, we
have got the Biden executive order on direct Federal contracts
of $35 million or more, but outside of that, we actually have
other policies independent of the executive order that push PLA
requirements on federally assisted projects. And that is being
done through Federal agency grant programs that Federal
agencies are asking state and local governments to compete for,
and what they are saying is, you are more likely to get this
funding if you require PLA. It is coercion. They are trying to
get them to require PLAs.
And fortunately, in states like yours, Mr. Fitzgerald,
there has been legislation passed that restricts government-
mandated PLAs on federally assisted projects. That is not
helpful on direct Federal contracts like at Fort McCoy----
Mr. Fitzgerald. Right.
Mr. Brubeck [continuing]. Where I got a call the other day
from a small contractor saying, I do 90 percent of my revenue
at Fort McCoy. Once I am done with this project, I have no
other work. I have got to fire my people or close my business
or find another work. This was all sprung on me so fast, so
yes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Yes. This all adds insult to injury----
Mr. Brubeck. Exactly.
Mr. Fitzgerald [continuing]. Because on top of that, now
you have the interest issue that is starting to creep up on the
financing of many of these projects as well, so very good.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Brubeck. Thank you.
Mr. Fitzgerald. I yield back.
Ms. Mace. All right. I would now like to recognize Mr.
Higgins for 5 minutes.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for
holding this hearing. Gentlemen, I appreciate you being here.
Just to clarify for the American people, what we are dealing
with is an executive order from the President, which has
resulted in rules being written and mandated through government
projects, major government projects that impact every state,
and have forced contractors to submit bids with union workforce
as their primary workforce. And many states do not have that
workforce infrastructure, including the state of Louisiana that
I represent. So, according to the January 2024 Bureau of Labor
statistics, only about 10 percent of the workforce is
unionized, so it is quite an unrighteous move by the executive
of our country.
The President of the United States issued an executive
order saying 90 percent of the workforce of American people
does not qualify for these government bids. It is quite
unrighteous. Twenty-four sovereign states have right-to-work
laws, including Louisiana. We offer fair and open competition
for all companies, including union labor, to bid on contracts,
but it should not be mandated either way. I am quite sure that
my colleagues that represent union districts, which I respect.
I do not have a problem with that. I do not oppose unions. I
support freedom. I do not oppose our President. I oppose
oppressive actions out of our executive branch. And I am quite
certain that my colleagues that represent union districts would
have an issue with the President reversing an order saying you
cannot allow union workforce to bid on these projects.
Mr. Ledet, congratulations. We have arrived at the point
where someone can pronounce your name.
(Laughter.)
Mr. Higgins. Mr. Ledet, would this violate Louisiana law,
in your assessment, and disadvantage Louisiana-owned and
operated non-union companies that you have historically
partnered with to rebuild Louisiana coasts and protect
Louisiana communities from flooding?
Mr. Ledet. Thank you, Congressman. As you indicated, we
think it violates the spirit of the law. As you said, we have a
right-to-work state. Only three percent of Louisiana workforce
is union labor. The other 97 percent is non-union labor, and so
this mandate discourages them from being able to work on these
major infrastructure projects to protect our citizens.
Mr. Higgins. In your experience, Mr. Ledet, again, to
clarify for Americans witnessing this hearing, is there any law
in Louisiana that denies unionization?
Mr. Ledet. No, there is not.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you very much. So, our free citizens, by
a ratio of 97 percent, choose to work for companies that are
not involved with union labor. They have the right to unionize.
We certainly would not stop that. Go ahead. That is called
freedom. Once again, we do not oppose unions. We support
freedom. We oppose oppression of rights and individual
liberties. Mr. Ledet, again, what would be the real-world
implications of this rule on CPRA and the Army Corps projects
in South Louisiana? Would you address that? Please bring it
home.
Mr. Ledet. Yes.
Mr. Higgins. In my remaining minute here----
Mr. Ledet. Yes, it is----
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. What is the real-world impact of
projects that we have ongoing in Louisiana with CPRA through
the Corps of Engineers for coastal reconstruction and flood
mitigation?
Mr. Ledet. Yes. As a great example, if we are talking about
cost increases, we have the $3.7 billion ongoing West Shore
Lake Pontchartrain project that could result in cost increases
of anywhere from $400 to $700 million, if those statistics are
correct, and then the state of Louisiana has to pay 35 percent
of that cost share.
Mr. Higgins. Could you even bid it out? I mean, can you get
a workforce? Is there a Louisiana workforce, a contractor that
could even effectively respond to that bid, the contractors
that you have historically successfully done business with?
Mr. Ledet. Yes, there is uncertainty there. The first
project that we have encountered, which after this mandate has
been put in place, is we only received one bid.
Mr. Higgins. One bid. Well, gentlemen, and Mr. Snyder, this
includes you, good, sir. I thank you for being here. I respect
your representation. We just disagree in principle on
government mandates that oppress the freedoms of Americans'
right to work, so I do appreciate you being here. We have some
questions to submit to you in writing, good sir, and the other
panelists as well. Madam Speaker--Madam Chair--I apologize--
thank you for holding this hearing. It is very important.
Ms. Mace. I spoke Louisiana good today. I said ``Ledet.'' I
did a good job. I think I got it mostly right. I would like to
recognize Ms. Foxx, the queen, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Foxx. And you do not have to stay, but I know how to
pronounce it, too.
(Laughter.)
Ms. Foxx. But I will start with Mr. Brubeck, and I thank
the Chairwoman for holding this hearing today, also, and thank
our witnesses for being here. Mr. Brubeck, your written
testimony mentioned that the limited number of non-union
contractor employees who are possibly allowed to work on a PLA
project would be subjected to wage theft. Can you explain how
that works in practice?
Mr. Brubeck. Yes. So, typical PLAs, and they can vary from
job to job, but what I have seen typically is they force
contractors to pay their fringe benefits into the union pension
and benefits plans as a condition of winning the contract. And
if you are a non-union worker, you are allowed to work on a PLA
project, which may be in limited numbers. Let us say you can.
You would have all that money paid into those plans on your
behalf, but you would forfeit that unless you joined the union
and became vested in those plans. Where I come from and what I
hear from our contractors, that is wage theft.
A lot of contractors will actually make sure that those
employees come back and work with them after the project is
done. And what they will do is they will actually pay for those
additional benefit costs that they are going to lose, gets
stolen from them. They will pay into their existing plans the
company has, but what happens is that puts that contractor to a
severe competitive disadvantage. They have to have double
benefit payment costs, which is yet another reason why these
contractors will not pursue these PLA projects.
Ms. Foxx. And so, what you are describing is that the
employer then is also exposed to multi-employer pension plans,
correct?
Mr. Brubeck. That is right. So, the employer is making the
contributions to the union pension plans as required by the PLA
as a condition of performing the project, and a number of these
multi-employer pension plans are extremely underfunded. And
what happens for the contractors that pay into these plans is
they can become liable for future liabilities of the pension
plans when they can no longer make the promises that they have
made to the union workers that deserve benefits from these
plans. And so, when that happens, they get a bill for their
liability and that can be extreme. That can prevent them from
getting bonding. That can prevent them from qualifying from
future contracts. So, they do not want to be on the hook just
for one project.
Ms. Foxx. Right.
Mr. Brubeck. And PLA advocates will say, well, you can be
exempt from that type of pension withdrawal liability. There
have actually been legal cases where they have signed the
exemption, and the judges come back and said, no, it still
applies to you, sorry, and these companies either go bankrupt
or have to completely reduce their operation as a result of
this.
Ms. Foxx. Right. As I have railed against many times, the
American Rescue Plan contained a provision providing over $90
billion for the PBGC bailing out these poorly performing multi-
employer pension plans that were unable to pay the defined
benefit pension promises that were made to worker
beneficiaries, many of which were plans in the construction
industry. Why would anyone think that forcing workers to pay
into these poorly performing plans is a good idea and in the
best interest of the construction workers? Mr. Brubeck? Sorry.
Mr. Brubeck. No, it is a great question. I know a number of
our employees are taken care of by 401(k) or profit sharing or
all kinds of great programs that transfer with them, and they
have certainty in that. And a lot of the folks getting into the
industry are not sure about whether the pensions will be
available. I understand that is why the bailout was made for
some of these programs and plans, but it is certainly something
that we are concerned about, and workers are concerned about
their future retirements----
Ms. Foxx. Sure.
Mr. Brubeck [continuing]. And not knowing if it is there or
not and not knowing if the government is going to have to bail
them out another time.
Ms. Foxx. Right. I think, Mr. Ledet, that I walked in as
Mr. Brubeck was talking about how much PLAs increase costs for
Federal construction projects. So, I will not ask you that
question, but how does this increase in cost impact your
ability to budget and your ability to use the limited resources
available to complete much-needed construction projects?
Mr. Ledet. Yes, thank you. CPRA is the non-Federal sponsor
on major infrastructure in our state to protect our citizens
from flooding. And so, any time the cost goes up for the
Federal Government, it also goes up for us, the non-Federal.
And so, those cost increases that we referenced, if it is $400
million, we pay 35 percent of that, and then if there are
schedule delays, that is just prolonged time that our citizens
are at risk.
Ms. Foxx. Right, and I think you all have alluded, you
particularly, I think, earlier to PLA mandates creating new
workforce shortages if contractors refuse to bid for work under
a PLA. I think all of you have probably talked about that. So,
we all know that there is a huge worker shortage. I am the
Chairwoman of the Education and Workforce Committee. We are
dealing with this every day. I meet with employers every day
who tell me they cannot find skilled workers, and construction
is one of the main areas.
And so, I just want to thank you all for what you are doing
and for the work that you are doing to try to protect workers
in this country. As my colleague Mr. Higgins said, people who
choose not to join unions, he is right, this is about freedom.
This is all about freedom in our country. If they want to join
the union, they can, but nobody is holding a gun to their head
to do it, and nobody should be holding a gun to the heads of
contractors to have a PLA, and what this is all about is
freedom in our country. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. Mace. Thank you.
Ms. Mace. To recognize Mr. Allen for 5 minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Chairwoman, for allowing me to waive
on to your Committee.
Ms. Mace. Saved the best for last.
Mr. Allen. Well, you are also my neighbor, so, but anyway,
my home state is Georgia, and I can pronounce your name, Mr.
Ledet. And what is unique about Georgia is we have a right-to-
work law, which many states have across the country, and all
that simply means is that you do not have to pay union dues to
keep your job. And Georgia has been the best state to do
business, been named the best state to do business in over 10
years in a row, and we have great leadership, and our economy
is growing. We just recently finished two nuclear power plants,
which now is the largest clean energy power plant structure
with four units in the country, and it was union. But the
problem is we could not get the workers, and when I talked to
the head of the Building and Trades Union, he said that they
are having a hard time recruiting people to join the union.
And I have had 40 years of experience starting and
operating a construction business. The workforce is a new
modern workforce, very entrepreneurial. When I started out, we
would call the union hall. We self-performed a lot of our work.
But now these union members all own the concrete companies, the
roofing companies, the framing companies, and the steel
erection companies, and we are subcontracting almost 90 percent
of our work. And I am all too familiar with the heavy-handed,
top-down regulations that this government is imposing on us,
which is why we never did any Federal Government work. It was a
different animal altogether.
And this rule is another example of the Biden
Administration using taxpayer dollars to push their pro-union
agenda. It bestows favors on political allies and intervene in
employee relations at private firms, and I have heard the
frustration of other construction companies in our district.
ACC Construction Company is a locally owned and operated
company out of Augusta, Georgia, and it has a stellar
reputation working on many federally contracted construction
projects, and I share their concern. This rule will drive up
cost, reduce competition, and result in jobs taking much longer
than they should.
Mr. Brubeck, my understanding is to be a signatory to a
project labor agreement, a contractor must negotiate with the
union. Is that correct?
Mr. Brubeck. Yes. Under the FAR Council rule, you have to
have one labor union or more to execute the project labor
agreement. And what is happening is that our understanding is
contractors are going to unions and saying would you be willing
to negotiate a PLA with me. They have to meet these terms that
are outlined in the PLA rule but also other terms that the
unions suggest. And they are having either a hard time finding
agreement with the unions, or the unions are slow walking that
negotiation, or giving better terms to other contractors.
Mr. Allen. Right.
Mr. Brubeck. So, they are preselecting who can win the
contract or not, and that is really problematic.
Mr. Allen. There has got to be case law somewhere because
this is----
Mr. Brubeck. We filed a lawsuit----
Mr. Allen. Yes.
Mr. Brubeck [continuing]. Which we have not really talked
much about today.
Mr. Allen. Right.
Mr. Brubeck. But it is in Florida.
Mr. Allen. Yes.
Mr. Brubeck. It is before the judge, and we are hoping for
an outcome that is good on the merits of the case, unlike the
case earlier discussed, the AGC case, which was dismissed on
basically technicalities.
Mr. Allen. Right. Tell me what you have heard about how
unions are negotiating in circumstances where their
participation is required for a contractor to complete the
project.
Mr. Brubeck. We have heard varying stories. Some have been
attempting to cooperate and trying to understand the needs of
the contractor. Other unions have not been participating in
good faith at all, and they have been slowing down
negotiations. They have been effectively making sure that that
contractor who is not already signatory to the union cannot
proceed with the contract award or even a contract bid, which
is required to have an executed PLA submitted with it. So,
effectively, they are acting as a prequalifier for the Federal
Government. This is not how the Competition in Contracting Act
works. We need full and open competition. We do not need
middlemen in this, and that is what our litigation is all
about.
Mr. Allen. Yes, and what I recommended to the head of the
Building and Trades Union is they need to work on recruitment
and provide a product, and then figure out how to sell that
product rather than these heavy-handed techniques that they are
using. And it is very concerning that the Biden Administration
provided unions all of this leverage at the negotiating table
and left contractors no choices but to cave to union demands.
It is directly contrary to America's free market. And of
course, we have seen that in every area of the country. We have
a huge workforce problem.
I have a contractor friend who does work all over the
world, and he says the only place he has a problem getting
labor working on Federal projects is in the United States. He
said, everywhere else in the world because I asked him where do
you get these people. He says, it is no problem. Everywhere
else in the world, the Nation will allow me to use people to
bring workmen in to get the job done.
But anyway, thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield
back.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. In closing today, I want to thank our
panelists once again for their testimony.
With that and without objection, all members will have 5
legislative days within which to submit materials and to submit
additional written questions for the witnesses, which will be
forwarded to the witnesses for their response.
Ms. Mace. So, if there is no further business, without
objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:39 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
