- ADDRESSING REAL HARM DONE BY DEEPFAKES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ADDRESSING REAL HARM DONE BY
DEEPFAKES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY, AND GOVERNMENT INNOVATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND ACCOUNTABILITY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

MARCH 12, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-94
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-181 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Michael Cloud, Texas                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Ro Khanna, California
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Katie Porter, California
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Cori Bush, Missouri
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Shontel Brown, Ohio
Byron Donalds, Florida               Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Robert Garcia, California
William Timmons, South Carolina      Maxwell Frost, Florida
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Greg Casar, Texas
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Dan Goldman, New York
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
Nick Langworthy, New York            Ayanna Pressley, Massachesetts
Eric Burlison, Missouri
Mike Waltz, Florida

------

Mark Marin, Staff Director
Jessica Donlon, Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel
Peter Warren, Senior Advisor
Lauren Lombardo, Deputy Policy Director
Raj Bharwani, Senior Professional Staff Member
Mallory Cogar, Deputy Director of Operations and Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5074

Julie Tagen, Minority Staff Director
Contact Number: 202-225-5051
------

Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government
Innovation

Nancy Mace, South Carolina, Chairwoman
William Timmons, South Carolina      Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Tim Burchett, Tennessee                  Ranking Minority Member
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Ro Khanna, California
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Nick Langworthy, New York            Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Eric Burlison, Missouri              Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Vacancy                              Ayanna Pressley, Massachesetts
Vacancy                              Vacancy

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

Page

Hearing held on March 12, 2024...................................     1

Witnesses

----------

Mrs. Dorota Mani, Parent of Westfield (NJ) High School Student
Oral Statement...................................................     6

Mr. John Shehan, Sr. Vice President, Exploited Children Division
& International Engagement, National Center for Missing &
Exploited Children (NCMEC)
Oral Statement...................................................     7

Mr. Carl Szabo, Vice President & General Counsel, NetChoice
Oral Statement...................................................     9

Dr. Ari Ezra Waldman (Minority Witness), Professor of Law,
University of California, Irvine School of Law
Oral Statement...................................................    11

Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are
available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

* Article, TechCrunch, ``Taylor Swift deepfake debacle was
preventable''; submitted by Rep. Garcia.

* Statement for the Record, Dr. Mary Anne Franks - CCRI;
submitted by Rep. Garcia.

* Letter from State AGs Urge Study of AI and Harmful Impacts on
Children; submitted by Rep. Langworthy.

* CSAM Graphic; submitted by Rep. Luna.

* Article, Post and Courier, ``Aiken Winter Colony member
facing voyeurism charges''; submitted by Rep. Mace.

* Article, People, ``Lawmaker Whose Son Died by Suicide After
Sextortion''; submitted by Rep. Mace.

* Report, CDC, Youth Risk Behavior Survey; submitted by Rep.
Pressley.

* Questions for the Record: to Mrs. Mani; submitted by Rep.
Connolly.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Shehan; submitted by Rep.
Langworthy.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Shehan; submitted by Rep.
Connolly.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Szabo; submitted by Rep.
Langworthy.

Documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

ADDRESSING REAL HARM DONE BY DEEPFAKES

----------

Tuesday, March 12, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Oversight and Accountability

Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government
Innovation

Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:27 p.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Nancy Mace
[Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Mace, Timmons, Burchett, Luna,
Langworthy, Connolly, Lynch, and Pressley.
Also present: Representatives Raskin, Garcia, and Morelle.
Ms. Mace. The Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information
Technology, and Government Innovation will now come to order,
and we welcome everyone who is here this afternoon.
Without objection, the Chair may declare a recess at any
time.
And I do want to ask for unanimous consent at this time for
Representative Morelle from New York to be waived on to the
Subcommittee for today's hearing for the purposes of asking
questions.
So, without objection, so ordered.
And thank you for being here today, and we have a few extra
Members that will come in as well this afternoon.
I would like to recognize myself for the purpose of making
an opening statement.
First of all, I want to say thank you to all of our
witnesses who are here today. AI deepfakes, nonconsensual
photos/photography are only getting worse in this country and
around the world because of the advent of technology, and we
are very eager to hear from each and every one of you today. If
you did not get a chance to watch ABC ``This Week'' on Sunday
and see the way George Stephanopoulos handled the topic of
rape, I would encourage everyone watching this today to go and
watch it.
I have been working on women's issues for a very long time.
The body of work that I have been working on is only becoming
more extensive because of the advent of technology. I wanted to
point out today for my constituents back home some of the
legislation that I have been working on. For example, H.R.
5721, has to do with rape. Rape is an issue that I care about,
near and dear to my heart. I do not believe in rape shaming
rape victims, but I did a bill that would work on the backlog
for rape kits in this country. There are over 100,000 rape kits
that are sitting on shelves today that law enforcement have not
processed, and I want women to know here today and in the
hearing, those that are watching, those around the country, to
know that Congress cares. We care about victims of sexual
crimes.
And another bill, most recently, there was a decision in
Alabama about IVF, and I have sponsored a resolution, I guess 2
weeks ago, House Resolution 1043, that talks about IVF and my
desire to make sure that we, one, condemn the Alabama ruling,
but two, also we do everything we can to protect women and
their access to IVF. And it is not just a women's issue. It is
a family issue. It is men and women alike who want to start a
family. And both sides of the aisle, I know that we both want
to work to make sure that we protect women and men and their
access to reproductive technology and the ability to have a
family.
I recently rolled out last week a deepfake bill, an
initiative that would take a look at it from a criminal
perspective. You know, we have a lot of laws in this country.
Some states talk about revenge porn. Some have, you know,
obviously, peeping Tom laws, surreptitious recording laws, but
really, the advent of deepfakes and technology and AI is really
a new frontier, and we will hear from you all today about this.
But I filed a bill with some of my colleagues last week that
would take deepfakes, if they are in the likeness of a real
person, and make it a crime. This is not a crime yet today, and
when the FBI or when you are looking to charge someone or
indict someone for criminal behavior, it has got to be under
Title 18. So, we looked at Chapter 88, Title 18 of the Federal
Code of laws and looked at how we can make it a crime. I also
recently cosponsored a bill by Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez on
deepfakes, but it was related to civil torts.
I have learned a lot in the last hundred days or so, due to
some experiences that I have recently had, about our Nation's
laws and how poor they are on nonconsensual recordings of
people, whether they are real or whether they are deepfakes. I
am going to be introducing a bill next week, I believe, on
voyeurism, again, looking at Title 18. When the Violence
against Women Act was done, there was a civil tort enabled for
women who are victims of voyeurism at the Federal level, but
there was no crime. Like, it is not a crime to do that at the
Federal level, and I am, you know, sort of astonished that
there is not. But those are just a smattering of things that I
have been working on up here in Congress.
I did want to enter into the record this afternoon and
wanted to ask unanimous consent to enter into the record two
articles. One is out of People magazine. State House Rep.
Brandon Guffey, his son committed suicide. His son was 17. The
title of the article is, ``His Son, 17, Was a Sextortion
Victim, Then Died by Suicide. Now South Carolina Dad Protects
Other Kids From the Same Fate.'' This is difficult for me to
read, but Brandon Guffey was typing on his phone at his home in
Rock Hill, South Carolina. All of a sudden, he heard a sound.
It sounded like a bowling ball falling and crashing through
shelves, Brandon told People magazine. He yelled for his son,
Gavin Guffey, who was in the bathroom with the door locked.
When the 17-year-old failed to answer, Brandon kicked in the
door and found his oldest child lying on the floor bleeding. He
thought that he fell and hit his head. After the shouting from
his wife, they called 9-1-1. Brandon said he could smell the
gun and the taste of gunpowder.
Brandon's son committed suicide because of being shamed and
blackmailed over photographs on Meta, on social media, and it
is very hard for me as a mom to hear these stories that have
had kids affected by online scammers on social media. But it
gets worse because with the advent of deepfakes and AI and
technology, it is not just real videos you have to be worried
about. It is the fake ones now that can be easily created.
The second article I wanted to ask unanimous consent to be
entered into the record is a recent article in the Post and
Courier and the title of it is, ``Member of Aiken Winter Colony
Family Still Facing Voyeurism Charges.'' This guy had a hidden
camera in an Airbnb, I guess, and under South Carolina State
Law Section 16-17-470, where it is illegal to record anybody,
this first-offense voyeurism is a misdemeanor. It is only a
misdemeanor. The fine is $500, and you face only up to 3 years
in jail. This guy, I believe, allegedly had thousands of videos
of unsuspecting victims.
And recently and disturbingly, I learned of a real incident
in my district where multiple women appeared to be recorded
without their knowledge or their consent, over a dozen women in
my district. And disturbingly, included in these videos and
these photographs, that I have been made aware of, included
sexual assault. As a rape victim, to learn about these things
is deeply, deeply disturbing.
And as I just mentioned, these are the real stories of real
women that are victims, but it is worse because with the advent
of deepfakes and AI and technology, it is not the real videos.
I mean, obviously we are worried about that, but now it can be
created out of thin air, and that fake videos of real people
are out there. We are going to hear your stories today, and
some of you, I hope, will touch on legislative options, how do
states address this, how does the Federal Government address
this, how do we take care of this criminally, how do we take
care of this civilly? Because women who are victims of such a
disturbing thing, whether it is real or fake or deepfake, they
ought to get justice in this country at the Federal and the
state level. With AI technology moving forward very fast, here
in this Subcommittee today, we are going to talk about this
from policymakers and people and family and moms who have
experienced this horrific thing called deepfake. We are going
to hear about child pornography, something I cannot even talk
about, what is happening in the deepfake and AI world with
child porn. It is all deeply disturbing, and I look forward to
hearing everyone's testimony today and how do we move forward
from here and make sure that everyone who has been a victim has
their voices heard and that they get justice when this happens.
Thank you, and I yield back to my colleague from Virginia,
Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Acknowledging the importance of
this hearing during Women's History Month, I am grateful that
we are gathered here today to highlight a sensitive but very
deeply troubling subject. A 2023 study found that while 98
percent of all online deepfake videos were pornographic, women
were the subjects in 99 percent of them. Our hope is that
today's discussion will underscore the need for policy
solutions that end the production, proliferation, and
distribution of malicious deepfakes.
Earlier this year, artificial intelligence generated
pornographic images of American pop star Taylor Swift rapidly
spread on social media. Formerly known as Twitter, X, that
platform and that company, proved very slow to act, and the
images received, as a result, more than 47 million views in a
matter of hours before X finally got around to removing them.
Despite the images' removal, the explicit defects of the singer
remain elsewhere online, and no laws exist to stop other
malicious actors from reposting that material again. The fact
that Ms. Swift, a globally recognized icon who built a $1
billion empire, cannot remove all nonconsensual deepfakes of
herself, emphasizes that no one is safe.
Deplorably, children have also become victims of deepfake
pornography. Last December, the Stanford Internet Observatory
published an investigation that identified hundreds of images
of child sexual abuse material, also known as CSAM, in an open
data set that AI developers use to train popular AI text-to-
image generation models. While methods exist to minimize CSAM
in such data sets, it remains challenging to completely clean
or stop the distribution of open data sets as the data are
gathered by automated systems from a broad cross-section of the
web, and they lack a central authority or host. Therefore, tech
companies, leaders, victims, advertisers, and policymakers must
come together to build a solution and address the issue head
on.
Mrs. Dorata Mani, thank you for coming here today and
bravely sharing your family's story. You and your daughter,
Francesca, have proven to be fierce advocates against the
creation and proliferation of nonconsensual deepfake
pornography. You are providing a stalwart voice for countless
others victimized by AI-generated deepfakes. I know President
Biden has heard your heartfelt request for help because during
his State of the Union address just this last week, he
explicitly called upon Congress to better protect our children
online in the new age of AI.
I also want to thank my multiple Democratic colleagues who
requested to waive onto the Subcommittee today to speak out
against harmful deepfakes. One of those Members, Representative
Morelle, introduced the Preventing Deepfakes of Intimate Images
Act, which would prohibit the creation and dissemination of
nonconsensual defects of intimate images. As a cosponsor of
this bill, I see that legislation as a great first step to
preventing future wrongs that echo the fight of your family,
Mrs. Mani.
Recent technological advancements in artificial
intelligence have opened the door for bad actors with very
little technical knowledge to create deepfakes cheaply and
easily. Deepfake perpetrators can simply download apps that
undress a person or swap their face onto nude images. That is
why, if we want to keep up with the rapid proliferation of
deepfakes, we must support Federal research and development of
new tools for the detection and elimination of deepfake
content. In addition, digital media literacy programs, which
educate the public about deepfakes, have demonstrated
effectiveness in vesting individuals with skills to critically
evaluate content they consume online.
But we cannot have a fulsome discussion without
acknowledging that some of our colleagues, including Members of
this very Committee, have actively worked against rooting out
the creation and dissemination of deepfakes. This Congress, the
House Judiciary Committee Select Committee on Weaponization of
the Federal Government, has relentlessly targeted government
agencies, nonprofits, and academic researchers who are on the
front line of this very work. These Members have stifled
efforts of individuals and advocacy organizations actively
trying to combat deepfakes and disinformation. For example, the
Select Subcommittee accused the Federal Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, CISA, of ``colluding with Big
Tech to censor certain viewpoints.'' These members argued that
CISA's work to ensure election integrity, which, in part,
includes defending against deepfake threats, is censorship.
They have also attempted to undermine the National Science
Foundation's efforts to research manipulated and synthesized
media and develop new technologies to detect. Most recently, on
February 26, Chairman Jordan subpoenaed the NSF for documents
and information regarding its research projects to prevent and
detect deepfakes and other inauthentic information sources. He
issued this subpoena even though the directive originated from
a 2019 Republican championed law. Chairman Jordan has also
targeted many of the academic researchers across the country
who provide valuable research findings to the public and
policymakers, such as the Stanford Internet Observatory, which
led the investigation into CSAM's very questionable inclusion
in AI training data sets.
I am proud of the Biden-Harris Administration secured
voluntary commitments from seven major tech companies promising
to work together with us and with government to ensure AI
technologies are developed responsibly, but we know our work is
not done. I urge my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to
set aside partisan fishing expeditions and redirect our focus
toward crafting bipartisan solutions to stop the creation of
and dissemination of harmful deepfakes. I look forward to the
hearing today, and I yield back.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I am pleased now to introduce our
witnesses for today's hearing. Our first witness is Mrs. Dorata
Mani, a mother whose high school daughter was a victim of
deepfake technology. We appreciate you being here today, Ms.
Mani, to share your and your daughter's experience and message
with us. Our second witness is Mr. John Shehan, Senior Vice
President of the Exploited Children Division and International
Engagement at the National Center for Missing and Exploited
Children. Our third witness is Mr. Carl Szabo, Vice President
and General Counsel of Netchoice, and our fourth witness today
is Dr. Ari Ezra Waldman, professor of law at the University of
California's Irvine School of Law. We welcome to have you and
pleased to have you all here this afternoon.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 9(g), the witnesses will please
stand and raise your right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you God?
[A chorus of ayes.]
Ms. Mace. Let the record show the witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
We appreciate all of you being here today and look forward
to your testimony. Let me remind the witnesses that we have
read your written statements, and they will appear in full in
the hearing record. Please limit your oral arguments to 5
minutes. As a reminder, please press the button on the
microphone in front of you so that it is on, and Members up
here can hear you. When you begin to speak, the light in front
of you will turn green. After 4 minutes, the light will turn
yellow. When the red light comes on, your 5 minutes has
expired, and we are going to ask you to wrap up, and I will use
the gavel nicely.
So, now I would like to recognize Mrs. Mani to please begin
her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DORATA MANI

PARENT OF WESTFIELD (NJ) HIGH SCHOOL STUDENT

Ms. Mani. Thank you so much for having me here. On October
20, 2023, a deeply troubling incident occurred involving my
daughter and the Westfield High School administration and its
students. It was confirmed that my daughter was one of several
victims involved in the creation and distribution of AI
deepfake nudes by her classmates. This event left her feeling
helpless and powerless, intensified by the lack of
accountability for the boys involved and the absence of
protective laws, AI school policies, or even adherence to the
school's own code of conduct and cyber harassment policies.
Since that day, my daughter and I have been tirelessly
advocating for the establishment of AI laws, the implementation
of AI school policies, and the promotion of education regarding
AI.
Despite being told repeatedly that nothing could be done,
we find ourselves addressing this esteemed Committee today,
highlighting the urgency and significance of this issue. Our
advocacy has brought to light similar incidents from
individuals across the globe, including Texas, D.C.,
Washington, Wisconsin, Australia, London, Japan, Germany,
Greece, Spain, Paris, and more, indicating a widespread and
pressing concern. We have identified several loopholes in the
handling of AI-related incidents that demand attention from
government bodies, educational institutions, and the media.
However, our greatest disappointment lies in the school's
handling of the situation, which we believe is indicative of a
broader issue across all schools, given the ease and allure of
creating AI-generated content.
Here, I wish to outline the mishandling of the situation by
Westfield High School. One, the school inappropriately
announced the names of the female AI victims over the intercom,
compromising their privacy. The boys responsible for creating
the nude photos were discreetly removed from the classroom,
their identities protected. Only one boy was called over the
intercom. When my daughter sought the support of a counselor
during a meeting with the vice principal who was questioning
her, her request was denied. The administration claimed the AI
photographs were deleted without having seen them, offering no
proof of their deletion. My attempts to communicate with the
administration about the case have been constantly ignored.
A harassment, intimidation, and bullying report submitted
in November 2023 has yet to yield a conclusive outcome which we
should receive within 10 days of submission. The interviews,
carried out at the school with underage suspects in the
presence of police but without their parents, have made their
statements inadmissible in court. Despite our submission of
updated policies created by our lawyers at McCarter & English
to the Westfield Board of Education, the school's cyber
harassment policies and code of conduct remained outdated,
referencing Walkmans, pagers, and beepers, with no mention of
AI to this day. The school's communication focused on only one
boy involved, ignoring the others. The accountability imposed
for creating the AI deepfake nudes without girls' consent was a
mere 1-day suspension for only one boy. This incident and the
school's response underscores the urgent need for updated
policies and a more responsible approach to handling AI-
generated content and cyber harassment at schools.
In light of the recent incident at Beverly Hills Middle
School from this month, Superintendent Bregy not only released
a statement that the school's investigation is nearly completed
1 week after the incident, but also took crucial steps of
contacting Congress to emphasize the urgency of prioritizing
the safety of children in the United States, and today, I have
learned from The Guardian that he expelled five students.
This proactive stance demonstrates a commendable commitment
to facing uncomfortable truths head on, with a focus on
educating and advocating for essential changes in how such
incidents are handled. In contrast, my expectations for similar
leadership and responsiveness from the principal at Westfield
High School, Ms. Asfendis, have been met with disappointment.
Given that the principal, like myself, is both a mother and an
educator, I had hoped for a stronger stance in defending and
supporting the girls at Westfield High School. Instead, there
appears to be an effort to minimize the issue, hoping it will
simply pass and fade away. This approach is not only
disheartening, but also dangerous as it fosters an environment
where female students are left to feel victimized while male
students escape necessary accountability.
The discrepancy in handling such serious issues between
schools like Beverly Hills and Westfield High is alarming and
calls for immediate reevaluation and action to ensure all
students are protected and supported equally in United States'
schools.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Shehan for his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JOHN SHEHAN

SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, EXPLOITED CHILDREN DIVISION

& INTERNATIONAL ENGAGEMENT

NATIONAL CENTER FOR MISSING AND EXPLOITED CHILDREN

Mr. Shehan. Good afternoon, Chairwoman Mace, Ranking Member
Connolly, and the Members of the Subcommittee. My name is John
Shehan, and I am a Senior Vice President at the National Center
for Missing and Exploited Children, also known as NCMEC. NCMEC
is a private, nonprofit organization created in 1984. Our
mission is to help reunite families with missing children, to
reduce child sexual exploitation, and to prevent child
victimization. I am honored to be here today to share NCMEC's
perspective on the impact that generative artificial
intelligence, also referred to as GAI, is having on child
sexual exploitation.
Even though GAI technology has been widely available to the
public for just a short period of time, it is already
challenging how we detect, prevent, and remove child sexual
abuse material, also known as CSAM, from the internet. Today,
we are at a new juncture in the evolution of child sexual
exploitation with the emergence of GAI platforms. As you know,
NCMEC operates the CyberTipline to receive reports related to
suspected child sexual exploitation. The volume of CyberTipline
reports is immense, and it increases every year. In 2023, NCMEC
received more than 36 million reports related to child sexual
exploitation. Last year was also the first year that NCMEC
received reports, 4,700 in total, on content produced with GAI
technology. While 4,700 reports with GAI are dwarfed by the
total number of reports NCMEC received, we are deeply concerned
to see how offenders are already widely adopting GAI tools to
exploit children.
In the reports submitted to NCMEC, we have seen a range of
exploitative abuses on these platforms, including offenders
asking GAI platforms to pretend it is a child and to engage in
sexually explicit chat, asking for instructions on how to
groom, sexually abuse, torture, or even kill children. One user
was reported to the CyberTipline for asking on a GAI platform,
``How can I find a 5-year-old little girl for sex? Tell me step
by step.'' Individuals are also using GAI platforms to alter
known CSAM images to include more graphic content, including
bondage, or to create new CSAM with faces of other children.
They are also taking innocent photographs from children's
social media accounts, just like you heard about, and using
Nudify or unclothed apps to create nude images of children to
disseminate online.
If these real examples from CyberTipline reports are not
shocking enough, perhaps even more alarming is the use of GAI
technology to create sexually explicit images of a child that
are then used to financially sextort that child. It is also
worth noting that more than 70 percent of the reports submitted
to NCMEC's CyberTipline related to GAI CSAM were submitted by
other platforms and not the GAI platforms themselves. This
reflects a significant concern that GAI platforms, aside from
OpenAI, generally are not engaging in meaningful efforts to
detect, report, or prevent child sexual exploitation. NCMEC has
additional concerns about the impact of GAI technology in its
current unregulated state, including the increased volume of
GAI reports that will strain NCMEC, ICAC, and Federal law
enforcement resources; the legal uncertainty about how Federal
and state criminal and civil laws apply to GAI content,
including CSAM, sexually exploitative, and nude images of
children; as well as complicating child victim identification
efforts when a real child must be distinguished from GAI-
produced child content.
NCMEC has identified the following best practices and new
protections that would help ensure we do not lose ground on
child safety while the GAI industry continues to evolve. First,
facilitating training of GAI models on CSAM imagery to ensure
that the models do not generate CSAM and, at the same time,
ensuring that GAI models are not trained on open-source image
sets that often contain CSAM; considering liability for GAI
platforms that facilitate the creation of CSAM; ensuring
Federal and state criminal and civil laws apply to GAI CSAM and
to sexually exploitative and nude images of children created by
these tools; and finally, implementing prevention education in
the schools so children understand the dangers of using GAI
technology to create nude or sexually explicit images of their
classmates.
In conclusion, I would like to thank you again for this
opportunity to appear before the Subcommittee to discuss the
dangers around GAI technology in its current unregulated state
and what that presents to children online. NCMEC is eager to
continue working with this Subcommittee and other Members of
Congress to find solutions to these issues that I have shared
with you today, and I look forward to your questions.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I will now recognize Mr. Szabo to
please begin your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF CARL SZABO

VICE PRESIDENT AND GENERAL COUNSEL

NETCHOICE

Mr. Szabo. Thank you. Madam Chair, Ranking Member Connolly,
my name is Carl Szabo. I am Vice President and General Counsel
of Netchoice. I am also an adjunct professor at George Mason
Antonin Scalia Law School.
The stories that I have heard so far are horrible and
terrifying, and it enrages me as a father of two that a
principal is more willing to side with the perpetrators of a
bad action than the victim. I think that is little outside what
I am here to talk about, but fundamentally, we should support
principals who enforce rules, not principals who try to escape
responsibility.
Just kind of jumping in, I do want to kind of disagree a
little with my colleague over here. AI is heavily regulated
today. It is heavily regulated today. Every law that applies
offline applies online. So, when it comes to harassment, we
need to enforce harassment law. When it comes to fraud, we need
to enforce fraud law. Good example is Sam Bankman-Fried went to
prison not because of crypto, but because of fraud. So, the
notion that AI is some escape clause for criminals, I think, is
incorrect, and we need to do more law enforcement and more
prosecution of bad actors.
Simple example, and I kind of outline this in my testimony,
so, there was a famous situation this past couple of months
where President Biden up in New Hampshire allegedly sent out a
bunch of robocalls saying he was dropping out of the race. They
used AI to generate the robocalls. Well, turns out that
Pindrop, a company that detects AI-generated content, detected
it, identified it was created by ElevenLabs, contacted them.
Law enforcement then got the name of the perpetrator from
ElevenLabs and arrested him. And they arrested him, not under
any new law, but New Hampshire law, for example, makes it a
crime to engage in such fraud. The Telecommunications Privacy
Act, TCPA, makes it illegal. We have Federal laws with prison
sentences up to 20 years for such criminal activity. So, I do
not care if you use a robot, or you do it yourself, or you get
an impersonator from ``Saturday Night Live,'' fraud is fraud,
and we need to be willing to prosecute it.
But that is not saying that there are not gaps in the law.
I think you are correct. When it comes to things like child
sexual abuse material, there are existing gaps in law, and we
have been working at Netchoice with lawmakers across the
country to close those gaps. Under existing CSAM law, you
actually require an actual photo, a real photograph of child
sexual abuse material, to be prosecuted. So, bad actors are
taking photographs of minors, using AI to modify them into
sexually compromised positions, and then escaping the letter of
the law. Not the purpose of the law, but the letter of the law.
So, this is an example where legislation that is before
Congress, that Chairwoman Mace has introduced and many others,
can help fill those gaps and make sure that bad actors go to
prison.
Looking to the issue of nonconsensual deepfakes, this is
something we are also working with state lawmakers across the
country to make sure that we enact laws. And one of the things
that we did at Netchoice, we sat down, and we looked at First
Amendment law because the last thing we want to do is create a
law that does not hold up in court. We do not want a criminal
to get prosecuted and then have a get-out-of-jail free card
because we did not artfully address some of the constitutional
challenges. So, when we sat down and drafted, and it is
included in the back end of our testimony, some of our proposed
recommendations, we identified the constitutional issues and
then filled in those gaps.
Finally, when it comes to artificial intelligence,
deepfakes, anything like that, we need to make sure we get the
definitions correct. One of the challenges that we are seeing
across the country, many states have introduced legislation,
well intentioned, but, unfortunately, their definition of
``artificial intelligence'' is written so broadly, it would
apply to a calculator or a refrigerator. And so, we need to
make sure when we are drafting definitions and we are writing
legislation, that we need to hit the target directly.
Otherwise, we risk creating a law that is unconstitutional, and
an unconstitutional law will protect no Americans.
Just to close out. The last thing that I will chime in on,
and I am happy to answer your questions about what is going on
at the state level, challenges we can address, but legislation
must come from the legislative branch of government. One of the
things that truly scares me is when we see executive overreach
try to seize control of certain sectors of the government, and
the fundamental problem is, like what we have seen in the
latest executive order on AI, as well intentioned as it may or
may not be, it will violate the major questions doctrine.
So, once again, unconstitutional laws will protect no one.
Laws must be written by the legislature and enforced by the
executive branch. And to that end, I fully welcome the
opportunity to work with this legislature on creating laws that
protect everyone from AI deepfakes.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I will now recognize Dr. Waldman to
begin your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DR. ARI EZRA WALDMAN

PROFESSOR OF LAW

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA'S IRVINE SCHOOL OF LAW

Dr. Waldman. Thank you. Chairwoman Mace, Ranking Member
Connolly, and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to provide testimony about the dangers of and
possible responses to deepfakes here today. My name is Ari
Waldman, and I am a professor of law at the University of
California at Irvine, where I research, among other things, the
impact of new technologies on marginalized populations. Given
my commitment to these issues and my own personal experience
with image-based abuse, I also sit on the board of directors of
the Cyber Civil Rights Initiative, or CCRI, the leading
nonprofit organization dedicated to combating image-based
sexual abuse and other technology-facilitated harms. Although I
sit on the board of CCRI, I am here in my own capacity as an
academic and as a researcher.
As we have already heard, AI means, in this context, we
have a proliferation problem in which images that are fake
images and synthetic images and videos about anyone, whether it
is Taylor Swift or a young teenage girl, can be sent throughout
the internet within moments. Technology, of course, did not
create this problem, but it certainly made the problem bigger,
harder to identify and dismiss, and vastly more common. But
common does not mean that harm is evenly distributed.
Deepfakes cause unique harms that are disproportionately
experienced by women, particularly those who are
intersectionally marginalized, like Black women and trans
women. So much of the history of modern technology begins with
men wanting to objectify and sexualize women. It is no wonder
that recent advances in deep-learning technology is reflecting
our cultural and institutional biases against women. Even here,
the story Mrs. Mani tells us about how a school is
inappropriately ending up putting the female victim at risk
reminds me of how so many schools approach the harassment of
women, of trans women, of Black women and queer folk,
generally.
The people who create, solicit, and distribute deepfake
porn of women and girls have many motives, but what they all
have in common is a refusal to see their victims as full and
equal persons. Like other forms of sexual exploitation,
deepfake porn is used to punish, silence, and humiliate mostly
women, pushing them out of the public sphere and away from
positions of power and influence. Let us be clear: this is not
mere speech. This is not protected by the First Amendment. The
harm caused by artificial, nonconsensual pornography is
virtually indistinguishable from the harm caused by actual
nonconsensual pornography: extreme psychological distress that
can lead to self-harm and suicide; physical endangerment that
include in-person stalking and harassment; and financial,
professional, and reputational ruin.
There are new deepfake porn apps and web services that
launch every month, and platforms do not seem willing to do
anything about them. These services produce thousands of images
every week, and those images are shared on websites that Google
and other platforms list in their results and prominently do
so. And as we know, deepfakes go viral, even for someone as
famous as Taylor Swift. It is always the last bastion of those
who want a deregulatory agenda to say that we need to enforce
current laws and we do not need any new laws, but we already
know and have examples, and many examples, of current laws not
even working. Simply enforcing the laws that we have is
insufficient.
Although most of us around the world relate to Taylor
Swift's music, almost none of us have the same resources at our
disposal as she does. If digital forgeries of us get out there,
we are often powerless. That is not just because we cannot all
afford lawyers, nor is it just because we do not have lawmakers
or platforms listening to us. It is because, just like with
real nonconsensual pornography, it is extremely difficult to
mitigate the harm of deepfakes after the fact. This means we
need deterrence. We need to stop this, particularly
nonconsensual deepfake pornography, before it starts, and that
is where Congress can step in.
The First Amendment does not stand in the way of Congress
acting. There is longstanding precedent in First Amendment law
for regulating false harmful expression that is perceived by
others to be true. While false expression that is clearly not
harmful or likely to be mistaken for real depictions of
individuals, such as parody or satire, enjoy considerable First
Amendment protection, there is nothing about defamation and
fraud that has been historically considered protected by the
First Amendment. So, I am not sure what the deep, difficult
conversation is here about trying to pass a law that passes
First Amendment scrutiny because nothing that we are talking
about here is protected by the First Amendment. There are
criminal prohibitions against impersonation, against
counterfeiting and forgery, and these have never raised serious
constitutional concerns.
I would argue that the intentional distribution of sexually
explicit, photorealistic visual material that appears to depict
an actual, identifiable individual without that individual's
consent should be prohibited. Civil penalties are a step
forward toward deterrence but insufficient. Deepfakes offer a
liar's dividend, as the legal scholars Danielle Citron and
Bobby Chesney have argued. In a world where we cannot tell the
difference between true and false, those that are lying have a
leg up. Thank you.
Ms. Mace. Thank you all. I will now recognize myself for 5
minutes for questioning. And to piggyback on Dr. Waldman, yes,
that Taylor Swift video got 45 million views before it was ever
taken down, and there are people today who do not know that it
was a deepfake, probably believe that it was still real because
they do not know the difference and did not know it was taken
down because it was a deepfake. So, I appreciate everyone's
points today.
My first questions will go to Mrs. Mani, and first of all,
I just want to say as a mom of a 14-year-old girl, it is
horrifying to know what your daughter went through and the fact
that they released the names. I did not have that detail, but
it really pains me to hear that. I was raped at the age of 16
by a classmate of mine in high school. I dropped out of school
shortly thereafter, and I can only imagine as a mom what my mom
felt at the time. It is a deeply painful experience, and I am
really sorry that it happened to you and any woman or young
girl that has gone through this. I hate, you know, what they
have felt and the shame that they have gone through. And on
that point, when George Stephanopoulos rape shamed me on Sunday
on ``ABC News This Week,'' I want to make sure that no woman or
girl is ever treated that way, and I hope that we can put a
stop to that.
So, first of all, my first question to you, in your written
testimony about what was done to your daughter, you state this
event left her feeling helpless and powerless. As a mom, can
you talk to us a little bit about what this has done to your
family?
Ms. Mani. Yes. So, I probably will not share what you want
to hear, but the moment when Francesca was informed----
Ms. Mani. Mm-hmm.
Ms. Mani [continuing]. By her counselor and her vice
principal that she was one of the AI victims, she did feel
helpless and powerless.
Ms. Mace. Mm-hmm.
Ms. Mani. And then she went out from the office, and she
has noticed group of boys making fun of group of girls that
were very emotional in the hallway. In that second, she turned
from sad to mad, and now, because of you, all of you, we feel
very empowered because I think you guys are listening. And just
like you pointed out, you are a father. I think we are all
human beings, we all have children, and we all have brothers
and sisters that we want to protect, and we should sit down
together and figure out a way how to fix it.
And I am so sorry that Mr. Stephanopoulos shamed you. I
think that is the narrative that must change in media. Besides
upsetting, it is just irresponsible and dangerous. The
narrative needs to be changed.
Ms. Mace. Mm-hmm.
Ms. Mani. And instead of talking about girls and how they
feel as a victim, we should be talking about the boys and how
are they being empowered by the people in power, especially, in
my case, in education, by being left unaccountable, walking the
hallways with the girls. My daughter does not mind. I do.
Ms. Mace. Right, and I want to thank you for your and your
daughter's advocacy, too. Your voice is very important because
this is so early on in terms of the technology and what laws we
are looking at, at the Federal and the state level. It is very
important to hear voices of moms and dads and parents and the
kids who have been affected, quite frankly, because those
voices have to be a part of the conversation, and I hope that
your advocacy will help change the policies not just at her
school, but at every school. So, we really admire and
appreciate you being here today.
I have less than 2 minutes, and I did want to, while I have
you, Mr. Szabo, talk about legislatively, policy wise, because
I am very, very, very, very tuned in to, one, as a victim of
sexual trauma and assault and then seeing, you know, the things
that I have seen, especially over the last couple of months,
the advent of technology and then nonconsensual pornographic
images and videos, et cetera, and then digital forgeries. You
know, at the Federal and the state level, just at the state
level, how many states have updated their laws so far?
Mr. Szabo. So, right now, we have been working with states
across the country. Wisconsin is about to enact the two
recommended pieces.
Ms. Mani. Are they the first?
Mr. Szabo. I do not want to say they are the first----
Ms. Mace. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Szabo [continuing]. But they are definitely one of the
leaders on this. They are going to actually enact both the
recommended Stop Deepfake CSAM Act as well as the Stop
Nonconsensual Artificially Generated Images Act. California
right now, we are working with lawmakers out there to make sure
that their introduced legislation does not get thrown out by a
court when a bad actor gets arrested. And so, we are seeing
many states across the country start to adopt this. To your
home state of South Carolina, I would love to see----
Ms. Mace. That is what I was going to bring up--I have 40
seconds left--is talking about South Carolina's laws, and I am
going to look up impersonations and forgeries. I am not quite
as familiar with state law. Obviously, that is not my
jurisdiction. But when I looked at what was going on, when I
found out about these women in my district that had been
recorded without their knowledge or consent, I looked at state
law. State Law 16-17-470 is under peeping Tom voyeurism laws. A
$500 fine and up to 3 years in jail for the first offense is
offensive. It is not a felony until the second offense, but
clearly it is not enough, but there is not digital. There is
nothing that would include, I believe, deepfakes in there, so I
would love to talk to you about and actually even work with our
state legislature, who I know our state legislature is working
on revenge porn laws, but I also want to strengthen state law
in all ways with nonconsensual images and video. So, I would
love to talk to you afterwards, so thank you. I am going to
yield back to my colleague from Virginia, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Mr. Shehan, I just want you to
know, you could not pay me a million dollars a month to have
your job. I cannot imagine dealing every day with violence
against, abuse against children. It is just horrifying and very
hard to listen to or contemplate, and I salute you for doing
what you are doing and protecting children.
Dr. Waldman, well, it is almost St. Patrick's Day, a little
leprechaun on my shoulder. You will forgive this question, but
is deepfakes mentioned in the Constitution of the United
States?
Dr. Waldman. No.
Mr. Connolly. No. So, according to Samuel Alito logic, we
have no ability to regulate deepfakes because it is not
mentioned in the Constitution. Isn't that kind of what he did
in the Dobbs decision with respect to abortion?
Dr. Waldman. Yes. There is no history and tradition of
regulating deepfake technology under his theory of
interpretation.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. So much for originalism. Of
course, we saw a lot of originalism with respect to the
Fourteenth Amendment just recently. I think it is kind of
outside the window, Antonin Scalia Law School being named after
an originalist notwithstanding. Mr. Szabo, if I understood him
correctly, was suggesting we do not really need a lot of new
laws. There are some gaps, but how about enforcing what we got
both at the state level and the Federal level. What is your
sense of that? I am addressing you, Dr. Waldman.
Dr. Waldman. Oh, sorry.
Mr. Connolly. I mean, Congress is all about passing laws.
Do we need to pass more laws? I mean, are there, in fact, some
significant gaps that allow malign things to happen that we
could perhaps prevent.
Dr. Waldman. Especially in this situation. We have seen it
before with nonconsensual pornography. We needed new laws on
the books because existing defamation or existing tort law had
too many gaps, especially when victims originally allowed the
image to be taken or video to be taken in the context of a
consensual relationship but then distributed without their
consent. So, we needed new laws, and we have seen some
progress. My colleague at GW Law School, Mary Anne Franks, has
been a leader in working with legislatures to pass legislation
all across the country, so that is just one example. There are
so many gaps here as well.
Mr. Connolly. So, I invite you to provide us a list of
those gaps because we would be glad to work on filling those
legislative gaps.
I know my colleague and friend, Mr. Raskin, has to go to
another committee. I yield the balance of my time to Mr.
Raskin.
Mr. Raskin. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Connolly. I just
had one question for Mr. Waldman. Can you tell us what is the
experience of deepfake regulatory legislation in the states and
have they survived First Amendment attack, and what is the best
model for creating a statute to deal with the problem?
Dr. Waldman. So, we do not have a lot of examples of state
legislation focusing specifically on deepfakes, but we have
examples of state legislation focusing on nonconsensual
pornography that has gone to be challenged on First Amendment
grounds, and they have been upheld. Minnesota is a really good
example. The State Supreme Court handed down--and Illinois--
handed down excellent decisions saying that, just as I
discussed in my written testimony, there is no reason why this
kind of nonconsensual harmful activity has ever been protected
by the First Amendment. And Congressman Connolly, you are
talking about history and tradition. Here, we have an example.
There is no history and tradition of allowing this type of
content, this type of behavior to be protected by the First
Amendment.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you very much. I yield back, and thank
you, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Raskin. Mr. Szabo, you know, I
represent George Mason University, though I would never have
named law schools the way it got named. It is a public
university. But I invite you to do the same thing I have
invited Dr. Waldman to do, which is, where there are gaps, or,
for that matter, where there are enforcement issues, please
alert us. You may want to comment.
Mr. Szabo. Yes, thank you. So, first of all, with respect
to the gaps, I highly suggest we take a look at making sure
that our laws clearly address AI deepfake CSAM, one such
example. The other, when it comes to law enforcement. So, this
is something that--there is a group called Stop Child Predators
that put out a report recently. Ninety-nine percent of reports
of child sexual abuse material do not even get investigated.
Yes, I know. Only one percent of reports of child sexual abuse
material get investigated, and that is a lack of resource. So,
there is currently legislation, both on the House and Senate
side from both parties, called the Invest in Child Safety Act,
which would give law enforcement more tools to put bad actors
behind bars, and that is something I suggest taking a look at
as well.
Mr. Connolly. And I would just say in closing, when I was
Chairman of Fairfax County, we had a police unit that looked
at, you know, child predation and sex trafficking and crimes
against children, but that was 15 years ago, and what has
happened with technology has just exploded. And often, I think
it just goes beyond the resources of local law enforcement to
monitor, let alone entirely enforce, so I think that is
something we are going to look at in terms of how can we find
better ways of addressing the issue at that level. Thank you so
much.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I will now recognize Mr. Timmons for 5
minutes.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Szabo, you said
that we do not really need a lot of new laws, and, Dr. Waldman,
you have taken a pretty different stance on that. I mean, it
seems to me that there are, indeed, holes and there are gaps,
whether it is revenge porn, nonconsensual porn, child porn. I
mean, I think, Mr. Szabo, you would agree that we do need to
address that. I mean, there is just a lot of gray area
surrounding causes of action and ways to be made whole, whether
it is using civil law to extract financial benefits or criminal
law in certain circumstances. But you would agree that we do
need to address the holes as it relates to those areas.
Mr. Szabo. Hundred percent. I mean, you have laws like
FCRA, HIPAA, all these laws. Rohit Chopper is the director of
the CFPB. He and I probably disagree on not much. Even he
recognizes that you cannot hide behind a computer because
existing laws apply, but here we do have gaps that do need to
be filled.
Mr. Timmons. So, I guess to that, I mean, are you familiar
with the Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity that
Adobe has founded?
Mr. Szabo. Yes.
Mr. Timmons. OK. So, I mean, it seems that one of the big
problems is that anybody can use the internet and create
deepfakes of any kind, and there is no way of knowing who
created it, and that is a big challenge.
Mr. Szabo. Exactly. So, what we need to do is better
identify the perpetrators. I completely agree that it is a
challenge, but you can reverse engineer. You can look at IP
addresses. That is kind of what happened with the Biden
deepfake call. Once they----
Mr. Timmons. I wanted to go to that.
Mr. Szabo. Yes.
Mr. Timmons. So, they were able to charge them because it
was fraudulent in that he was not actually pulling out of the
race, and there are all kind of laws associated with that.
Would it be illegal if the same individual, instead of saying
that the President was pulling out of the race, did dozens of
videos of him falling upstairs or stammering or stuttering? I
mean, you know, those will have equally adverse impacts on a
campaign. What law would apply if somebody did a video of him
falling into Marine One or falling out of Marine one?
Mr. Szabo. Yes.
Mr. Timmons. I mean, is that illegal?
Mr. Szabo. It is a complex----
Mr. Timmons. The answer is no.
Mr. Szabo. Yes.
Mr. Timmons. I do not think it is.
Mr. Szabo. Well, ``it depends,'' is kind of the problem
because you have the public figure doctrine. You have satire.
There is a lot that goes into that. States have tried to look
at this by requiring campaign videos that use altered images to
have a disclosure, but the challenge there, again, is in the
definition. So, if a politician were standing in front of a
green screen, that would be defined as an altered image, and
all of a sudden you have to put at the bottom of your campaign
ad, there are fake images in the campaign ad.
Mr. Timmons. Again, I mean, there are so many different
bizarre media outlets. I mean, you could not put a video of a
fake video of the President falling, which, again, there are
many that exist that are not fake. But I mean, if you had a
fake one, you could not put it on television because it gets
vetted through legal. You could not theoretically run an ad on
a radio that is fabricated because the radio station has
liability if they are going to release an ad that is fake, I
mean. But, again, the internet is such a wide area of media
consumption, that none of these laws really have any
enforcement mechanism. I mean, how would you address a deepfake
that would be detrimental to someone's political campaign or
life, short of nonconsensual pornography, but still is equally
bad? We do not have laws for that.
Mr. Szabo. Well, so you could bring an action under
existing tort law for defamation of character,
misappropriation.
Mr. Timmons. Why is it defamation if you are falling over?
Mr. Szabo. Because if it is not a real image, it is a----
Mr. Timmons. What if I fell over in a different image?
Mr. Szabo. Well, so, I was going to say----
Mr. Timmons. Again, truth is the ultimate defense to
defamation, so.
Mr. Szabo. Yes. So, when it comes to nonconsensual
disclosures, for example, you have the Hulk Hogan v. Gawker
example that played out under existing privacy law, so there is
potential there. There are a lot of laws out there that can be
enforced today, and to the extent that we do find gaps, we need
to make sure that when we fill them, that we do so in a
constitutional way.
Mr. Timmons. I agree with you on that, and I think one
thing that we are not talking about is disparity of resources.
Dr. Waldman, you touched on this. Taylor Swift has unlimited
resources. She can sue whoever she wants. If a similar
situation to Ms. Mani happened, technically, under the VAWA
civil cause of action, you could probably allege that it was
nonconsensual pornography, I mean, but it would cost tens of
thousands of dollars, so, I mean, I like loser pays across the
board. But could we look into some sort of loser pays funding
mechanism to address civil causes of action for revenge porn,
nonconsensual porn, all of these things. Dr. Waldman, is that
something----
Dr. Waldman. Yes, absolutely. I believe Chairwoman Mace's
proposal includes a fee-shifting provision for civil damages
that would, you know, it is found to be indeed nonconsensual,
deepfake pornography, that the perpetrator would have to pay.
But still, even Taylor Swift still has the problem of those
images and videos are still out there, and even she cannot----
Mr. Timmons. Well, it also goes back to the provenance.
Like, how do you know who did it? Anyways, OK. I am over. Thank
you. I yield back.
Ms. Mace. Thank you, and I will recognize Ms. Pressley for
5 minutes.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you to our witnesses for being here
today, including Ms. Mani. As a survivor of intra-family
childhood sexual abuse myself, I must say, I really do look
forward to a day where families and children do not have to
weaponize and relive their trauma in order to compel action
from their government, but I am grateful for those who do it
time and time again.
Frederick Douglass once said it is easier to build strong
children than to repair broken men and women. That is why in
the 116th Congress, as a freshman Member and serving on the
Oversight Committee, I convened the first-ever hearing on
childhood trauma in the history of this Committee. Children
across the country and in my district, the Massachusetts 7th,
are facing layered crises, shouldering unprecedented emotional
burden from challenges in their homes, classrooms, and now,
more than ever, online. Our young girls--our young girls, and
we must see them as all of our children--our girls are targeted
and victimized the most.
Just last year, the CDC released a report that teenage
girls are experiencing record-high levels of violence, sadness,
and suicide ideation. The trauma backpacks that they carry
across the thresholds into our schools every day only grow
heavier. I ask unanimous consent to enter this youth risk
behavior survey into the record.
Ms. Mace. Without objection.
Ms. Pressley. You know, as a Black woman who was once a
Black young girl, I know intimately what it is for your body to
be criminalized, your hair to be criminalized, for your body to
be banned, objectified, and, as a survivor, violated. And as
this report makes plain and this hearing has confirmed, our
girls are being traumatized. I worry for my 15-year-old
daughter, who will think that it is normal, a conflated part of
her identity as a girl or a woman in this country, to
experience these indignities and these violations. Professor
Waldman, in what ways does nonconsensual, deepfake pornography
contribute to the growing crises of childhood trauma?
Dr. Waldman. I need more than 2 1/2 minutes to describe all
those ways, but very briefly, the nonconsensual, deepfake
pornography does more than just nonconsensual pornography in
that not only does it objectify and make someone at risk of,
you know, someone who is always looking over their shoulder,
every image, every social encounter that they engage in, which
deters them from engaging with other people, which is necessary
at any age of life, but also, it allows for this to happen even
if you do not have any images out there, right, because these
images can be created even with a simple instruction to an AI
generator. Essentially, what it does is it creates perpetual
trauma and perpetual risk of trauma.
Ms. Pressley. That is right. Thank you. And further, a
traumatized child certainly has a decreased readiness to learn.
Advances in AI have made it easier for people to create sexual
content that intimidates, degrades, dehumanizes, and
traumatizes victims, and this technology is becoming more
present in our K through 12 schools. Ms. Mani, can you describe
what the psychological damage is for teenagers who are victims
of this type of harassment? And once again, thank you for the
courage you and your daughter continue to display in the face
of these reprehensible acts.
Ms. Mani. [Off mic.]
Ms. Mace. Turn your microphone on or speak into it.
Ms. Mani. So, I am not trained to really talk about the
repercussions of those images. All I can tell you is that we
are not the majority. We took a stand and my daughter took back
her dignity, but not many girls can be in the same position
because of multiple of layers and factors. Most importantly, it
is a shame that in 2024, we are still talking about consent,
consent in regards to our body. Now that should be taught as a
sentence, and our girls that are not empowered but rather
falling through the cracks because of the educational system.
Laws, they have to be put in place? Hundred percent. School
policies? Hundred percent. And then we all should sit down and
figure out ways of how to make it better without pointing
fingers as well but, rather, because it is ethical and the
right thing to do.
Ms. Pressley. Absolutely. I think we should start with
trauma-informed schools. Thank you.
Ms. Mani. Hundred percent.
Ms. Mace. I will now recognize Mr. Langworthy for 5
minutes.
Mr. Langworthy. Thank you, Chairwoman Mace. It seems now
every single week that goes by, we see another story about a
bad actor using AI unethically. And while I strongly support
innovation and will always work to make sure that this country
does not lose its edge to China in the AI race, I think that we
all must hold accountable unethical creators, criminal actors,
and especially those who are creating child pornography and
child sexual abuse material.
Emerging technology should always be used in ethical ways,
and tech companies, alongside Congress, need to ensure that
this happens. That is why I am very proud to be working on
legislation with attorney generals [sic] from all 50 states and
four territories that would create a commission examining
generative AI safeguards, assess current statutes, and
recommend legislative revisions to enhance law enforcement's
ability to prosecute AI-related child exploitation crimes.
And I would like to enter into the record a letter signed
by 54 attorneys general calling for this commission-based
approach.
Ms. Mace. Without objection.
Mr. Langworthy. I want to start today by talking about law
enforcement's approach to generative AI. Mr. Shehan, how is law
enforcement reacting to the uptick in AI-generated child sexual
abuse material, CSAM? Has that approach been reactive as in
waiting for images to circulate, or are there ways law
enforcement can be more proactive?
Mr. Shehan. Excellent question. In a lot of the scenarios,
these are reactive because I outlined earlier that many of the
generative AI technology companies, they are not taking
proactive measures to identify and stop the creation of that
material on the onset. It is often after the content has
already made its way into the wild that you have social media
companies and the such that are finding these types of material
and reporting it into our CyberTipline, and we, in turn,
provide that information to the Internet Crimes Against
Children Task Force members who are actively investigating
these cases.
One quick example, in the fourth quarter of last year, we
had a report that came through--it was made by Facebook--
regarding an adult male who was talking through Messenger to a
minor using Stable Diffusion to create child sexual abuse
content. Sent it to the minor. It was detected and reported.
The Wisconsin ICAC investigated that case, found out not only
was he creating content, possessed child sexual abuse material,
and through the forensic interviews, also realized he was
abusing his 5-year-old son. State and local law enforcement are
having to deal with these issues because the technology
companies are not taking the steps on the front end to build
these tools with Safety By Design. We are getting this content
out into the wild far too early, and something has to be done
about this.
Mr. Langworthy. It is chilling. Thank you. I would like to
point out that the sheer volume of cyber tips has oftentimes
prevented law enforcement from pursuing proactive investigation
efforts that would efficiently target the most egregious
offenders. In only a 3-month period from November 1, 2022 to
February 1, 2023, there were over 99,000 IP addresses
throughout the United States that distributed known CSAM, and
only 782 were investigated. Currently, law enforcement, through
no fault of their own, they just do not have the ability to
investigate and prosecute the overwhelming number of these
cases.
Mr. Szabo, there have been several bills introduced this
Congress to address the current legal framework to protect
those exploited by generative AI, and even more that look to
combat deepfakes all at once. You know, while many of them are
well intentioned, my concern is that the Department of Justice
has not had much success in prosecuting a number of these cases
because of the fine line that needs to be walked with the First
Amendment rights. So, I wanted to ask you, what are the biggest
gaps in the current legal framework that need to be filled?
Mr. Szabo. So, there is a case called Ashcroft v. Freedom
of Speech Coalition, and basically what it got into is an
overly broad law, well intentioned, to prohibit these types of
activities, but it applied to non-actual victims of fake
images, and the U.S. Supreme Court shot that down. They said it
is a violation of the First Amendment. So, one of the gaps is
the type of legislation that we have been talking about here,
whether it is the Chairwoman's legislation as well as some of
the other bills that have been proposed from all sides of the
aisle, to kind of fill that gap and make crystal clear that AI-
created content, if it has the image of an actual or
identifiable child, is CSAM material, as opposed to the way the
laws are currently written, which requires an actual photo. So,
we are seeing time and time again that bad actors are escaping
justice. At the same time, the Invest in Child Safety Act, I
think, is a really important one to give law enforcement the
tools it needs.
One other thing to address is groups like NCMEC are taking
on tons of information but not necessarily having enough time
to process it, and they have a mandatory deletion time for
content. So, giving them a bit more time to process and
prosecute content that they receive and tips that they receive,
I think would be helpful as well.
Mr. Langworthy. Thank you very much, and I am out of time.
Thank you, Chairwoman, for having this hearing, and I yield
back.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I will now recognize Mr. Garcia for 5
minutes.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and thank you
for allowing me to waive on to the Committee today. I want to
thank all of our witnesses, particularly to Ms. Mani. My heart
goes out to you and everything that obviously you have
experienced. I also want to just note a couple other cases I
think are important.
A few weeks ago, fake images were circling online that put
real students' faces on artificially generated nude bodies from
Beverly Vista Middle School in Beverly Hills. We are talking
about middle school students. We know that that is completely
predatory and unacceptable. I know a lot of examples have been
discussed today. Also, just weeks ago, AI-generated
pornographic deepfake images of Taylor Swift were viewed more
than 45 million times.
Now, media investigations showed how easy it was to get AI
software guardrails to post these images and how platforms
struggled to prevent people from sharing them.
Ms. Mace. Will the gentleman yield for 1 second? We need to
waive you on. I ask unanimous consent to have Representative
Garcia from California on the Subcommittee for today's hearing,
and without objection so ordered.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. Now, I would like to ask unanimous
consent to introduce this article entitled, ``The Taylor Swift
Deepfake Debacle Was Preventable,'' and these are all really
serious issues.
Now, fortunately, someone like Taylor Swift had millions of
fans that came out to defend her, to protect her online. They
flooded social media with junk posts to bury abusive content.
The phrase, ``Protect Taylor Swift,'' was on 36,000 posts that
were shared. But we know that Taylor Swift fans and Swifties
cannot protect everyone and certainly not people that do not
have that platform, and so Congress has a responsibility to
act.
Now, deepfake pornography accounts for 98 percent of
deepfake videos online, and 99 percent of all deepfake porn
features women, while only 1 percent feature men. A 2019 study
found that 96 percent of all deepfake videos were nonconsensual
pornography, and it does not matter, of course, whether you are
a billionaire, one of the most powerful women on earth, whether
you are Taylor Swift, or a middle school student, deepfake
pornography and the manipulation of images is deeply troubling
and predatory, particularly to women across this country and
girls.
Now, we know that deepfake images can also be used to
intimidate, harass, and victimize people, and oftentimes, if
you are targeted, there is nowhere to turn, and, Ms. Mani, I
know in your situation you received little to no support. And I
just wanted to ask you, did you feel you got any support from
the actual school itself?
Ms. Mani. I received zero support, and it is disappointing
that I have to sit down in here, and, you know, fighting for
the girls of Westfield and other girls of United States because
my school did not have the balls to do so. Also, in contrast,
as you mentioned, the Beverly Hills incident, that principal or
superintendent, you know, withdrew the boys from the school,
completed HIB investigation within 10 days. He did the right
thing. Was it an easy choice? No, but it was the right thing,
and I think our girls should not be solo gladiators fighting
for their rights. It is shameful that in 2024, we need to fight
still for our rights.
Mr. Garcia. That is exactly right, and I want to note that
the Beverly Hills middle school case, I mean, students were
actually expelled in that that case.
Ms. Mani. Correct.
Mr. Garcia. The principal acted quickly.
Ms. Mani. That is right.
Mr. Garcia. And it is important to note, I mean, all young
girls deserve equal protection. That also happens to be a
school that is very well resourced with parents that are
constantly advocating. It is in Beverly Hills, and so it should
not matter where the school is or the resources parents may
have, but every girl deserves protection at every single school
or any student, period.
Also, just, Professor Waldman, we know, also, just briefly,
with the remainder of my time, we know that Russia and China
and other hostile actors are targeting our elections. We have
seen deepfakes already used to do that, whether it is targeting
President Biden or other elections that are happening as well.
Can you explain how what is happening right now is undermining
our election security and as well as our national security?
Dr. Waldman. Sure. So, I think it can boil down to what
deepfakes do is, as I said during my testimony, they create a
liar's dividend, which means that when anything could be false,
then everything is presumed to be false. Therefore, when we
know that AI can be used by Russia and hostile countries to
undermine our democracy, then we start disbelieving everything,
right? We do not start just disbelieving the things that are
actually false. We start then allowing people to say, well, how
do I know that it is true? It could be a deepfake. And when we
disagree on even just the basic things, democracy ceases to
work.
Mr. Garcia. And I appreciate that. I think obviously,
deepfakes are oftentimes being used for entertainment purposes.
I mean, look, I have seen deepfakes on funny videos, on things
that could be entertaining, but it is also deeply troubling
when it affects our elections and certainly when it is
affecting people and young people in our country.
Before I close, I just want to introduce a written
statement into the record from Dr. Mary Anne Franks. Dr. Franks
is the President and Legislative Tech Policy Director of the
Cyber Civil Rights Institute and Eugene L. and Barbara A.
Bernard Professor of Intellectual Property, Technology, and
Civil Rights at George Washington Law. So, I would like to
just----
Ms. Mace. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, and thank you all to our witnesses.
Ms. Mace. Right. I will now recognize Mrs. Luna for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Luna. Chairwoman, if I could submit this poster into
the record.
Ms. Mace. Without objection, so ordered.
Mrs. Luna. So, there has been a lot of talk today on CSAM,
but for those who might be tuning in that might not know what
that is, it is the creation of child sexual abuse materials
from lifelike images of children. This situation has not only
perpetuated the occurrence of child sexual exploitation in this
country, but has also created a new legal question about how to
effectively crack down on the practice to protect our children.
And I bring this up because this was actually something that
the FBI, in talking to them about cybercrimes, asked us to
specifically look at because they are having issues currently
prosecuting these really, really gross, sick individuals
because, technically, a child is not hurt in the process
because it is a generated image.
According to recent reports, thousands of AI-generated
child sex images have been found on forums across the dark web.
Some of these forums have even been found to have instructions
that detail how other pedophiles can create their own AI-
generated sex images, and I just want to point to the poster
behind me.
[Chart]
Mrs. Luna. If you see ``after COVID in 2020,'' and then you
see this spike, this also, in my opinion, correlates with the
rise and the, I think, evolution of AI getting better and
better and better at generating these graphics and images, and
you can see it is clearly not good for our kids. This has
increased the speed and scale at which pedophiles create new
CSAM. One report explained that in the creation of new images,
pedophiles superimpose the face of children onto adult bodies
using deepfakes and rapidly generate many images through one
single command.
The importance of raising awareness of this problem speaks
for itself. In one study of an online forum with over 3,000
members, over 80 percent of respondents stated that they would
use or intended to use AI to create child sexual abuse images.
This is concerning for child safety and makes law enforcement
efforts to find victims and combat real world abuse much, much
more important.
My first question is for Mr. John Shehan. You previously
stated in a report of CSAM, online platforms grew from 32
million in 2022 to 36 million in 2023. What factors do you
think have contributed to this trend?
Mr. Shehan. That is an excellent question, and much of it
is around just the global scale and ability to create and
disseminate child sexual abuse material. This is truly a global
issue. The 36 million reports last year, more than 90 percent
were outside the United States, individuals using U.S. servers,
but we are also seeing a massive increase in the number of
reports that we are receiving regarding the enticement of
children for sexual acts.
In your chart there, you know, in 2021, we had about 80,000
reports regarding the online enticement of children. Last year,
it jumped up to 180,000 reports. Not even through the first
quarter of this year, we are already over 100,000 reports
regarding the enticement of children. Many of these cases are
involving generative AI. Others are financial sextortion. So,
there are individuals in countries like Nigeria and the Ivory
Coast, and it is all about the money. They are blackmailing
young boys to create a sexually explicit image, just that one
image, and then they are after the money----
Mrs. Luna. The deepfakes.
Mr. Shehan [continuing]. Significant amounts of money.
Mrs. Luna. Just out of curiosity, because we have
legislation. I know that I am cosponsoring Representative
Mace's legislation in regard to deepfakes, but in regard to the
No. 1 platform that you are finding that this is being
circulated on, and I know that this has been a question of how
do these online platforms moderate this content, what is the
No. 1 platform that you are finding that is distributing this?
Mr. Shehan. Well, so GAI and deepfakes, it is a difficult
question because some of the companies that are reporting the
most are doing the most. I mentioned earlier OpenAI. They are
setting the bar for what every single other generative AI
company should be doing in this space. I also gave an example
just a minute ago about Stable Diffusion, which is owned by
Stability AI. They are not even registered to report to the
CyberTipline. So, we have a huge gap in some of these providers
who are enabling individuals to create child sexual abuse
content, and they are not even set up to report. So, it is
difficult to give a top provider when there are so many that
are not even doing a bare minimum.
Mrs. Luna. So, what would you say the bare minimums are?
Mr. Shehan. Well, certainly taking proactive steps that, if
someone is trying to use these tools to create child sexual
abuse material or modify it or text prompts to create, they
should not be allowing that to happen. We started off this
session, Ranking Member Connolly had mentioned the Stanford
Internet Observatory research that was done that discovered
that there was child sexual abuse material in the training set
of these data that was given to the OpenAI models to train on.
How did that even happen?
Mrs. Luna. Yes.
Mr. Shehan. How is their child sexual abuse material in the
content that they are training on? So, there are so many things
that we work backward on to rectify the situation that we are
in right now.
Mrs. Luna. OK. Well, I know parents might be tuning in, so
I just ask you, and I am sure you would agree, but maybe not
post pictures of your children on the web because right now, it
is kind of the Wild West out there, and they could be
exploited.
Mr. Shehan. There certainly are situations where even the
benign photos, the clothed photos, as you heard earlier, are
being used, run through these tools, and turned into nudity and
pornographic content. So, it is a troubling time to be posting
content online with some of these tools that are not built
Safety By Design.
Mrs. Luna. Thank you for your time. Chairwoman, I yield my
time.
Ms. Mace. OK. We will now, finally, Mr. Morelle, recognize
you, and thank you for being here this afternoon. Thank you for
waiting so patiently.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Madam Chair, and let me start by
thanking you for holding this incredibly important hearing. And
thank Ranking Member Connolly and both of you for allowing me
to participate in this conversation, as well as thanking our
witnesses for sharing their perspectives on this fast-growing
and very, very dangerous issue, an issue that has been noted
overwhelmingly, disproportionately affects women.
And I also want to acknowledge some familiar faces on the
witness panel. I, first of all, want to thank Dorata Mani, a
mother, powerful advocate and partner in the war to help
prevent innocent people from being harmed by nonconsensual
deepfake images. I have had the pleasure of meeting both Dorata
and her 14-year-old daughter, Francesca, several times,
including here in Washington, where they both courageously
participated in a conversation with myself and Congressman Tom
Kean on this topic.
I also want to thank the Cyber Civil Rights Initiative,
represented here by Dr. Waldman, for their assistance in the
drafting of my legislation, the Preventing Deepfakes of
Intimate Images Act, which was originally introduced in 2022,
long before anyone heard of what happened to Taylor Swift, and
we reintroduced the bill in May 2023. On this Subcommittee
alone, Members Connolly, Lynch, Langworthy, and Moskowitz are
cosponsors.
And as I listen and learn from our witnesses panel this
afternoon, the need has been clearly demonstrated for a
comprehensive, and what I hope will be a bipartisan, solution
to address the unique pain caused by the distribution of
nonconsensual, intimate deepfake images, and as has been said,
and I think bears repeating, made so much easier today by
advances in both generative AI as well as hardware and the
capability of even laptops to be able to do this. You know,
years ago, you would need to have some sophistication.
Nowadays, frankly, I think teenagers will be able to do it with
very little training and very little time and energy.
I agree with much of what has been said by my colleagues.
Over 50 Members have already supported my legislation, which
will make sharing these images - it is comprehensive in the
sense that it creates sharing of the images a criminal offense
and also creates a private right of action for victims to seek
relief. And I hope others, not only on the Subcommittee, but
other Members will consider joining as well as we look to
perhaps work on all these different proposals and blend them
together.
Having said that, in just a couple of minutes, I want to
start with a question for you, Mrs. Mani, and thank you, again,
for sharing your story and for your thoughtful notes and
commentary on a comprehensive solution. And throughout your
testimony and other comments you have made publicly, you called
attention to the work that needs to be done at the local and
state level, within our education system particularly, and also
focusing on artificial intelligence companies and what they
need to do and their responsibilities. So, based on your
experience discussing your story and what you have learned, how
do you think Congress can help ensure that these entities are
better prepared to combat the issue of nonconsensual deepfake
pornography?
Ms. Mani. I actually think we should establish a roundtable
without pointing fingers and ask them for solutions. They are
the experts. They will teach us more than we can ever know. So,
that is one. No. 2, create a coalition of companies, platforms
that host the illegal content, like Google, Amazon, and few
others, as well as the financial platforms that facilitate
spread of that content, like Amex, Google, Visa, PayPal, et
cetera, et cetera, to come to the table because it is the right
thing to do.
You know, I have watched, just like every one of us
watched, the Senate hearing, and every single platform said the
same thing that you said today. We are fathers and we are
mothers, and I think that is what we need to do. We need to sit
down and figure out ways how to fix it without laws and
legislations. Put laws and legislations in place, and then put
accountability on the perpetrators or the bad actors.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you. If I could ask you, Dr. Waldman, in
the few seconds I have left, could you talk about the
importance of a multipronged approach, civil and criminal, in
whatever it is we ultimately decide to do here?
Dr. Waldman. Sure. I think a civil remedy approach is a
step forward but insufficient for a couple of reasons. We
cannot be sure that a simple threat of civil damages would be
enough because so many of the perpetrators of this are, you
know, the dude in the basement who is probably judgment proof,
and so you will not be made whole by a civil remedy. Relying on
a civil remedy alone puts the burden entirely on the victim,
right, and civil litigation is really expensive, so when you
are not Taylor Swift, as we said before, it is really hard to
even start something like that. And then in certain situations,
we have a history of under criminalizing bad things that happen
to women, and intersectionally marginalized women, in
particular.
So, while I think we need to be concerned about people in
power misusing their power in certain situations, we want to
make sure we criminalize this kind of behavior in other
instances for important reasons, because it is so bad, because
we need that deterrent effect. And I fear that without this
comprehensive approach, including government organizations like
CISA getting involved in helping platforms do what they should
be doing on this, then we are going to leave victims without
any recourse.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Madam Chair, for your indulgence,
and thanks for allowing me the opportunity to participate. I
yield back.
Ms. Mace. Of course. Thank you. In closing, I want to thank
our panelists once again for their testimony today, and I want
to encourage you all, please stay in touch with this Committee,
but with my office. I am deeply passionate about this issue. I
come from a background in technology. When I got my first job,
I was a programmer, and I have since been fighting for things,
especially for women and kids, and this is a very important
issue. I have seen this kind of thing have devastating
consequences, even deadly consequences, when we are talking
about nonconsensual pornography.
I want to piggyback on what Dr. Walden just talked about,
civil damages not being enough. You are right. Any victim who
is a victim of a nonconsensual image or video, real or
deepfake, should know, should be able to take possession of
that and know that it is never going to be seen anywhere ever
again for the rest of their life, if that is what they want.
But that is not really a thing today, I mean, because these
things can be found online and everywhere. Once that is out, it
is forever. And these victims should be allowed to get their
content back, real or fake, if their image and their likeness
is part of it, and know that it has been destroyed forever,
from every device, any cloud, anywhere online.
And we are not there yet, and it is deeply troubling. So,
civil damages are not enough, and in some cases, I mean, there
is not even criminal action here. I mean, I look at the
Violence Against Women Act, and it is just a civil right of
action, not even criminal. I think if you are doing voyeurism
at the Federal level, you got to be, like, over international
water for it to be against Federal law under Title 18. Like, it
is insane to me. And so, I am deeply passionate about trying to
correct some of this, correct course, find the gaps, like, as
you said, Mr. Szabo, on definitions. While we were sitting here
today, I went into the South Carolina's Code of Laws, and I
just looked up the word ``porn.'' It does not exist in South
Carolina's Code of Law. So, when we are talking about
definitions, I agree with you, there is room for improvement,
there are gaps here, and I really want to figure out how we
move forward in a bipartisan manner at the Federal level, but
also with states.
Especially in my home state of South Carolina, there is a
lot of work to do. Five hundred fine for voyeurism, the first
time is a misdemeanor is wrong, and it is offensive, and it
should be much more expensive. We want to make sure that a man
who does that to over a dozen women in South Carolina does not
ever do it again, and a $500 fine and 3 years in jail just does
not cut it. And the law is not clear on whether or not, if it
is the first offense or if, let us say, for example, an example
that I shared, if it is over a dozen women, images and videos
this individual took, if it would be a felony because it is
multiple victims. The law is not clear. So, there certainly is,
you know, definitely room for improvement in our state as well.
And I looked up impersonations, forgery. Forgery in South
Carolina law is only related to financial transactions, mostly.
So, there is just so much room to improve here, both at the
Federal and the state level. I want you all to know that my
office is very much keen on adding to our portfolio of
legislation, constitutionally, as it makes sense, not overdoing
it, but just the right amount so that victims are no longer
victimized, or when they are, that it is quickly corrected.
So, with that and without objection, all Members will have
5 legislative days within which to submit materials and to
submit additional written questions for the witnesses, which
will be forwarded to the witnesses for their response.
Ms. Mace. So, if there is no further business, without
objection, the Subcommittee stands adjourned, and thank you.
[Whereupon, at 3:53 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
