- OVERSIGHT OF THE BIDEN ADMINISTRATION'S PAUSE ON LIQUIFIED NATURAL GAS EXPORTS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE BIDEN
ADMINISTRATION'S PAUSE ON
LIQUIFIED NATURAL GAS EXPORTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC GROWTH, ENERGY POLICY, AND REGULATORY AFFAIRS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

APRIL 18, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-103
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-544PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Michael Cloud, Texas                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Ro Khanna, California
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Katie Porter, California
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Cori Bush, Missouri
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Shontel Brown, Ohio
Byron Donalds, Florida               Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Robert Garcia, California
William Timmons, South Carolina      Maxwell Frost, Florida
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Greg Casar, Texas
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Dan Goldman, New York
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
Nick Langworthy, New York            Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Eric Burlison, Missouri
Mike Waltz, Florida

------

Mark Marin, Staff Director
Jessica Donlon, Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel
Kim Waskowsky, Professional Staff Member
David Ehmen, Counsel
Daniel Flores, Senior Counsel
Mallory Cogar, Deputy Director of Operations and Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5074

Julie Tagen, Minority Staff Director
Contact Number: 202-225-5051
------

Subcommittee On Economic Growth, Energy Policy, And Regulatory Affairs

Pat Fallon, Texas, Chairman
Byron Donalds, Florida               Cori Bush, Missouri, Ranking
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania                Minority Member
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Shontel Brown, Ohio
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida               Columbia
Nick Langworthy, New York            Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Mike Waltz, Florida                  Ro Khanna, California
Vacancy

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on April 18, 2024...................................     1

Witnesses

----------

Brad Crabtree, Assistant Secretary, Office of Fossil Energy and
Carbon Management, U.S. Department of Energy
Oral Statement...................................................     5

Opening statements and the prepared statements for the witnesses
are available in the U.S. House of Representatives Repository
at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

* Letter, from European Parliamentarian, to President Biden,
April 16, 2024, re: LNG Export Pause; submitted by Rep. Fallon.

* Letter, from House Democrats, to President Biden, February 1,
2024, re: LNG; submitted by Rep. Fallon.

* Article, Global Commodity, ``US LNG 'pause' to have no impact
on EU''; submitted by Rep. Norton.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Crabtree; submitted by Rep.
Fallon.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Crabtree; submitted by Rep.
Fry.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Crabtree; submitted by Rep.
Langworthy.

The documents listed above are available at: docs.house.gov.

OVERSIGHT OF THE BIDEN
ADMINISTRATION'S PAUSE ON
LIQUIFIED NATURAL GAS EXPORTS

----------

Thursday, April 18, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Oversight and Accountability

Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Energy
Policy, and Regulatory Affairs

Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:31 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Pat Fallon
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Fallon, Waltz, Brown, Norton,
Krishnamoorthi, and Khanna.
Also present: Representatives Higgins and Pfluger.
Mr. Fallon. This hearing on the Subcommittee of Economic
Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs will come to
order.
I want to welcome everyone and our witness, Mr. Crabtree.
And without objection, the Chair may declare a recess at
any time.
I recognize myself for the purposes of an opening
statement.
We are here today to examine the Biden Administration's
announcement of a pause on LNG, liquefied natural gas, exports
to non-free trade agreement countries, which appears to be
nothing more than electioneering and a bending of the knee to
the leftist environmental activists. I will admit I could not
believe it happened when it did, and if it was a pause of a
week or two, maybe that could be something that would be
digestible. The fact that it has gone on now for months is
something that is very perplexing, and this is the reason for
the hearing.
In doing so, however, the Administration is undermining our
country's national security and energy independence. The
Administration, along with leftist activist organizations, have
made it abundantly clear that they wish to end all fossil fuel
use and reach Net Zero emissions by 2050 at any cost. This
effort would be laughable, except that it is eviscerating our
economy and hurting hardworking Americans across the country.
In fact, the left's policies have consistently ignored the
energy benefits, jobs, revenues, investments, and educational
opportunities that come with LNG facilities across the United
States.
In 2019, America officially became a net exporter of energy
and now leads the world in LNG exports. I found it interesting
that in my home state of Texas, we actually produce more
natural gas than the entire country of China. We take great
pride, and we should take great pride, in the fact that we are
an exporter and that we have states like Texas that can
outperform and outproduce large nation-states like China.
However, this Administration's pause has caused a great alarm
and uncertainty, particularly with our European allies.
The United States' LNG producers and exporters are
rightfully alarmed by the pause. They need predictability in
order to move forward into the future. In fact, 16 states'
attorney generals [sic] have now sued the Department of Energy,
arguing that the DOE did not have clear congressional
authorization to issue a pause and violated major questions of
doctrine when they did. State-level representatives in Texas
have gone as far as to create a House Select Committee on
Protecting Texas LNG Exports to mitigate the negative
consequences of the pause on the LNG industry and the state
energy sector as well. It is going to affect the Texas economy
as well as the United States economy, and I commend them for
these efforts.
One key issue with this LNG pause is understanding the
Federal Government's legal authority to make the decision. It
is unclear whether the pause is even necessary to update the
public interest analysis the Department seeks to update. When
acting on an LNG export permit application to a non-free trade
agreement country, the Department conducts a public interest
analysis that takes a number of criteria into account. Many,
including several of us in Congress, question whether the
Department and the Biden Administration should have applied
those same criteria to their decision to pause LNG exports. Had
they applied those criteria, it seems the Administration would
have easily decided against an LNG export pause.
You have to ask yourself, what was the domestic need for
the pause. What would be the effect on job creation? What were
the international considerations, and what would be the pause's
effect on the environment, which it is purportedly intended to
benefit? If the Biden Administration was truly considering
environmental impacts of LNG exports, it would have dismissed
the role LNG plays in the world's energy mix.
LNG produces 40 percent less carbon dioxide than coal and
30 percent less than oil, which solidifies LNG as the cleanest
fossil fuel in the mix. The Biden Administration and the
Department have defended the pause by arguing that our
operational capacity for LNG exports remains at high levels.
True, but for how long because we are talking about moving
forward and what is going to happen in the mid and near future.
Americans do not need to read between the lines to understand
that this pause is a political decision in an election year to
shore up an election base.
Our witness, Brad Crabtree from the Department of Energy,
leads the Department's Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon
Management. His office has been tasked to assist in the review
and update to the public interest the analysis for LNG exports.
I want to thank Mr. Crabtree for appearing here today and for
your willingness to testify on this important issue.
One thing to also consider, when you have a war between
Ukraine and Russia, this is an absolute gift to Vladimir Putin
insomuch as one of the main destinations for liquified LNG
exports is Europe, and allies desperately need it, and I do not
want them buying it from Russia.
And with that, I yield to the Ranking Member, well, now it
is going to be acting Ranking Member, Ms. Norton from
Washington, DC, for her opening statement.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Chairman
Fallon, and thank you to the witness for being with us here
today.
As a matter of good government, I have always held that
Congress should use the most up-to-date facts and analysis when
crafting policy. I would expect Federal agencies to do the
same. Members of Congress should encourage agencies to study
issues before making consequential policy choices. Outdated
data leads to outdated policy.
Back in January, when the Department of Energy paused
future permits for liquified natural gas, or LNG, export
terminals, they did so with the goal of making better policy.
DOE is taking the opportunity to update its public interest
analysis to include current economic climate change and global
energy security considerations. Over the last 5 years, global
events and new research have shifted the economic and
environmental factors that DOE should consider when making LNG
export facility permitting determinations. DOE must also
closely scrutinize the greenhouse gas emissions associated with
the LNG production lifecycle and its disproportionate effect on
minority communities.
The Biden-Harris Administration has wisely pumped the
brakes or new permits to examine all potential effects on the
American people. This temporary and limited pause on permits
will in no way affect our ability to assist allies across the
globe. To help defund Vladimir Putin's war of aggression
against Ukraine, the United States has stopped export capacity
to meet the European allies' energy needs. DOE has already
approved permits to supply enough LNG to support Europe, with
capacity to spare.
New research indicates that producing LNG emits more
greenhouse gases than previously estimated. Natural gas system
leaks spew greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. New satellite
measurements reveal that prior estimates fell woefully short of
understanding the scope of LNG production's environmental
impact. Previous analysis also failed to account for the
disproportionate damage LNG export projects have on
disadvantaged communities. These export projects emit toxic
gases that can increase cancer and lung disease risks. Yet
corporations, focused solely on profits, keep building new
export sites near low-income and minority communities. I
applaud DOE's work to take a moment to update their research
related to these projects.
As part of President's Justice 40 Initiative, these studies
must focus on decreasing the energy and environmental burden on
disadvantaged communities. The Biden-Harris Administration has
not chosen to stymie industry. It seeks simply to carve a
policy path forward using up-to-date research and evidence.
Using science and facts is not anti-energy. It is pro-people,
pro-communities, and just commonsense.
This hearing makes a mountain hill out of a molehill. The
permitting pause affects only export projects awaiting approval
by DOE. DOE has already authorized permits for facilities that,
when operational, will amount to a 600-percent increase in LNG
capacity. Moreover, DOE leadership does not expect this pause
to last more than a year. We are all here today talking about a
drop in the LNG export budget bucket compared to the massive
expansion in export capacity the Biden Administration has
already enabled. This whole endeavor is just one more chapter
in the Majority's false claim that the Biden-Harris
Administration is waging some sort of ``war on energy.''
I once again return to the facts, which show that the
United States has never produced more fossil oils than right
now. LNG export capacity has increased more than 30 percent
since 2021. More importantly, this Administration and
congressional Democrats have made historic investments in clean
energy through the Inflation Reduction Act, which will reduce
energy costs for American families, invest in a healthier
future, and combat climate change by bringing us closer to a
100 percent renewable energy future. I follow the facts and
listen to experts. The Biden-Harris Administration has
committed to do the same.
The natural gas permitting pause is just that, a pause to
gather more evidence to make sure our policies are the right
ones. I do not understand why some of my colleagues object to
evidence-based policymaking. Maybe they would rather have this
hearing than working with the Administration to move beyond
harmful fossil fuels, like LNG, and support policies that
embrace renewable energy sources. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
I yield back.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you very much. Today, we are joined by
Brad Crabtree, who serves as an Assistant Secretary of the
Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management at the United
States Department of Energy. Thank you, Mr. Crabtree, for being
here and for your testimony.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 9(g), the witness will please
stand and raise your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you God?
Mr. Crabtree. I do.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you. Please let the record show the
witness answered in the affirmative.
Please take your seat, and let me remind the witness that
we have read your written statement, and it will appear in full
in the hearing record. Please limit your oral testimony to 5
minutes. I think you know the drill: 4 minutes green light, 1
minute yellow light, and then kind of try to wrap it up, and
then the red light. If you go a little bit over, you will be
forgiven. I now recognize Mr. Crabtree for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF MR. BRAD CRABTREE

ASSISTANT SECRETARY

OFFICE OF FOSSIL ENERGY AND CARBON MANAGEMENT

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Mr. Crabtree. Good morning, Chairman, Ranking Member
Norton----
Ms. Norton. He needs to speak into the microphone.
Mr. Fallon. Sir, could you speak into the microphone? Thank
you.
Mr. Crabtree. Sorry. I thought I pushed it.
Good morning, Chairman Fallon, Ranking Member Norton,
Congressman Higgins. I appreciate the opportunity to be before
you today and to testify at today's hearing regarding the
Department of Energy's announcement of updates to our economic
and environmental analyses that support public interest
determinations for liquified natural gas export applications to
countries with which we do not have free trade agreements. We
are required under Section 3 of the Natural Gas Act to
undertake such determinations. I look forward to sharing some
background on that announcement and a status update of where we
are today.
Let me begin with the unprecedented transformation brought
about by U.S. natural gas production. In less than 2 decades,
the shale revolution has fundamentally changed America's energy
prospects. We have gone from a Nation poised to become a major
natural gas importer to the world's top producer and exporter
of natural gas, both of which are relatively new roles for our
country. Over the past 2 years, American natural gas has made a
decisive difference in helping Europe to meet its energy supply
challenges following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, as well
as the broader energy security needs of our Asian and other
international allies and partners.
Last year, U.S. LNG exports reached a new high, averaging
nearly 12 billion cubic feet per day, and exports are expected
to increase to over 14 billion cubic feet next year as new
projects come online. With authorized projects currently under
construction, our export capacity is set to reach over 26
billion cubic feet per day. That is more than double our
current level, and our export capacity will be 40 percent
greater than any other country by 2030, even after accounting
for other countries' announced capacity additions. And our
level of authorized exports to countries in which we have no
qualifying free trade agreement goes well beyond these numbers.
We have authorized exports over 48 billion cubic feet per day
to non-FTA countries. This is 4 times our actual current LNG
export levels and nearly twice the anticipated export volumes
at the end of this decade. This level of authorized exports to
non-FTA countries represents nearly 45 percent of our current
domestic natural gas production.
To summarize, our export posture is world leading and will
grow dramatically during the remainder of this decade,
regardless of future DOE export approvals. This context makes
clear why it is so important that we take this moment to
evaluate the impacts of authorizing further exports beyond the
very large volume of exports that we have already approved. We
need to understand how additional exports beyond 48 billion
cubic feet per day--again, nearly half our domestic
production--would impact our economy, communities, domestic
consumers, and manufacturers, international partners, and the
environment. To that end, on Friday, January 26, DOE announced
that we are undertaking a review of our analyses that we rely
on for public interest determinations of applications for
proposed exports, again, to non-FTA countries. While this
update to our analysis is being completed, DOE will defer
making determinations on all pending non-FTA applications.
Regular updates to economic and environmental analyses have
long been a critical component of DOE's public interest
determinations under the Natural Gas Act, Section 3(a), and in
the past, we have also deferred decisions on those
determinations pending completion of analyses. In 2012, DOE
temporarily deferred its review of 15 then-pending applications
to export LNG until it completed its review of public comments,
which occurred several months later in 2013. Two years later,
in 2014, DOE announced plans to undertake new economic studies
to gain a better understanding how even higher levels of U.S.
LNG exports, at levels between 12 and 20 billion cubic feet of
natural gas, would affect the public interest. Those studies
were then published in late 2015.
By early 2018, DOE again determined that a new economic
study was warranted, given both the total volume of non-FTA
exports authorized at that time, again, equivalent to 21.35
billion cubic feet of natural gas per day, and the additional
volumes of LNG requested for export in then pending
applications. Accordingly, 6 years ago, in June 2018, DOE
published its fifth and most recent economic study, entitled,
``Macroeconomic Outcomes of Market-Determined Levels of U.S.
LNG Exports.'' DOE provided notice of all of these economic
studies in the Federal Register and solicited public comment.
These public comment processes have been an invaluable part of
our decisionmaking.
Additionally, beginning in 2014, DOE undertook studies to
evaluate lifecycle greenhouse gas and other environmental
impacts associated with LNG exports. The established framework
for making public interest determinations relies on economic
and environmental analyses to inform DOE of the potential
impacts of additional exports. As we explained in an order
denying a petition for rulemaking brought by several
environmental groups last summer, ``because the U.S. LNG market
and related issues, including climate change considerations and
global energy security, are all dynamic, the LNG export program
is best served by continuing to update the economic
environmental studies, analytic approaches, and public interest
factors that DOE considers in an iterative fashion based on
developing facts and circumstances.'' Our current economic and
environmental analysis is consistent with last summer's order.
To carry this out, we are partnering with two of our
national laboratories, the National Energy Technology
Laboratory and Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, to
support the underlying modeling work, which is well underway.
This effort will be similar to past updates. However, one key
difference is that when those past updates were undertaken, the
reality of U.S. LNG exports was speculative or, at best,
nascent. Now, after several years of burgeoning U.S. natural
gas production exports, we have significant data and global
events and trends to draw on. We are working quickly to
complete this work and to have it ready for public comment. We
are planning for a 60-day public comment period, and together
with that process, we estimate the update will be completed by
the end of the first quarter of 2025.
I would note in conclusion, we have a strong record of
defending our Natural Gas Act determinations because they have
relied on well-supported and up-to-date analyses. Absent our
current update to those analyses, future applicants whose non-
FTA applications are approved would face litigation challenges
from organizations alleging that DOE improperly relied on
outdated analyses.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, Mr. Crabtree.
Without objection, Representative Higgins of Louisiana and
Representative Pfluger of Texas are waived onto the
Subcommittee for the purpose of questioning the witness at
today's hearing.
Without objection, so moved.
And now, I recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Crabtree, do you believe that President Biden is
completely aware that there is a complete 100-percent pause on
new permits for LNG exports to non-FTA countries?
Mr. Crabtree. I am sorry?
Mr. Fallon. OK. Sorry. Did you not hear me?
Mr. Crabtree. Apologies.
Mr. Fallon. That is OK. I will speak in the microphone. Do
you believe that President Biden is completely aware that there
is a 100-percent pause on new permits being issued for LNG
exports to non-FTA countries?
Mr. Crabtree. We have deferred decisions on only those
pending applications that are above the authorized levels of 48
billion cubic feet. That is the decision.
Mr. Fallon. OK. Do you believe that he is completely aware
of that decision, that you just----
Mr. Crabtree. The entire Administration, I believe, is
aware of that.
Mr. Fallon. OK. I find it interesting that when Speaker
Johnson spoke to the President about this issue, President
Biden was completely unaware, and he said, no, we have not done
that, so that is interesting and alarming at the same time. The
Biden Administration's announcement on the LNG pause occurred
on the 26th of January, which is almost 3 months ago, we have
since heard all sorts of indications from the Department and
the Administration regarding its anticipated length. So, the
question is, when will the pause end? I think you might have
just answered it. Are you saying the first quarter, 2025?
Mr. Crabtree. Yes. The Secretary has been very clear about
that publicly, and I have as well.
Mr. Fallon. So, almost an entire year. Here is another
question. The Biden Administration is seeking to bring, I
think, a crushing end to U.S. energy production involving the
use of fossil fuels in any place, in any form. Meanwhile,
liquified natural gas is wildly abundant, and it is a clean
source of energy that leads the world in exporting. So, why the
pause when I believe under the Obama Administration, what you
just mentioned, there was a pause, but they were issuing
conditional permits. Why not issue conditional permits?
Mr. Crabtree. No. In 2012, the economic analysis was being
undertaken, and there were 15 applications, decisions upon
which were deferred until the analysis was complete.
Mr. Fallon. And how long did that analysis take?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, the public comment was incorporated,
and the results of the studies were finalized in early 2013.
Mr. Fallon. So, how long did it take?
Mr. Crabtree. I believe----
Mr. Fallon. Was it 2 months, a month, a year?
Mr. Crabtree. I believe it was about a year, but I would
like to get back to you for the record to be precise on that.
Mr. Fallon. So, your testimony is that they did not issue
any permits for that year?
Mr. Crabtree. In 2012----
Mr. Fallon. 2012.
Mr. Crabtree [continuing]. My understanding is no, but
again, I will confirm that.
Mr. Fallon. OK.
Mr. Crabtree. My understanding is that they were issued in
2013.
Mr. Fallon. OK. My colleague mentioned in her opening
statement that ``This no way affects our allies across the
globe.'' Do you believe that? Do you agree with that statement
that this pause in no way affects our allies across the globe?
Mr. Crabtree. It does not affect allies in terms of near-to
medium-term energy security supply because we are going to be
doubling our export capacity by 2030, and we have an additional
22 billion cubic feet of authorized volumes that do not yet
have a final investment decision.
Mr. Fallon. So, do you think that they are not alarmed and/
or concerned?
Mr. Crabtree. They are not alarmed. We have briefed our
allies extensively.
Mr. Fallon. Really? OK. That is interesting because I have
spoken with some of our allies, and they are very alarmed, and
they want this pause lifted, every single one of them that we
have talked to.
Mr. Crabtree. Well, I have met with----
Mr. Fallon. Their Ambassadors. OK.
Mr. Crabtree. I have met with my direct counterparts in
multiple countries----
Mr. Fallon. And they do not care at all.
Mr. Crabtree [continuing]. On the basis of our position.
They want to know, long term, the direction of our policy, but
they are not alarmed.
Mr. Fallon. So, it is your testimony that they would prefer
it to be reauthorized in 2025 and not as soon as possible.
Mr. Crabtree. What I would say is there are different
perspectives in different countries.
Mr. Fallon. And I think our European allies are the ones
that I have been talking to, and they are very alarmed about
what is going on, in addition to the fact that they want to
wean themselves off of Putin's gas. Mr. Crabtree, the Wall
Street Journal detailed the outside influence of groups who
sought to pressure the Biden Administration to halt new
approvals of LNG export facilities. Further, Bloomberg reports
that the work of a researcher, who ``openly admitted that his
research on LNG lifecycle emissions was prematurely released,
with the ultimate goal of getting rid of natural gas
entirely,'' was a clear factor in the Biden Administration's
decision to announce the pause. This research was not peer
reviewed. Are you familiar with the work that we are referring
to?
Mr. Crabtree. The work was not peer reviewed. I am familiar
with it. I would argue that that is, actually, a basis for our
decision is that there is conflicting analysis from both sides
about lifecycle analysis, about domestic economic impacts, and
we----
Mr. Fallon. I am limited on time, so I apologize, but I
just need to ask you this. As assistant Secretary of the Fossil
Energy and Carbon Management Office, is it important that
research, relied on by the FECM to do its work, is
scientifically sound and peer reviewed?
Mr. Crabtree. That is exactly why we have involved our
National Labs to participate with us and technical experts from
DOE offices to do this work.
Mr. Fallon. Do you anticipate that this researcher's work
will support the DOE's update to its public interest analysis?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, their work is the basis for our public
interest analysis. I am not predetermining the outcomes of what
we come up with on the economic and environmental analysis, but
it is precisely why we are doing it is their expertise and to
bring that to bear.
Mr. Fallon. OK. And my time has expired, so the Chair now
recognizes acting Ranking Member Norton for her 5 minutes of
questions.
Ms. Norton. Thank you. Mr. Chairman. I ask unanimous
consent to submit for the record this article from S&P Global
Commodity Insights, entitled, ``U.S. LNG Pause to Have No
Short-Term/Mid-Term Impact on EU Supply Security EC.''
Mr. Fallon. Without--I am sorry.
Ms. Norton. Thank you. This report quotes a spokesman from
the European Commission who says they have been in close
contact with DOE on the matter and continue to have a ``solid''
energy partnership.
Mr. Fallon. Without objection, so ordered.
[Chart.]
Ms. Norton. Mr. Crabtree, the Department of Energy's pause
on LNG exports will have almost no impact on the United States'
ability to support LNG globally. Looking at this chart on the
screen, you will see that DOE's pause on exports affects only a
small fraction of potential export capacity. The affected
capacity is represented in the red bar on the chart. All the
remaining green bars on the chart represent LNG export capacity
that either already exists, is under construction, is permitted
awaiting construction, or awaiting approval from another
unrelated agency. This chart shows that DOE already has already
permitted nearly 7 times the amount of capacity than this pause
will affect. So, Mr. Crabtree, how long do you estimate the
export pause will last?
Mr. Crabtree. So, we have stated publicly--the Secretary,
again, and myself--that we anticipate this work----
Ms. Norton. Speak up a little bit, please.
Mr. Crabtree. The Secretary and I have both indicated
publicly that we anticipate this work being done within a year.
And I would note that in your chart, the 14 billion cubic feet
that you have in the last two rows is accurate. That is the
capacity that is currently being deferred for decisionmaking.
We have committed to 48 billion cubic feet in terms of
authorized exports. Again, that is 4 times our current actual
exports of 12 billion cubic feet. So, to put that into context,
with the additional 14 billion cubic feet in the last two rows,
that would take the United States to the neighborhood of 60
billion cubic feet of authorized capacity, which is well over
half of our domestic natural gas production.
I would note that the United States has the world's largest
economy. We have a major industrial and manufacturing base and
330-plus million people. We rely extensively on our natural gas
resource for our own domestic economy. And so, our current
export commitment of 48 billion cubic feet per day, 45 percent
of our production, is a very, very substantial export
commitment.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Crabtree, is DOE's permitting process a
barrier to U.S. exports of LNG?
Mr. Crabtree. In the near to medium term, the commitments
we have already made will allow us to essentially double our
export capacity by 2030, so, no.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Crabtree, DOE has already permitted
significant LNG export capacity that is not yet built. Why is
that?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, so, in the United States, we are
different than the country of Qatar. Qatar is the world's
second largest exporter. The Government of Qatar and Qatar
Energy are the same. It is a state-owned company. We approve
FERC and MARAD a permit construction siting in operation of
terminals. The role of the Department of Energy is to authorize
their exports to non-free trade countries. But after that, our
industry is a fully private sector enterprise. Those projects
are financed in the private sector, and so you have 22 billion
cubic feet of capacity represented across a wide range of
projects that have been approved by Department of Energy for
export, but they have not been able to finance their projects
in the private sector up until this time. I think it is fair to
say that some of those projects may not move forward, some
will, but that is a private sector decision. We have authorized
their exports, but we do not get involved in financial
investment decisions. That is not our role.
Ms. Norton. So, we have determined that the global and
domestic LNG production effects of DOE's pause are not
consequential, but the reason for the pause is quite
consequential. For far too long, when DOE evaluated LNG export
authorization requests, it did not consider the detrimental
effects on disadvantaged communities. LNG export sites come at
a cost to local communities and industries where they operate.
Studies have found that living near LNG export facilities may
cause serious health concerns, including asthma, heart disease,
cancer, et cetera. On top of that, in Louisiana, a new LNG
terminal destroyed the local shrimp industry when it wrecked
the wildlife habitats and eliminated docking space.
Mr. Crabtree, can you commit today to ensuring that DOE's
forthcoming public interest analysis will incorporate and
consider environmental justice concerns and effects on existing
local industries?
Mr. Fallon. And the gentlelady's time has expired. I am
going to let you answer, but if you could just do it quickly.
Thank you.
Mr. Crabtree. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ranking Member
Norton, we are undertaking an assessment of local and community
impacts from the development of liquified natural gas
production. I would just quickly note that compared to 2018,
when we last updated our economic analysis, our capacity was 4
billion cubic feet. We are now at 14. One of the fastest-
growing industries in the world is U.S. natural gas production
and export, and the geographic footprint of that is
concentrated on the Gulf Coast of the United States. So, we
will be looking at the whole range of impacts, some of those
that you have referenced, like environmental justice, as well
as the economic and jobs benefits where they occur.
Mr. Fallon. The gentlelady's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes our good friend, Representative Higgins from
Louisiana.
Mr. Higgins. I thank the Chairman and the Ranking Member,
and I appreciate the Committee allowing me to waive here. Mr.
Crabtree, we appreciate you being here today, sir.
You realize, of course, that the actions that you have
taken on behalf of the executive for whom you work, it is
impacting thousands and thousands of American lives and jobs.
You can speak to the amount of LNG export that has been
maintained, and you can dangle those numbers before the
American people, but that is growth of the industry that was
created by the industry and an appetite from the world for
clean, reliable, affordable energy.
So, my district in South Louisiana has become, over the
course of a very quick couple of decades, the epicenter of LNG
export for the entire country. And we feed clean, affordable,
reliable energy to the entire world, primarily before the
interruptions from this executive branch, many of which were
led by you, or at least you are at the point of that spear that
you are being forced to wield. Prior to the executive's
interference, the American LNG industry had been feeding
reliable, affordable clean energy to our allies across the
world, and because of various interruptions that have been
planned and calculated, interruptions to American energy
production and dominance and export, our European allies have
had to rely on other sources for their raw energy product to
power their grids across the continent.
And now you have, Iran is selling 90 percent of its raw
energy product to China. That means China is feeding Iran
billions and billions of dollars. Russia is deeply engaged in
renewed energy supply across Europe because the reliability of
that supply chain has been crippled by Biden Administration
policy decisions. And, my brother, Mr. Crabtree, you are a part
of this, man. We do not understand what happened between the
summer of last year and January of this year. My colleagues are
going to get into that.
The timeline that you put forth in your advisement of the
pause sounds very cool. We are just going to chill for a little
while we take a closer look for a few months. But you knew that
a pause that you were initiating generally requires over a year
to renew normal permitting. Is that correct? Historically,
doesn't it take over a year? Didn't you say in this hearing, a
little while ago, next year? Will be done in a year?
Mr. Crabtree. We have committed to delivering this work
within a year, so----
Mr. Higgins. OK. So, a year.
Mr. Crabtree. Yes, sir.
Mr. Higgins. OK. Not a few months? Because your letter said
a few months.
Mr. Crabtree. No----
Mr. Higgins. So, let us just move on.
Mr. Crabtree. To clarify, to clarify----
Mr. Higgins. What happens----
Mr. Crabtree [continuing]. To clarify, a few months to
provide the analysis for public comment.
Mr. Higgins. There was an illusion of this, just slight,
pause that was put forth by this executive. Now the year's time
for renewal, that brings us past November 2024, does it not? I
am pretty sure that brings----
Mr. Crabtree. We are committing to complete the analysis in
the----
Mr. Higgins. Yes. So, we are past the election, my brother.
Do you see a pattern developing here? Do you have
communications, Mr. Crabtree, in my remaining time, with the
Biden Administration officials regarding LNG permitting pause
that took place between the summer of last year and January
through today in this hearing? Do you have communication,
emails, telephone calls, et cetera?
Mr. Crabtree. With whom, Congressman?
Mr. Higgins. The Biden Administration officials, people you
work for.
Mr. Crabtree. So, we have had extensive discussions from--
--
Mr. Higgins. Extensive discussion.
Mr. Crabtree [continuing]. Within the Department of
Energy----
Mr. Higgins. I am advising you, in my remaining 10 seconds,
to preserve that stuff. How long have you been building your
career at DOE, Mr. Crabtree?
Mr. Crabtree. I was confirmed beginning of May 2022.
Mr. Higgins. How long you been building your career to get
to that point?
Mr. Crabtree. I worked on energy policy for the better part
of 30 years----
Mr. Higgins. Thirty years. You got 30 years into this
thing. You realize you are being set up as a sacrifice on the
Green New Deal altar?
Mr. Crabtree. I disagree with that, sir.
Mr. Higgins. I am going to offer you whistleblower
protection, sir. I am going to offer you whistleblower
protection. Remember that statement, because we will protect
you, sir. Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Fallon. The Chair now recognizes Representative Brown
from Ohio.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Biden-Harris
Administration is supercharging our Nation's energy
independence while combating the climate crisis, one of the
greatest challenges and responsibilities of our generation.
Congressional Democrats and President Biden are committed to a
bold, effective, and expansive climate agenda, which is already
creating tens of thousands of clean energy jobs across the
country. I was proud to vote in favor of the Inflation
Reduction Act, Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, and the CHIPS and
Science Act. These laws all made historic investments in our
energy sector, and I am glad to say these efforts are already
yielding great success. In 2023, the United States boasted the
highest level of energy independence our country has seen in
over 70 years.
This January, the Biden-Harris Administration announced a
pause in the approval of pending and future liquified natural
gas export projects as part of an effort to update the current
outdated process, while developing a modern approach to assess
how projects serve the best interests of the American people.
So, Assistant Secretary Crabtree, how has the Biden-Harris
Administration demonstrated a commitment to energy
independence?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, Representative, I think you have
summarized it well in the sense that we have, obviously, the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law passed in 2021, which provided
extensive funding across energy industries, energy and climate
investments. The Inflation Reduction Act provides several
hundred billion dollars' worth of tax credits to incentivize a
whole range of technologies that are essential both to meet our
climate goals, but also, as you point out, to sustain and even
improve U.S. energy independence.
And I think the facts speak for themselves. We are
dramatically expanding a whole range of clean energy
alternatives even as the United States has become the largest
oil and gas producer and exporter in the world today. And that
expansion continues even as the same time we are committing to
decarbonize that oil and gas production in use and also to
manage methane emissions to near zero by 2030. And I would note
that we have the support and participation of the oil and gas
industry in that effort as well.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. And, Assistant Secretary Crabtree,
how will the pause on liquid natural gas export projects
positively impact American energy independence now or in the
future?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, I would just note I need to go back to
the fact that we have already made authorization decisions for
48 billion cubic feet of exports. We are currently at capacity.
We are currently exporting 12 billion cubic feet, and then of
the 14 billion cubic feet that is operating in terms of
capacity, we have another 12 billion cubic feet that will be
online by 2030. So, we are already No. 1 in the world in terms
of our natural gas exports. We will be No. 1 in the world in
2030, 40 percent ahead of Qatar, which is the second ranked
exporter today. So, what I would argue is that our decisions
are not impacting U.S. energy independence because the
decisions DOE has already made will allow a doubling of our
export capacity, which contributes to our larger domestic
energy independence, along with all the other investments in
other energy resources and technologies that we are making.
Ms. Brown. And I would not call those dangling numbers for
the American people. They are facts. Last, what factors does
the Department of Energy take into consideration when measuring
what is in the best interest of the public?
Mr. Crabtree. So, we take a broad range of factors into
account. We take domestic energy supply, natural gas supply,
and its availability to consumers and to industry. We look at
natural gas prices, again, for households, but also for
industrial producers and manufacturers. Also, distributional
consequences, how these price changes affect who. We look at
demand in the future, what is the demand both for the natural
gas here at home, but also our exports. Importantly, and ever
more so following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, we look at
energy security not only for ourselves, but our allies. And
then finally, we look at environmental impacts, and that
includes traditional environmental impacts that you might
imagine from project development, but also greenhouse gas
emissions, both methane and carbon dioxide emissions,
associated with natural gas production, processing,
liquefaction, and export.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. Contrary to the claims by my
Republican colleagues, in 2023, the United States set a new
high for natural gas production. In fact, today the U.S. is the
world's single largest liquid natural gas exporter. While my
Republican colleagues continue to put the interest of large
corporations and Big Oil first, Democratic policies are
building clean energy infrastructure for the next generation.
This translates to lower energy, water, and fuel costs for
American families, both at home and at the gas pump. And as we
expand our energy independence, Democrats continue to work on
building the clean energy sector for the future.
The Inflation Reduction Act provides hundreds of billions
of dollars in loan guarantees and subsidies for clean energy to
expand domestic clean power production, growing our energy
independence, and leading the world. Although my Republican
colleagues are once again attempting to undermine that
transformational legislation, I will continue to work to build,
expand, and defend it. Thank you.
Mr. Fallon. The Chair now recognizes our good friend from
Florida, Mr. Waltz.
Mr. Waltz. Assistant Secretary Crabtree, do you recall
signing and issuing the July 18, 2023 Department of Energy
denial to the Sierra Club's rulemaking petition on DOE's
natural gas export policy?
Mr. Crabtree. Yes, Congressman, I do.
[Chart]
Mr. Waltz. And with that decision, you stated, as we have
up here for the American people to see, ``DOE's continuing
development of LNG export policy has accounted for changes''--
say again--``accounted for changes in environmental, energy,
economic, and other relevant considerations.'' I would also
like to bring your attention to the excerpt for that decision
here, that it says, ``Insofar as petitioners''--the Sierra Club
in this case, a well-known environmentally focused group that,
by the way, have been petitioning the DOE for over a decade to
do this and repeatedly denied, including yourself--so,
``insofar as petitioners are asking DOE to halt approval of
pending applications to export LNG until DOE completes a final
version of its policy guidelines, we find there is no factual
or legal basis for such an action at this time.'' That is from
you. But then 6 months later, after you signed this denial, the
Administration announced its decision to pause pending
decisions on export permitting for LNG to non-free trade
agreement countries.
So, what factual or legal basis suddenly emerged? What
happened in 6 months----
Mr. Crabtree. Sure.
Mr. Waltz [continuing]. To justify implementing this pause
that you agreed was ``well-functioning'' and adaptable to
``changing economic and environmental circumstances.'' What
changed?
Mr. Crabtree. I am happy to answer that question. The
Sierra Club, in their petition, was basically asking us to
fundamentally roll back our adjudicatory process to our orders
and our determinations and proceed with the rulemaking. And the
point we were making in that order is that our process has been
sustained in litigation, our past approvals of projects,
because we look at these projects on a case-by-case basis and
look at the evolving LNG----
Mr. Waltz. For many years----
Mr. Crabtree [continuing]. Natural gas and LNG.
Mr. Waltz. Right. So, what changed?
Mr. Crabtree. And in that very order, we essentially make
the case for the very thing we are doing today, which is
updating our economic and environmental analysis because it is
very clear, based on the----
Mr. Waltz. But----
Mr. Crabtree. Its very cure, is based on the litigation
approach of various stakeholders, that our determinations, any
future approvals we make would have been subject to litigation,
and that is in that order.
Mr. Waltz. But in the time I have remaining, we are saying
it is fine, the process is fine, but then in 6 months, we need
to update everything. And let me tell you what a lot of the
American people----
Mr. Crabtree. That is not what it said. That is not what it
said.
Mr. Waltz. But that is essentially what we have done,
right?
Mr. Crabtree. No, that is not true.
Mr. Waltz. But I will tell you what people suspect. We
suspect this is an election year. We expect this is a political
play to the Democratic base. And let me just tell you, I mean,
you have industry estimating that global demand for LNG could
rise as much as 50 percent by 2040, and the thing that concerns
me is that Russian LNG exports to the EU have grown since 2021.
They are selling just as much as they ever did through China
and through India. Is it in the public interest to cripple
Russia's LNG exports?
Mr. Crabtree. Congressman, there are so many differing
views of future market demand. That is actually an argument for
our pause. We have 22 billion cubic feet of exports that we
have authorized----
Mr. Waltz. Is it in----
Mr. Crabtree [continuing]. That have not been able to get--
----
Mr. Waltz. Is it in the----
Mr. Crabtree [continuing]. FID in the marketplace----
Mr. Waltz [continuing]. Public interest?
Mr. Crabtree. No, we have not----
Mr. Waltz. We are voting on the Ukraine package today. Is
it in the public interest to cripple Russia's LNG? That is a
``yes.'' I would think that would be an easy ``yes.''
Mr. Crabtree. We are crippling their----
Mr. Waltz. They are selling just as much----
Mr. Crabtree. That is because we are doubling our exports--
--
Mr. Waltz [continuing]. As they ever did, so we are
spending against our----
Mr. Crabtree [continuing]. Between now and 2030, sir.
Mr. Waltz. So, look, I sit on the Intelligence Committee,
on the Armed Services Committee. If we drop the price of global
oil and gas below a certain point, Russia is done, Mr.
Secretary, and for that matter, Iran is done. And yet we are
literally spending against ourselves as they are selling just
as much as they ever did. Ninety percent of Iran's is going to
China, by the way. Look, you are----
Mr. Crabtree. Between now----
Mr. Waltz. Look, you are parsing some things here, but this
is about long-term signals, and you just stated that our allies
are not being affected. I just sat down with the Speaker of the
Parliament of Lithuania right on the front lines, and she said,
we buy 80 percent of our gas through Texas and through
Louisiana at your government's request, and now, she said, we
are making political and industry decisions to go in a
different direction from the United States because we do not
know if it is going to be there long term. I also sat down with
officials from Japan and South Korea, and we know Japan has
moved away from nuclear, they are trying to go back. They said
we are trying to get off. You guys are beating us up for buying
Russian gas. Where is North American gas? Where is it going to
be in the next 5, 10 years? What is going to happen if
President Biden gets reelected?
They are making long-term decisions, and the signal you
have sent to our allies, Mr. Secretary, is a big question mark.
They do not know, at least they are telling me, and I take it
at face value. I do not think politics are at play for them.
They are trying to get onto North American gas and off of
Russian gas, and this pause has sent all the wrong signals.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield my time.
Mr. Crabtree. To help them get off Russian gas, we are
going to be providing another 12 billion cubic feet of capacity
between now and 2030.
Mr. Fallon. All right. We are going to go ahead, and the
Ranking Member and myself are going to ask an additional 2
minutes of questions.
I think it is important to state that economics 101,
particularly when you are talking about energy, is production
levels today are not determined by what is happening today.
Production levels today in energy are determined by policies
and decisions that happened years ago, whether that is 2 years
ago, 4 years ago, 6 years ago. Do you believe, Mr. Crabtree,
that stability and predictability are important when we are
talking about energy production?
Mr. Crabtree. Investment certainty is important to
industries that are capital intensive and have projects that
take years----
Mr. Fallon. So, you would agree that energy production is
capital intensive?
Mr. Crabtree. What I would argue is that----
Mr. Fallon. Mr. Crabtree, it is just----
Mr. Crabtree. The certainty of our regulatory decisions are
also important----
Mr. Fallon. Mr. Crabtree, do me a favor.
Mr. Crabtree [continuing]. If we are subject to litigation.
Mr. Fallon. Mr. Crabtree, I have been overly polite. Can
you please just answer the question? Do you believe that energy
production is a capital-intensive endeavor?
Mr. Crabtree. Yes----
Mr. Fallon. That is a simple question.
Mr. Crabtree [continuing]. Capital intensive.
Mr. Fallon. That is not a trick question.
Mr. Crabtree. I just said that, yes.
Mr. Fallon. OK. All right. Do you believe that stability
and predictability are important when you are talking about
capital intensive endeavors? Again, not a trick question.
Mr. Crabtree. It is important, but also, the certainty of
our regulatory decisions is important to investors, and that
is----
Mr. Fallon. So, when you have this analysis, couldn't you
do the analysis and continue to approve new liquified natural
gas exports or exporting permits?
Mr. Crabtree. The challenge is there are----
Mr. Fallon. No. Could you do that?
Mr. Crabtree. There are 14 billion cubic feet of projects
that----
Mr. Fallon. All right. Let us try it again. Could you do
that, though? Could this Administration, could your Department
do this analysis, but at the same time, we will say
synchronously, also be approving new liquified natural gas
permits?
Mr. Crabtree. Not without approving them and having them
subject to legal risk because our analysis for the
environmental analysis is 5 years old. Our economic analysis is
6 years old.
Mr. Fallon. You can do it. The past Administration did not
have a pause.
Mr. Crabtree. No, but the Obama Administration did. In
2012, we had 15 projects pending, and they deferred the
decisions on those projects until the analysis was completed,
and then it was----
Mr. Fallon. So, these are political policy decisions.
Mr. Crabtree. Mr. Chairman, I would note that our approvals
in the past have all been sustained in courts of law because we
have updated analysis----
Mr. Fallon. Mr. Crabtree?
Mr. Crabtree [continuing]. And now we are 5 and 6 years out
from our last update.
Mr. Fallon. A very simple question. Are you a political
appointee?
Mr. Crabtree. I am a political appointee.
Mr. Fallon. OK. Thank you. I yield to the Ranking Member.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Crabtree, would you like time to walk
through the administrative process? Mr. Waltz would not give
you time to explain.
Mr. Crabtree. Well, so, thank you, Ranking Member Norton.
We have economic and environmental analysis that we are
required to use in our decisions of determining whether a given
export application is in the public interest. And over the
course of the program, beginning in 2012, on a periodic basis,
we have had to update the economic and environmental analysis,
subject to changing circumstances in the marketplace. In the
initial years, those analyses and, frankly, the industry itself
were suggesting much lower levels of exports than we are
actually already at today, let alone what we have approved for
the future. And so, our process now is consistent with what we
have done in the past. Our last environmental analysis was
updated 5 years ago. Our economic analysis was updated 6 years
ago. Based on previous practice, it is time for us to update
that analysis.
A lot has changed in the world. We are the largest producer
and exporter of natural gas in the world. We had COVID that we
came out of, supply chain crises, the Russian invasion of
Ukraine. It is a dramatically different environment that we are
operating in today. And so now, as part of our process, as we
did in 2012, we are deferring decisions on those applications
until we complete this economic and environmental analysis. And
what I would argue gets lost in the public discussion is that
our previous approvals for industry have been sustained in the
courts, and even in 2017, the courts specifically acknowledged
the updating of our analyses as a basis for that, and any
future decisions we might make will be subject to litigation
risk if we do not take this step today.
Mr. Fallon. The gentlelady's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes Representative Pfluger from Texas for 5 minutes
of questions.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and for waiving on. It
was a shock on January 26 to hear the President announce his,
what I think he is calling a pause, but what the industry is
calling a ban on LNG exports to non-free trade agreement
countries. Mr. Crabtree, how many free trade agreement
countries exist?
Mr. Crabtree. I do not remember the exact number. I would
have to go back and check, but 80----
Mr. Pfluger. Fourteen.
Mr. Crabtree. Eighty percent of the natural gas market is
non-free trade agreement countries.
Mr. Pfluger. Eighty percent?
Mr. Crabtree. Yes.
Mr. Pfluger. Is non-free trade agreement countries?
Mr. Crabtree. Correct.
Mr. Pfluger. OK. So, we have 14 free trade agreement
countries that comprises 20 percent of the----
Mr. Crabtree. That is correct. Korea is the large market
that is a free trade country with respect to natural gas.
Mr. Pfluger. OK. So, DOE undertaking steps in the usual
process, in accordance with DOE's past practice, to update the
analyses that DOE has long determined are necessary to make a
reliable assessment of the public interest. How many Bcf was
promised, Bcf a day, Bcf a year, any metric you want, was
promised to Europe by President Biden about a year ago?
Mr. Crabtree. The agreement with the EU promised 15 billion
cubic meters, so----
Mr. Pfluger. All of those to free trade agreement
countries?
Mr. Crabtree. No, that was to the European Union, which is,
collectively, the world's largest natural gas market.
Mr. Pfluger. All of those free trade agreement countries?
Mr. Crabtree. No, they are not.
Mr. Pfluger. OK.
Mr. Crabtree. They are non-free trade agreement.
Mr. Pfluger. Exactly the point. So, was it determined at
that point in time that they were in the public interest? Did
the President making that statement promising that amount to
the EU----
Mr. Crabtree. No.
Mr. Pfluger [continuing]. To non-free agreement countries.
Mr. Crabtree. Based on regulatory decisions made in
previous administrations and this one, plus efforts to make
sure that cargoes got to Europe that were actually committed
cargoes to East Asia, we were able to not only meet that
commitment, but succeeded it substantially.
Mr. Pfluger. So, I want to know why DOE is not following
precedent to consider the LNG export authorization applications
while updating the study. Why are you deviating from past----
Mr. Crabtree. We are following precedent. I just got done
explaining in response to the Chairman's questions that in--or,
sorry, the Ranking Member's questions--in 2012, there were 15
applications pending to non-free trade area countries, and the
decisions on those applications were deferred until the
economic analysis was updated. Public comments were
incorporated. That process was completed in 2013, after which--
--
Mr. Pfluger. How many current projects are in works that do
not have approval, that need the approval, that would meet the
requirement and meet the demand and meet the supply that was
promised by the President to the EU or other non-FTA countries?
Mr. Crabtree. I can get you the specific number of
projects, but the volume of exports, beyond what is operating,
the capacity is 12 billion cubic feet under construction, and
22 billion cubic feet have been authorized but do not yet have
FID, if that is your question.
Mr. Pfluger. No. The question really is why is it taking
longer? Why are you not following precedent when this pause has
happened, and yet the President stated previously in statements
like he made about the EU and the promise that we were going to
send a certain volume over there, why now are we pausing it?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, we met that commitment and exceeded it,
sir.
Mr. Pfluger. But this is not happening.
Mr. Crabtree. By a large measure.
Mr. Pfluger. You met it on that day, but for the future
commitments that we have, for the future contracts that we
have, let me----
Mr. Crabtree. We have capacity, nearly equivalent to our
current entire export capacity, is coming online in the next 6
years, nearly a doubling, sir.
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Crabtree, I will reclaim my time. Thank
you for that. The fact is that there are many countries right
now that are looking for LNG and are looking for contracts. Are
they asking you for 1-year contracts, 2-year contracts? What
does a typical contract look like, a request from a country
that we are dealing with?
Mr. Crabtree. Contracts vary, but the United States' LNG
sector is financed liquefaction terminals based on long-term
contracts. Most companies have a small percentage of short-
term----
Mr. Pfluger. Fifteen, 20 years.
Mr. Crabtree. Yes, exactly. Yes.
Mr. Pfluger. OK. So, the decision to pause--I call it a ban
because I think industry agrees with that--the decision to ban
LNG exports starting on January 26, has industry received that
positively? Have you had discussions with industry, and which
companies have you talked to since then?
Mr. Crabtree. It depends on which energy sector you are
referring to. We have domestic manufacturers and industrial
companies that are actually concerned about committing even
more than 48 billion cubic feet of our domestic natural gas
supply to export. And so, we have heard from them that they
think this is prudent.
Mr. Pfluger. Prior to January 26, which companies did you
personally deal with to make this decision?
Mr. Crabtree. I have met with many companies.
Mr. Pfluger. Can you give me a list? Can you tell me four
of them right now?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, I have met with all of the major LNG
producers.
Mr. Pfluger. I understand, but just tell me three or four.
Mr. Crabtree. Well, there are not that many, so----
Mr. Pfluger. Just name them.
Mr. Crabtree. I have met with all of the major companies
that operate liquefaction terminals, most of the major natural
gas producers. Also met----
Mr. Pfluger. Can you name three or four of them?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, they are well known. There is only----
Mr. Pfluger. It should be easy, right? So, just name three
of them. Name two of them.
Mr. Crabtree. Well, there is----
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Crabtree, you are the Department of
Energy----
Mr. Crabtree. I mean, are you asking me to provide you with
a list?
Mr. Pfluger. No. I am asking you right now, just name one
of them.
Mr. Crabtree. Well, Cheniere is an example.
Mr. Pfluger. OK. So, you met with Cheniere prior to January
26? Were they in agreement----
Mr. Crabtree. I have been meeting with these companies
since the day I was confirmed, sir.
Mr. Pfluger. Were they in agreement with the
Administration's decision? Was Cheniere in agreement with the
Administration's decision?
Mr. Crabtree. The LNG companies are concerned about the
decision.
Mr. Pfluger. Very concerned about the decision. We finally
got somewhere. I will yield back.
Chair. The Chair recognizes Mr. Khanna for his 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Khanna. Mr. Chairman, I know that the companies may be
concerned about the decision, but this President has one
concern: lowering prices for the American people. Now, I find
it amusing, sometimes, my Republican friends, you could say a
policy is going to reduce prices for the American people, help
lower electricity bills, they may applaud it. Then you say it
happens to also be good for climate, they will stop applauding.
We are bringing manufacturing back to America. Great. It
happens to also be decarbonizing. Oh, we cannot support that.
The reality, Mr. Crabtree, is this is a policy that puts
Americans first, right? I mean, this is a policy that is
actually going to lower electricity bills for Americans because
President Biden cares more about Americans' electricity bills
than anyone else in the world. He is the American President.
And you have testified that we have seen periods during which
U.S. LNG exports had a noticeable influence on domestic prices.
Can you explain why the President's policies in prioritizing
Americans over people elsewhere in the world for electricity
bills is helping lower electricity prices for Americans?
Mr. Crabtree. So, Congressman, I mentioned earlier in the
hearing that we have seen an enormous increase in natural gas
production and export. During the timeframe of this program at
the Department of Energy, we have gone from effectively zero in
2015 to 14 billion cubic feet.
Mr. Khanna. More than tripled, correct?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, more than tripled.
Mr. Khanna. Yes.
Mr. Crabtree. Yes, and then we have also authorized 3-and-
a-half times that volume for export already committed, and
there are 12 billion cubic feet under construction. So, up
until this point, with the exception of the, you know, the
supply crisis following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, we
have seen very low natural gas prices in the United States. We
saw a spike in that market situation, that supply crisis. What
we need to look at, though, is as we contemplate much higher
volumes of exports, far beyond anything if you look at both
what we have authorized, the 48 billion cubic feet and then the
14 billion cubic feet of projects that are pending,
collectively, that takes us in the neighborhood of 60 billion
cubic feet, which is well above half of U.S. domestic natural
gas production.
The Department of Energy has never analyzed exports at that
level, and we are duty bound to look at that and see what the
domestic price and supply and other considerations are. Along
with the needs of our allies and the environmental
considerations, we have to look at all of that----
Mr. Khanna. Let me help you out a little bit, maybe help
out the Biden messaging. Isn't it true that the EIA project
projects that if the President had not taken this policy, you
would have American consumers paying 10 percent more in their
electricity bills?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, the EIA does, in their projections,
does associate an incremental increase in price based on given
levels of increased export.
Mr. Khanna. Isn't a simple way of saying this is the
President's policy is saving Americans' electricity bills 10
percent, whereas what the Republicans want without this pause
would mean higher electricity prices for Americans because of
their ideological commitment to utility companies and LNG
companies?
Mr. Crabtree. We are very concerned that any future
decisions we make do not lead to higher domestic prices, sir.
Mr. Khanna. My sense is that this is the President's total
priority, and you heard from my colleague on the other side,
they care about the companies. This President cares about
lowering prices for Americans, and it also happens that it is
good for climate disasters. Can you explain, Mr. Crabtree, how
much climate disasters have cost the U.S. taxpayers over the
last year?
Mr. Crabtree. I am sorry, I do not have that data at hand--
--
Mr. Khanna. Of course.
Mr. Crabtree [continuing]. But we have been seeing for many
years a steady increase both in the number of disasters and
their intensity, and, therefore, their costs.
Mr. Khanna. Ninety-two billion dollars, 500 deaths in those
disasters. I just want to summarize, Mr. Crabtree, that the
President's policies primarily are motivated by lowering energy
prices for American consumers at a time of inflation. The big
contrast is that many of my colleagues and friends on the other
side care about the companies. That is why they are asking you,
did you meet the companies. While you are not maybe meeting
with all the companies, our President is meeting with folks in
Pennsylvania and Ohio who are facing too high electricity
bills, and his policies are with them in mind, lower their
electricity bills. If he had not done this, they would be
paying 10 percent higher. Is that a fair summary of the
President's policies here?
Mr. Crabtree. That is a fair summary. For the record,
though, it is important. I want to emphasize that in my job, in
the 2 years I have been in this job, I have met with all
stakeholders. I have met with industry, both natural gas and
LNG industry. I have met with other industries----
Mr. Khanna. But do you prioritize the American people
first?
Mr. Crabtree [continuing]. And I have met with
environmental and community groups and other stakeholders. We
have an open door. We are taking improvements from all parties,
so I just want to make that clear.
Mr. Khanna. That is fair. I yield back.
Mr. Fallon. The Chair now recognizes Ms. Norton for her
closing statement.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We have heard in this
hearing today the United States has grown to be the world
leader in liquified natural gas exports in less than a decade.
The Department of Energy has already permitted more than 50
billion cubic feet of LNG export capacity. That total of new
export capacity eclipses the United States' daily energy use.
As I showed earlier, the Biden Administration has paused only a
small fraction of possible permits. The Administration paused
new permits to perform a long-overdue update of public interest
studies that currently do not reflect reality.
Updating the Nation's permitting policies based on modern
information and data is just good government. The world has
changed in the last 5 years. Russia invaded Ukraine, leading
Europe to end all LNG purchases from Vladimir Putin, leaving
them searching for new sources of natural gas. The United
states seized this opportunity to help our allies hurt Vladimir
Putin and rise from fourth in natural gas exports globally to
first in just a few years. At that time, American exporters
doubled their capacity.
At the same time, the Inflation Reduction Act and
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act supercharged domestic
green energy production. The Biden Administration has America
on a clean energy path that allows us to move forward from
fossil fuels like LNG. In the meantime, DOE must update its LNG
export public interest analysis to account for the detrimental
impacts on the communities that house LNG export locations.
Previous assessments overlooked the disproportionate impact on
underserved communities and ignored critical questions of
environmental justice. I commend the Biden-Harris
Administration's actions to right these historical wrongs.
This hearing boils down to a made-up war on energy and an
attack on evidence-based policymaking. President Biden and
congressional Democrats have charted a path to renewable,
affordable energy for all Americans. Thank you, and I yield
back.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you very much. I just want to correct the
record. Since 2012, the pause that occurred then, and before
the studies were complete in 2014 and 2015, the DOE actually
issued seven conditional projects. The precedent appears clear
to me. And also, we rose to prominence in historical high
production levels in the 10-year period where there were zero
LNG export bans. And I will say once again, the production
levels today are determined by policies and decisions from
years ago. The industry wants stability and predictability.
I talked with former Secretary of state Mike Pompeo, and I
found something that he said very interesting, that when he was
talking to other diplomats, heads of state, et cetera, and his
counterparts around the world, that he had a lot more pliancy
and flexibility when he was negotiating things that were
unrelated to energy because of the production levels that
occurred during the Trump Administration, and because these
nation-states wanted, needed, need what we have an abundance
of.
The Biden Administration is simply unserious about energy
independence, and I do think there is a war on energy. You can
ask the energy industry, and I did not come to Congress,
despite what one of my colleagues said, to do the bidding of
anyone other than the American people and certainly not the
energy sector. I want the free markets to reign, and I found it
very interesting as well that, apparently, Joe Biden can
prevent natural disasters. I was unaware of that, so that is
very interesting. And I do think there is a war on American
energy, though, and it is very clear. You can ask the energy
industry, and you can see what President Biden did on day one,
was canceling the Keystone XL Pipeline and emptying our
Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
We had a hearing on that, on the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve, and how it is essentially--I do not know what the
exact number is as it is now updated--but it is about half of
what it was when he came into office. That is absolutely
inexcusable, particularly when Mr. Crabtree talked about
precedent. The precedent was, when we were drawing down the
Strategic Reserve, we were drawing it down sometimes 10 million
barrels here, 20 million here, right after a natural disaster,
or I think it was the incursion in Libya. We have never drawn
it down 200, 300, 350 million barrels ever, and that just
happened before a midterm election, so, that is inexcusable.
And I do think that the ban on liquified natural gas
exports is also inexcusable because when you have capital-
intensive industries and projects, they need reliability, they
need stability, they need predictability. They are risking a
lot. When they invest that money, there is no guarantee that
there is going to be a return, and we all use the energy that
they produce. I found it also interesting that at a State of
the Union address, the President of the United States said we
may need--may need--fossil fuels 10 years from now. I find that
remarkable. I think we are definitely going to need them moving
forward.
The Department says that because the U.S. leads the world
in LNG exports, it needs to update its public interest analysis
for LNG permitting, and that requires a pause in permitting. It
does not require a pause. You can do both. Again, you can do it
at the same time. The update to the analysis will include new
studies on LNG's climate impact. After the pause's
announcement, White House national climate advisor, she could
not even answer questions when asked about the amount of
greenhouse gas emissions that this pause would cut in the short
term. And there is a good reason to think it will not reduce
emissions at all, and I sure as hell think it is not going to
prevent any natural disasters.
You know, listen to what 10 of my democratic colleagues
wrote President Biden on February 1, 2024, urging him to
support U.S. LNG exports, and this is a quote: ``If U.S. LNG
replaced international coal use by 2030, it would have the
equivalent climate impact of electrifying every vehicle in the
United States, installing rooftop solar on every U.S. home, and
doubling our current wind capacity.'' That is some bipartisan
commonsense. They also wrote, ``Every molecule of US LNG
exported helps limit the growth of global emissions.''
Why then is the Biden Administration willing to say goodbye
to one of the most important tools in the tool shed for
reducing emissions? The liquified natural gas pause sends the
wrong message to the world, as do other clearly political
decisions against U.S. energy interests. I think, again, for
the record, we should note that this pause, this ban, will only
be lifted after the November elections this year. We have heard
testimony today explaining how the pause is not affecting
domestic price adversely, and how the operational capacity of
our LNG exports remains at high levels. What these numbers do
not indicate are the market conditions for new LNG facilities
and LNG exports which, ultimately, impact prices and our
ability to export. LNG is a global commodity. The prices
fluctuate based on markets. It is just more coincidental that
domestic prices have gone down slightly in the last 3 months.
What these numbers do not indicate are market conditions for
new LNG facilities and LNG exports, which, ultimately, again,
impact the prices and our ability to export.
And to quote, again, one of my Democratic colleagues on
February 1 in the letter to President Biden, ``It is time to
dispel the false narrative that U.S. LNG exports have an impact
on domestic prices.'' Another quote: ``Despite record high LNG
exports, U.S. natural gas prices have collapsed since February
2022.'' So let us be clear. United States' LNG exports have not
had any sustained and significant direct impact on natural gas
prices domestically. Exports of LNG have the potential to add
$73 billion to the U.S. economy and create thousands of, as my
colleague, Mr. Higgins said, well-paying jobs. This is
economics 101, and really, it is kind of free market for
dummies in which the Department of Energy needs to have a
lesson in.
Meanwhile, Russia is laughing in our faces. Think about who
was pleased by this ban or pause. I think Vladimir Putin and
the Kremlin was very happy with it. You know, newspapers in
Russia are writing ``now it is not Russia but the United States
that wants to bring Germans to their knees by denying new
American LNG export potential.'' Many European Parliament
members have expressed regret and concern over the pause in the
announcement that came in January. They wrote, ``The decision
not to allow permits to proceed undermines America's allies and
the Western order more broadly and will give succor to our
adversaries and those who wish to divide us. We should
reconsider.''
I would like to submit for the record the European
Parliament letter and House Democrats' February 1, 2024 letter
to President Biden in the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
The question becomes, if it is not the U.S. supplying
affordable and clean and abundant energy to the world, who is
going to do it? I think some nefarious actors are going to be
very pleased. Our allies around the world are relying on us. We
need to provide leadership. We have what not only they want,
but what they need, and we need to provide consistent energy
supplies at affordable prices. Instead, this Administration has
chosen to intentionally create uncertainty within the markets
at a time when global tensions are growing increasingly high,
particularly considering what is happening in the Middle East
right now. America is uniquely situated to provide the world
with affordable energy, and it is a blessing, and, you know, we
should not hinder our own energy security. The rest of the
world will be watching closely the decisions that we make here
in Washington, and we urge the Department of Energy to
reevaluate and reverse this misguided decision.
I want to thank our witness for coming today, and with
that, this Committee hearing is adjourned.
Nope. Nope. One minute.
And with that, and without objection, all Members have 5
legislative days within which to submit materials and
additional written questions for the witnesses, which will be
forwarded to the witnesses.
Mr. Fallon. If there are no further business, without
objection, the Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:49 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
