- ASSESSING AMERICA'S VACCINE SAFETY SYSTEMS PART 1

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ASSESSING AMERICA'S
VACCINE SAFETY SYSTEMS
PART 1

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SELECT SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 15, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-89

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov
------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-866 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Michael Cloud, Texas                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Ro Khanna, California
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Katie Porter, California
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Cori Bush, Missouri
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Jimmy Gomez, California
Byron Donalds, Florida               Shontel Brown, Ohio
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
William Timmons, South Carolina      Robert Garcia, California
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Maxwell Frost, Florida
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Greg Casar, Texas
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Dan Goldman, New York
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Nick Langworthy, New York            Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
Eric Burlison, Missouri
Mike Waltz, Florida

------
Mark Marin, Staff Director
Mitchell Benzine, Subcommittee Staff Director
Marie Policastro, Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5074

Miles Lichtman, Minority Staff Director
------

Select Subcommittee On The Coronavirus Pandemic

Brad Wenstrup, Ohio, Chairman
Nicole Malliotakis, New York         Raul Ruiz, California, Ranking
Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa           Minority Member
Debbie Lesko, Arizona                Debbie Dingell, Michigan
Michael Cloud, Texas                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
John Joyce, Pennsylvania             Deborah Ross, North Carolina
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Robert Garcia, California
Ronny Jackson, Texas                 Ami Bera, California
Rich Mccormick, Georgia              Jill Tokuda, Hawaii

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on February 15, 2024................................     1

Witnesses

Daniel Jernigan, M.D., M.P.H., Director, National Center for
Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC)
Oral Statement...................................................     7
Peter Marks, M.D., Ph.D., Director, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research (CBER), Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)
Oral Statement...................................................     5
CDR George Reed Grimes, M.D., M.P.H., Director, Division of
Injury Compensation Programs, Health Resources and Services
Administration (HRSA)
Oral Statement...................................................     8

Written opening statements and the written statements of the
witnesses are available on the U.S. House of Representatives
Document Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

Article, New York Times, ``Covid Shots for Children''; submitted
by Rep. Cloud.

Article, Vox, ``Covid vaccine hesitancy could doom future
vaccines''; submitted by Rep. Mfume.

Report, NBER, ``Excess Death Rates''; submitted by Rep. Raskin.

Joint Statement, Group of Six; submitted by Rep. Ruiz.

Stakeholder Letter, Assessing Vaccine Safety Systems; submitted
by Rep. Ruiz.

Statement for the Record, Association of State and Territorial
Health Officials (ASTHO); submitted by Rep. Tokuda.

Questions for the Record: to Dr. Marks; submitted by Rep. Miller-
Meeks.

Questions for the Record: to CDR Grimes; submitted by Rep.
Miller-Meeks.

Questions for the Record: to Dr. Jernigan; submitted by Rep.
Lesko.

Questions for the Record: to Dr. Marks; submitted by Rep. Lesko.

Questions for the Record: to CDR Grimes; submitted by Rep. Lesko.

Questions for the Record: to Dr. Jernigan; submitted by Rep.
Cloud.

Questions for the record: to Dr. Marks; submitted by Rep. Cloud.

Questions for the Record: to CDR Grimes; submitted by Rep. Cloud.

Documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

ASSESSING AMERICA'S
VACCINE SAFETY SYSTEMS
PART 1

----------

Thursday, February 15, 2024

House of Representatives

Committee on Oversight and Accountability

Select Subcommittee on the Coronavirus Pandemic

Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Brad R. Wenstrup
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Wenstrup, Malliotakis, Miller-
Meeks, Lesko, Cloud, Joyce, Greene, McCormick, Comer (ex
officio), Ruiz, Dingell, Mfume, Ross, Garcia, Tokuda, and
Raskin (ex officio).
Dr. Wenstrup. The Subcommittee will come to order.
I want to welcome everyone here today.
Without objection, the Chair may declare a recess at any
time.
Before I move on to opening statements, I want to go ahead
and advise Members, although there are very few here, that may
be an advice I give again, advise Members and remind them of
all the rules of decorum.
The issues we are debating are important ones that Members
feel deeply about. I understand that. While vigorous
disagreement is part of the legislative process, Members are
reminded that we must adhere to established standards of
decorum and debate.
This is a reminder that it is a violation of House rules
and the rules of this Committee to engage in personalities
regarding other Members or to question the motives of a
colleague. Remarks of that type are not permitted by the rules
and are not in keeping with the best traditions of our
Committee. This is a very serious matter.
The Chair will enforce these rules of decorum at all times,
and I urge all Members to be mindful of their remarks today. If
the Chair finds the Member to be in violation, the Member will
be suspended from speaking for the remainder of the
proceedings.
I now recognize myself for the purpose of making an opening
statement.
Good morning. Vaccines are a crucial public health tool
which save millions of lives. As a physician myself, I've
administered many doses of vaccines, especially COVID-19
vaccines. In 2020, I even volunteered to participate in the
Moderna vaccine trials.
Having this hearing is not an anti-vax hearing and I am not
anti-vax. I shouldn't even have to say that, but,
unfortunately, I do. I'm sure, as I sit here, there are people
getting ready to use that very pejorative to discredit this
hearing. Unfortunately, in an era of sound bites and newscycle
whiplash, it seems there is little time for nuanced
conversation about these topics. Today I hope we can have that
nuanced conversation about process.
Sometimes we don't know any weaknesses in a system until it
is truly tested. Now is the time to safeguard for the future
and about how we can do better next time if there are things we
recognize that could have been done better. It's now a time to
look at the things we did well, as well. But we need to restore
trust in public health and the process.
I'm very concerned with the hesitancy by so many today to
vaccinate their children. That's a grave concern of mine.
Testifying before us today are two senior officials who lead
the government's post-marketing vaccine safety systems. These
systems are absolutely critical to keeping the American people
safe but also to earning and preserving their trust and the
trust of the physicians that care for patients.
Our witnesses will discuss how these systems work, what
they can do, what they can't do, and the challenges that they
face. That's a fair process. The testimony is important to
design better systems in the future, as needed.
One such system, the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting
System, or VAERS, as it is well-known, is perhaps the best
known of these surveillance systems. VAERS has been a source of
attention and controversy since the beginning of the COVID-19
rollout.
However, concerns about these data are usually met with
dismissive replies. Unfortunately, they often point to the fact
that VAERS is unable to prove causality, and it contains
reports of people being hit by a car after vaccination. They
say that VAERS is being misused by anti-vaccine advocates and
that it is misinformation. These are all legitimate concerns of
the American people especially.
This seems to ignore many legitimate questions that have
been raised. For example, how does the government utilize this
data? We want to know.
During her testimony before this Committee last June,
Director Walensky assured us that the CDC had a responsibility
to comb through every single report to VAERS, if you will. It's
unclear if that has happened or if that's true.
People who have submitted reports to VAERS have told my
staff that they were never contacted by CDC or FDA officials. A
recent British Medical Journal investigation found this, too.
It seems that both sides agree that there's something wrong
here.
Further, while serious injuries caused by vaccines are
rare, the government has assumed the responsibility to
compensate for them. In doing so, vaccine manufacturers have
been shielded from liability. Therefore, the government has an
important duty, one that is essential in preserving trust in
vaccines and how we message completely and honestly about them.
Appearing before us today is Commander George Reed Grimes,
Dr. Grimes. Dr. Grimes is HRSA's Director of Injury
Compensation Programs and oversees the Countermeasures Injury
Compensation Program, or CICP, as well as the Vaccine Injury
Compensation Program, or VICP. Because COVID-19 vaccines were
purchased and distributed by the Federal Government under the
Public Readiness and Emergency Preparedness, PREP, Act, they
are covered under CICP, whereas most other widely distributed
vaccines are covered under VICP.
As of January 2024, CICP has compensated 11 claims out of
the more than 12,000 that have been filed for COVID-19
vaccines. Because of its design, CICP payments are also
significantly smaller than VICP, an average of about $3,700
compared with almost $500,000 in VICP. So, it appears that CICP
may not be designed or equipped to handle a vaccine that was so
widely distributed and mandated for many as COVID-19 vaccines
were.
So, I have concerns that we wouldn't be able to expect
people to line up and get vaccinated during the next pandemic
if they feel that in some way they're going to be abandoned.
Again, this testimony is important for designing better
systems for the future and establishing best practices. I hope
this hearing will provide us with an opportunity to discuss
what lessons were learned during the pandemic about our vaccine
safety and surveillance systems. These lessons, I believe, are
critical in preparing for future pandemics, which is the
mission, one of the missions, of this Subcommittee.
And I look forward to a robust and on-topic discussion
about these issues. And I want to thank everyone for being
here, especially our witnesses for being here.
I would now like to recognize Ranking Member Ruiz for the
purpose of making an opening statement.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses for your participation in today's hearing.
Our Nation's vaccine safety systems play a critical role in
protecting public health. Every day scientists, physicians, and
public health officials work together as part of this system to
monitor the safety and efficacy of vaccines to ensure the best
possible products reach everyday Americans.
Their efforts have helped protect us from the threat of
deadly diseases for decades, and their efforts during the
COVID-19 pandemic helped contribute to one of the most
successful vaccine rollouts in history, which, under President
Biden's leadership, led the country out of the depths of the
pandemic.
In total, these efforts saved 3.2 million lives, prevented
18.5 million hospitalizations, and saved the United States an
estimated $1.15 trillion in medical costs.
As a physician who went out into underserved communities to
administer vaccines during the height of the pandemic, I saw
firsthand the difference these vaccines made in helping our
communities overcome COVID-19.
So, at the end of the day, we were able to save so many
lives, prevent so much illness, and reduce a mountain of
medical costs on our system because these vaccines were shown
repeatedly to be safe and effective due to extensive clinical
data.
And, since then, our Nation's robust vaccine surveillance
systems and countless other studies have only reaffirmed the
safety of these vaccines by monitoring for and evaluating
serious adverse events, which remain rare.
This system has worked well. In fact, we saw it
successfully identify safety signals and vaccines during the
pandemic when it detected cases of thrombosis with
thrombocytopenia syndrome, or TTS, associated with the Johnson
& Johnson vaccine, resulting in the CDC and FDA releasing
updated recommendations for vaccine products.
So, I do want to be clear that, while adverse events are
rare, they are not impossible. That is why we must continue to
invest in a strong, capable vaccine safety and surveillance
system that is efficient in ensuring the best quality vaccines
reach the American people. And it is why we must ensure that,
when an adverse event does arise, people can receive the
protection and compensation that they need.
There is good bipartisan work I know we can do on this
front to strengthen the National Vaccine Injury Compensation
Program and Countermeasures Injury Compensation Program to make
them more efficient. And I hope that discuss--I hope that we
discuss those reforms here today.
Today's hearing does have the potential to generate
forward-looking policy solutions that improve people's lives.
However, it only does so if we approach this topic with care,
because if we don't, I worry that we are opening a Pandora's
box that I fear we won't be able to close again.
Right now, we are already witnessing an alarming rise in
overall vaccine hesitancy, which has been fueled by mis-and
disinformation spread online during the last 4 years. And, as
this mis-and disinformation has festered, immunization rates
among Americans have fallen for COVID-19, polio, measles,
mumps, and rubella. This should be alarming to us all. We've
already seen outbreaks of measles pop up in under-vaccinated
communities in the last year including in Philadelphia and
Columbus. And we've already seen an additional 300,000 COVID-19
deaths in the U.S. that could have been prevented if not for a
growing distrust in vaccines.
I worry that the politicization of medicine, the
politicization of science and vaccines will ultimately hurt us
all in the end and that the manufacturing of distrust in public
health norms and institutions that we have held true for so
long will make us less prepared to combat a future pandemic.
For example, Republicans are already 2.4 times more likely
than Democrats or Independents to believe that COVID-19
vaccines are unsafe. Childhood vaccination rates are already at
a historic low, and we are already in the process of undoing
decades of progress in overcoming infectious diseases. And,
unless we handle each opportunity to discuss this with immense
care, we are hurtling toward an even more grim future.
So, I urge for a constructive, civil conversation among us
all today that focuses on strengthening our current safety and
compensation programs, enhancing confidence in our public
health institutions, and building a brighter, healthier future
for us all.
And I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Dr. Ruiz.
Our witnesses today are Dr. Daniel Jernigan. Dr. Jernigan
is the director of the National Center for Emerging and
Zoonotic Infectious Diseases at the U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention.
Dr. Peter Marks, Dr. Marks is the director of the Center
for Biologics Evaluation and Research at the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration.
Commander Dr. George Reed Grimes, Commander Grimes is the
Director of Injury Compensation Programs at the U.S. Health
Resources and Services Administration.
Pursuant to Committee on Oversight and Accountability rule,
the witnesses will please stand and raise their right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony that you
are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
Thank you. You may be seated.
Let the record show that the witnesses all answered in the
affirmative.
This Select Subcommittee certainly appreciates you all for
being here today, and we truly look forward to your testimony.
Let me remind the witnesses that we have read your written
statement, and they will appear in full in the hearing record.
Please limit your oral statement to 5 minutes.
As a reminder, please press the button on the microphone in
front of you so that it is on, and the Members can hear you.
When you begin to speak, the light in front of you will turn
green. After 4 minutes, the light will turn yellow. When the
red light comes on, your 5 minutes has expired, and we would
ask that you please wrap up.
I now recognize Dr. Marks to give an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF PETER MARKS M.D., PH.D.

DIRECTOR

CENTER FOR BIOLOGICS EVALUATION AND RESEARCH

FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION

Dr. Marks. Chair Wenstrup, Chair Comer, Ranking Member
Ruiz, Ranking Member Raskin, and Members of the Select
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before
you today to discuss the Food and Drug Administration's COVID-
19 response and ongoing vaccine safety efforts.
Vaccines work. We know from clear and compelling evidence
that vaccines save the lives of millions of children and adults
every year by producing immune responses that prevent diseases,
such as measles, influenza, and COVID-19.
Though they may not provide perfect protection, vaccines
can often prevent the most serious consequences of disease
including hospitalization and death.
The American public can be rest assured that vaccines that
are authorized or approved are safe and effective. The vaccine
development process and FDA's stringent regulatory and
scientific evaluation process and continued safety surveillance
ensure that the health benefits of available approved and
authorized vaccines far outweigh any risks.
Regarding COVID-19 vaccines, FDA helped make these critical
medical countermeasures available as quickly as possible
without compromising our scientific and regulatory standards.
During a once-in-a-lifetime pandemic that was a public
health emergency, FDA scientists and employees worked around
the clock cooperatively, intensively, and efficiently alongside
researchers and manufacturers to minimize the time between the
clinical development process, manufacturing scale-up, and the
regulatory review process.
Hundreds of Americans were dying from COVID-19 daily at
this time, and every day we could make vaccines available
sooner counted. Every day counted, and we made them count.
Between December 2020 and May 2023, over 270 million people
received more than 675 million doses of COVID-19 vaccines in
the United States including over 650 million doses of mRNA
vaccines. The COVID-19 vaccines have had a tremendous positive
impact over the course of the pandemic globally, ultimately
saving millions of lives since their introduction.
The vaccines continue to be among the most effective public
health measures for preventing the serious consequences of
COVID-19. A large part of what has made this public health
success possible is the deployment of sophisticated safety
monitoring. In fact, COVID vaccines are the most closely
monitored vaccines that have ever been rolled out in U.S.
history.
The safety of the approved and authorized COVID-19 vaccines
has been monitored by FDA through both passive and active
safety surveillance systems in collaboration with CDC and other
governmental and nongovernmental partners.
FDA also participates in ongoing international
pharmacovigilance efforts, and these are in addition to the
safety surveillance efforts required of the vaccine
manufacturers.
These surveillance tools work. In early 2021, just days
after passive safety surveillance reporting through the Vaccine
Adverse Event Reporting System detected that six out of more
than 6 million patients who had received the Janssen COVID-19
vaccine had developed a rare blood-clotting disorder, CDC and
FDA recommended pausing the use of that vaccine until the risk
could be further evaluated.
Another example is the detection of myocarditis that
occurred primarily in younger males from the use of COVID-19
vaccines, which led FDA to modify labeling and CDC to provide
advice on the mRNA COVID vaccines to healthcare providers about
how to reduce this risk.
Vaccines are one of the most highly effective public health
measures, and they're responsible for saving millions of lives
every year. The benefits of available approved and authorized
vaccines in the United States when used appropriately continue
to far outweigh any risks.
Staying up-to-date on vaccination has been and continues to
be the best way to reduce the risk of death and serious illness
or hospitalization from various infectious diseases including
COVID-19.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I look
forward to answering your questions.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Dr. Jernigan to give an
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL JERNIGAN, M.D., M.P.H.

DIRECTOR

NATIONAL CENTER FOR EMERGING AND

ZOONOTIC INFECTIOUS DISEASES

CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION

Dr. Jernigan. Thank you.
So, Chairman Wenstrup, Chair Comer, Ranking Member Ruiz,
Ranking Member Raskin, and distinguished Members of the
Subcommittee, it is an honor to appear before you today to
discuss CDC's ongoing work to monitor the safety and
effectiveness of vaccines.
I serve as the Director of the National Center for Emerging
and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases at CDC, which includes CDC's
Immunization Safety Office.
CDC works to protect against public health threats through
prevention, detection, and response, and vaccines are a
cornerstone of that work. They have played a leading role in
irradicating smallpox, eliminating wild polio virus from the
United States, and averting millions of illnesses and deaths
from childhood-vaccine-preventable diseases.
During the COVID-19 public health emergency, over 676
million doses of COVID-19 vaccines were administered in the
U.S., which are estimated to have prevented millions of
hospitalizations and deaths. These public health successes have
been made possible by a shared commitment to ensuring vaccines
are safe.
As such, vaccine safety monitoring is a top priority for
CDC, and we collaborate closely with FDA and other partners. We
utilize multiple data systems in a complementary and layered
approach to detect possible safety signals, investigate them
rigorously, and act promptly when appropriate.
The Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System, or VAERS, is a
system where individuals, healthcare providers, and
manufacturers can report adverse events following vaccination
that may need to be investigated further. VAERS is not designed
to determine if a vaccine caused a reported event. Rather it is
an early warning system where we evaluate reports of serious
adverse events and use complementary systems to further analyze
potential safety concerns.
These other systems include the Vaccine Safety Datalink,
which uses electronic health records for robust analysis, and
the Clinical Immunization Safety Assessment Project, or CISA,
which offers consultation to providers on patient-adverse
events.
During the COVID-19 response, CDC also established V-safe,
a smartphone app where individuals can report health impacts
after vaccination. We also established a COVID-19 Vaccine
Pregnancy Registry to monitor pregnancy and infant outcomes
over time following vaccination.
CDC is committed to transparency and regularly shares
information on vaccine safety with our Federal and state
partners. And, in addition, there have been more than 30 public
meetings of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices,
or ACIP, featuring research on COVID-19 vaccine safety and
effectiveness. This approach to safety monitoring works. I'll
share two examples with you and underscore Dr. Marks' comments.
The first is, during the first 6 weeks that the J&J vaccine
was authorized for use, CDC identified six cases of a very rare
but life-threatening blood clot through VAERS. When additional
review identified a causal relationship between the J&J vaccine
and the blood clot, CDC and FDA acted within days to quickly
inform clinicians and the public, convened an emergency meeting
of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, and
recommended a pause in administration of the J&J vaccine.
Further investigation led to preferential recommendation
for mRNA COVID vaccines over J&J, and currently the J&J vaccine
is not available in the United States.
The second example is myocarditis. In April 2021, CDC
observed higher reports of myocarditis following mRNA COVID-19
vaccination, particularly in young men through the VAERS
system. After confirming these events, using the Vaccine Safety
Datalink, CDC quickly updated clinical considerations, while
continuing to recommend COVID-19 vaccination. Further research
has shown that the risk of myocarditis is substantially lower
following vaccination than following infection.
As these examples show, vaccine safety monitoring by CDC
and our partners is rigorous and transparent. The data
continues to show that staying up to date on COVID-19 vaccines
is an effective and safe way to prevent severe illness,
hospitalizations, and death.
The development and administration of COVID-19 vaccines is
a remarkable scientific achievement. After the most robust and
comprehensive safety monitoring in our history, the science
shows that we should all have confidence that COVID-19 vaccines
are both safe and effective.
I appreciate the opportunity to discuss CDC's vaccine
safety efforts and look forward to your questions.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
I now recognize Commander Grimes to give an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF

COMMANDER GEORGE REED GRIMES, M.D., M.P.H.

DIRECTOR

DIVISION OF INJURY COMPENSATION PROGRAMS

HEALTH RESOURCES AND SERVICES ADMINISTRATION

Dr. Grimes. Good morning, Chairman Wenstrup, Ranking Member
Ruiz, and Members of the Subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today about
the work of the Health Resources and Services Administration's
Injury Compensation Programs.
I'm Commander Reed Grimes, Director of HRSA's division that
overseas both the Countermeasures Injury Compensation Program,
or CICP, and the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program.
The Public Readiness and Emergency Preparedness Act of
2005, or the PREP Act, created the CICP to provide compensation
for serious physical injuries or death directly caused by the
administration or use of a covered countermeasure.
HRSA has received approximately 13,000 claims alleging a
COVID-19 countermeasure injury filed with the CICP since the
PREP Act declaration in 2020. Of these, roughly 9,600 alleged
COVID-19 vaccines as the covered countermeasure. For context,
the program received about 500 claims over its 10-year history
prior to COVID-19.
While injuries are rare and the claims we've received for
COVID-19 vaccines represent a small fraction, less than 0.001
percent of all COVID-19 vaccine administrations in this
country, the caseload for the CICP is orders of magnitude
higher than it was prior to 2020.
When I became Director in December 2021, I immediately
focused on the need to increase the CICP's capacity to process
claims. The PREP Act sets a high evidence standard for an
individual to be compensated by the CICP. By law, we are
required to establish that the covered countermeasure directly
caused a covered injury, which must be determined based on
compelling, reliable, valid, medical, and scientific evidence.
As a result, the CICP conducts medical reviews of each CICP
claim to determine if it meets the statutory standard. This
detailed review includes an iterative process of obtaining and
reviewing comprehensive medical documentation from CICP
requesters, as well as closely reviewing and monitoring the
medical literature.
For compensable claims, the CICP must also collect detailed
financial information, given that the program by statute can
provide compensation only after other third-party payers.
At the time of the PREP Act declaration in 2020, the CICP
had no direct appropriation and only four staff. We requested
and Congress provided a direct appropriation for the first time
in the history of the program in Fiscal Year 2022. With these
funds, we've been able to increase hiring and now have over 35
full-time staff working to process claims.
We've also implemented other key process improvements to
resolve claims at a faster rate. In 2023, we averaged more than
90 claims resolved each month, which is up from zero per month
the year before I started in this role.
Additionally, we're improving information technology and
other communication channels with requesters. While the program
has made significant improvements, there's more to be done. The
President's Fiscal Year 2024 budget requested $15 million to
operate the CICP. With these funds, we want to continue to
increase our capacity to analyze and resolve claims including
through increased staffing and IT infrastructure improvements.
We are committed to working with Congress to meet the
program's resource needs to increase the rate of CICP claim
resolutions.
The CICP is also in the process of establishing an injury
table for COVID-19 vaccine injuries that are presumed to be
directly caused by a covered countermeasure. In order to
establish this table, HHS must meet the high evidence standards
set by Congress. The injury table is another tool that will
allow us to streamline the claims review process and more
expeditiously address requests.
Finally, I wanted to address the National Vaccine Injury
Compensation Program, or VICP. The VICP was established under a
different statute, the National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act of
1986. For a vaccine to be covered under the VICP, certain
conditions must be met, including a recommendation from the
CICP for routine--from the CDC for routine administration to
children or individuals who are pregnant, and the vaccine must
be subject to an excise tax. COVID-19 vaccines currently do not
qualify for VICP coverage, which would require congressional
action.
We at HRSA are diligently carrying out these programs as
directed by Congress and thank you for the opportunity to be
here today to discuss HRSA's work. And we look forward to
continuing to work with Congress on these critically important
programs.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you all very much for your testimony.
I now recognize myself for questions, but I just want to
say a couple of things before we start.
You know, I want everyone to understand, especially those
serving on the government side, that public perception becomes
reality. And, because of that, words matter. Words matter that
are coming out, you know.
And, for those of us as Members of Congress or as
physicians at home, we're face-to-face with people. We are
sitting face-to-face with somebody. We're not just looking at
data on a sheet and making decisions. It needs to be done, what
you're doing, but there's a difference. And that's why I say
words matter.
Let me give you an example. When you say, ``safe and
effective,'' that's relative in your mind. It's relative in
your mind, but it's not to the person at home. They hear 100
percent safe and 100 percent effective. That's what they hear.
This is why words matter.
Dr. Fauci, in his testimony even said you can never say
that any treatment is 100 percent safe. Yet, in essence, that's
what people heard and are still hearing today. We've got to
change that because the doctor on the ground or the Member of
Congress on the ground is one on one with somebody and explains
that to them hopefully.
Yes, this vaccine saved hundreds of thousands of lives.
I'll advocate for that anytime, and that's why I was for
emergency use, because people were dying, and we knew from the
trials that it could save lives and keep people out of the
hospital. But we also knew that you could still get COVID. We
never really heard that from the Federal level. We just heard
it's safe and effective.
Now we have a society that thinks that the polio vaccine
and the other vaccines aren't necessarily safe and effective
the way they have been.
We never explained mRNA technology is different from the
technology of the other vaccines that have been around forever.
And you lump them together.
When people come to my office to tell me, ``I had an
adverse event of some type,'' I'm one on one with them. It's
not just something on a piece of paper.
So, words matter. That's one of the things I want to stress
across the board from this Subcommittee at the end of the day.
Early on, I will tell you that I even said to Secretary
Azar, America needs to be hearing from the doctors treating
COVID patients, not the politician who says, ``If Trump makes
this vaccine, I'm not taking it.'' Is that helpful? We needed
to be hearing from the doctors treating COVID patients, the
doctors administering the vaccines, the doctors that were
trying to save lives. That's who the public needed to hear--be
hear about--hear from. We have to be careful with our words.
I'm grateful, Dr. Jernigan. Today you gave the caveat,
didn't you? You said it kept you from being--in most cases it
kept you from being hospitalized or dying, especially if you're
amongst the most vulnerable. I appreciated that. That's the
type of messaging we have to have going forward.
Let me tell you I'm grateful we live in a country that has
these systems in place because they're there to protect the
American people and to provide for better health in America.
But there's ways we can do better, and that's what I want to
talk about today.
So, I'm going to start by asking this question about
vaccine safety surveillance as we get into that.
I want to ask each of you this question or at least Dr.
Jernigan and Dr. Marks. Yes or no, is any pharmaceutical 100
percent safe?
Dr. Marks. Thanks very much for that question, Chair
Wenstrup.
No pharmaceutical is 100 percent safe. In fact, even the
water we drink is not a hundred percent safe. If you drink too
much of it on a hot day, you can die from complications of
water poisoning.
Dr. Wenstrup. Well said.
Dr. Jernigan. Yes, thanks for the question.
You know, as clinicians, we all recognize that no medical
intervention is risk-free.
Dr. Wenstrup. And I'll go to Dr. Grimes. You know, you--
you've--there's a reason we have a compensation program.
Dr. Grimes. Yes, sir. So, there's a reason we have a
compensation program, and we're dedicated to diligently
carrying that out.
I can't say it any better than my colleagues sitting next
to me have.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
So, it is important that we properly surveil for these
inevitable injuries, unfortunately inevitable injuries, no
matter how many or how few.
Would you agree with that, Dr. Marks?
Dr. Marks. Chair Comer, I would agree fully with that, that
if we want to maintain confidence in the vaccines and the other
medical products that we authorize or approve, we must have
very robust safety surveillance systems in place.
Dr. Wenstrup. Dr. Jernigan
Dr. Jernigan. Yes, I agree that we really need those
complementary layered and comprehensive and multiple vaccine
safety monitoring systems.
Dr. Wenstrup. Dr. Grimes?
Dr. Grimes. Thank you. I couldn't agree more.
Dr. Wenstrup. And I agree with that.
Do you feel that what we currently have is sufficient? And
I don't mean that in an adversarial way. I mean, what are some
of the things you think we could do better?
And, as I said at the beginning, sometimes it takes
something like a pandemic to recognize where we can do better
and so in that--in the vein of surveillance system being
sufficient, any ideas that you could add to that?
Dr. Marks. Chair Wenstrup, thanks so much for that
question.
I believe we had very good safety surveillance mechanisms
in place that included overlapping systems, including passive
and active systems, but I do believe we could do better.
I think there were challenges in getting data in real time
that limit us in our ability to understand what was happening
on the ground. And hopefully we can work better together with
all of the individual states to have a more unified safety
surveillance system, should this ever happen again or, for that
matter, even on an ongoing basis for our medical products.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
Dr. Jernigan.
Dr. Jernigan. Yes, I think throughout the pandemic, we
stood up really the most intensive vaccine safety monitoring in
U.S. history. We really see the benefits of having a robust
vaccine safety monitoring system, and sustaining that is going
to be a critical feature for us moving forward.
Dr. Wenstrup. Dr. Grimes.
Dr. Grimes. And I would defer to my colleagues to my right.
They're the experts in the field.
Dr. Wenstrup. Fair enough.
One of the things, as I had the pleasure of meeting with
you all individually ahead of time, what occurred to me in
hearing some of the concerns, especially, you know, this
pandemic came on quickly and you had workforce challenges, if
you will, understandably, considering that in every component
of what you do.
And one of the ideas I have is that I'm an Army Reservist.
One of the ideas I have is we have a Reserve Component in each
one of your categories of interest where we can call up experts
in the field that can handle the increased load during a
pandemic. To me, that would really aid our national security
and our national health security.
And so, it's just a thought, but I'd love to get your
opinions on it because I know you face many challenges by the
overload of what took place.
Dr. Marks.
Dr. Marks. Chair Comer--sorry--Chair Wenstrup. Sorry. Chair
Wenstrup, thank you so much for that question.
I really appreciate the opportunity to reflect on this
issue. When the pandemic happened, we at FDA were dealing with
our usual files that we have. There are many vaccines that are
important for everyday life, measles vaccine, et cetera, that
we have to review. So, we didn't have a cadre of people to just
move over, and so we had to pull people to work on the COVID-19
vaccines. And many of them had to learn how to deal with
Emergency Use Authorization.
I couldn't agree with you more that if we had a cadre of
people ready to move over, very familiar with Emergency Use
Authorization, and able to quickly move to reviewing vaccines
in a pandemic settings, that would greatly help us in the
future.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
Dr. Jernigan.
Dr. Jernigan. Yes, thank you.
I think you pointed out the workforce. And, certainly in
public health, both at the state, territorial, tribal level at
CDC, we have an aging workforce. We need more public health
people working in the field.
We at CDC really are having to act as a response agency and
really not structured that way. So, having some additional ways
to quickly mobilize folks to stand up systems quickly, to
implement innovations very rapidly, that really requires a
robust workforce that we really need going forward.
Dr. Grimes. Thank you for the question.
I think we in the CICP at the beginning of the pandemic had
four staff, as I mentioned in my opening comments. And we
needed to scale up to do the volume of the work, and that is
one of the things that we look to for the future are those
opportunities and strategies to optimize scalability and
flexibility to perform the essential functions of our critical
programs.
Dr. Wenstrup. Yes, I appreciate that. As somebody who's
endured mass casualty events, you know, to be able to be
prepared for that or at least have the call-up ability to do
that, I think that's something that I hope that we can look
into as a Congress to consider that type of reserve workforce
that's ready to go on day one.
As of February 2024, VAERS reports for COVID-19 vaccines
total significantly higher than all other vaccines combined
since 1990, as reported. This is a surprising figure.
Dr. Marks, was the government prepared for such an
avalanche of reports to VAERS? And it kind of goes with what we
just mentioned. So----
Dr. Marks. Chair Wenstrup, thank you so much for that
question.
And I apologize about your name before. It shows when
you're nervous, things can happen.
But your--the point is extremely well taken. We try to be
prepared for that, but the avalanche of reports was tremendous.
And it, again, required retasking people on the fly to, I
think, for--and I'll let my CDC colleagues speak to this. We
had to usually staff up and had many meetings, working to
increase our ability to go through these reports, because, as
you already mentioned, the--what the public sees on the public
VAERS page is just a small fraction of the information that we
ultimately collect and sift through that is very important to
determining whether an adverse event is truly related to the
vaccine.
Now one of the criticisms that we often receive is that we
don't make that additional information available, and I would
say to you that it's a challenge because what we've learned is
it's very challenging to make available essentially protected
health information, because if you have a ZIP Code that someone
was pregnant, you know, if you have a ZIP Code of someone in
Akron, Ohio, that they were pregnant and they had COVID, you
could potentially reidentify them.
So, this is one of the challenges we face in making
available information, but I think we'd like to work to make
the most information available as possible.
Dr. Wenstrup. Do you have any concept on that, Dr. Marks?
As far as this number, you know, childhood vaccines, they are
spaced out. This was a vaccine that was being administered to
a--would it be a larger swath of the population? Was the number
higher but maybe the same per capita, if you will? Does that
make sense, the question?
Dr. Marks. Yes, so I can't think--you know, our seasonal
influenzae campaigns often administer about 150 million doses
over the course of a number of months. Here we had, you know,
millions of doses rolled out really on top of each other at a
tremendously rapid rate.
And, in addition, we encouraged people. Part of the
Emergency Use Authorization process, we were encouraging safety
reporting because we felt we needed to know about any potential
adverse events so we could try to investigate and find out if
there was something we were missing.
Dr. Wenstrup. Did you have anything to add to that, Dr.
Jernigan?
Dr. Jernigan. No, I think that covered--covered a lot.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Dr. Ruiz for 5 minutes--for
questioning.
Dr. Ruiz. Today's hearing comes at a pivotal time in the
ongoing efforts to fortify declining vaccine confidence, one of
the greatest public health challenges of our time. And I agree
with the Chairman; words matter. And what we say here today
will have significance ramifications on whether millions of
Americans will continue to place their trust in safe and
effective vaccines including the COVID-19 vaccine.
Before I get to my question, I'd like to enter into the
record a letter the Select Subcommittee received from more than
50 medical and public health organizations and experts ahead of
today's hearing.
There you go.
Dr. Wenstrup. Without objection.
Dr. Ruiz. This letter, which was led by Vaccinate Your
Family and signed by a broad coalition that includes the
American Academy of Pediatrics, the Association of State and
Territorial Health Officials, the National Association of
County and City Health Officials, the American Public Health
Association, the American Heart Association, Doctors for
America, and many more warns us of the potential damage that
could be done if today's hearing fails to handle the subject of
vaccine safety carefully and without bias.
And, just this morning, a group of six leading medical
societies representing more than 560,000 physicians issued a
joint statement with a similar warning, calling on the Select
Subcommittee to, quote, ``Acknowledge the overwhelming
evidence-based science and recognize how COVID-19 vaccines
protect and save millions of lives.''
I'd also like to enter this statement into the record.
Dr. Wenstrup. Without objection.
Dr. Ruiz. Now as a physician and as Ranking Member of this
Select Subcommittee, I want to ensure that today's conversation
remains rooted in the facts. And the facts are that, while
delivering effective COVID-19 vaccines to the American people
at a historic pace, our Federal public health officials went to
painstaking lengths to evaluate their safety, and they are
continuing to do so.
Dr. Marks, your division of the FDA is responsible for
evaluating clinical trial data to authorize and approve
products including the COVID-19 vaccine. Could you please
explain for us the rigorous standards the FDA has followed in
its authorization and approval processes for the COVID-19
vaccines?
Dr. Marks. Thanks so much for that question, Ranking Member
Ruiz.
The COVID-19 vaccines, the--before we even started to
receive data, we put forth guidance, first in April and then
subsequently in October 2020, which described our expectations
for the safety and the efficacy of these vaccines. That's the
standard that we would use before we could issue an Emergency
Use Authorization.
We then for--the initial Emergency Use Authorization
required manufacturing data that was equal to what we would
have or nearly equal to what we would have required for a
biologics license application, and we required effectiveness
data that was near or equal to what we would have required for
a biologics license application.
We couldn't speed up time. So, we, in order to get the
vaccines to people in need, when thousands of people were
dying, we actually allowed the safety to be authorized with
just 2 months of median followup rather than the normal 6 to
12, but we were confident that that would capture adverse
events. So, we had good safety data.
And then, when we went to finally do the biologics license
application, we go through very large datasets. For instance,
the Pfizer vaccine had 43,000 people involved in clinical
trials, about 21--22,000 of whom had received the vaccine
initially, and then thousands more received it after 6 months.
So, we went through a tremendous amount of data, looked at
the adverse events, and looked at the effectiveness data. So
that, plus looking carefully at the manufacturing.
Dr. Ruiz. And what has the clinical trial data shown
regarding the safety of the COVID-19 vaccines?
Dr. Marks. The safety of the COVID-19 vaccines includes
that there are some initial discomfort potentially in the arm,
fatigue that could occur. And there are rarely more serious
side effects. We identified myocarditis and rare allergic
reactions and, thankfully, by putting mitigation strategies in
place, both of those have been decreased in occurrence.
Dr. Ruiz. Dr. Jernigan, your division at CDC is responsible
for operating surveillance systems that detect adverse health
effects, mild or serious. Could you please explain the
multitiered system that CDC has in place to monitor for safety
concerns regarding vaccines that have been brought to market?
Dr. Jernigan. Sure. Thanks for the question.
And, you know, like I said, we've been putting through the
most intensive vaccine safety monitoring in U.S. history, and
that at CDC includes five different systems.
The first of those is the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting
System that we talked about, which is essentially an open door
to get those reports in.
The second is the Vaccine Safety Datalink, which is a very
large electronic health records, about 13.5 medical records in
it, where we look for trends.
We have a pregnancy monitoring system. We have a
Smartphone-enabled app called V-safe. And we have a Clinician
Immunization Safety Assessment Program where we have medical
experts that can provide input into the safety monitoring.
That system has been tremendous in us being able to follow
what's going on with vaccine issues.
What we've found so far, at least with the Vaccine Safety
Datalink, is that there are lower rates of death in those that
are vaccinated compared to the unvaccinated, and there are
lower rates of cardiac complications compared to those that
have been unvaccinated.
What we're looking for in that VAERS system and these other
systems is for signals of things that might be a problem that
we need to followup on.
I think this process works. We were able to find, like we
mentioned in our opening statements, there were six cases of a
blood clot problem, a very rare problem that we identified very
early. We were able to communicate that to clinicians,
communicate that, and follow a science-based process that we
have at CDC where the science is evaluated. The data is
analyzed. It's provided to the Advisory Committee for
Immunization Practices. And we know that the Committee advises
and provides it to the director to decide.
So that process, that science-based process is what we've
been following, utilizing the data.
Dr. Ruiz. So, let's talk about the VAERS for a second. So
that is a system where individuals can report their system--
symptoms that they believe may be associated with the vaccine.
How do you then determine if it, in fact, is associated
with the vaccine or it's not associated with the vaccine?
Dr. Jernigan. Yes, so VAERS is a--it's essentially front
door where anybody----
Dr. Ruiz. It's a screening mechanism.
Dr. Jernigan. Correct. They can put in anything they think
may be associated with that vaccine. That means that we have a
lot of reports that may not exactly be associated with the
vaccine, but there's a process for reviewing those.
Every serious adverse event in VAERS is followed up,
medical records are collected, and autopsy records are
collected to identify that.
We don't use VAERS to determine if an adverse event is
caused by the vaccine. We don't use it to look at trends about
whether the vaccine's more commonly causing a problem versus
what's in the general population. We use different datasets to
do that.
Dr. Ruiz. So, one can't subscribe the data from VAERS to
being the actual rate of death or serious illness because
that--that is an initial screening, and then the investigation
that occurs afterwards will determine whether it was, in fact,
related to the vaccine or not.
Dr. Jernigan. Correct.
Dr. Ruiz. So, then there are cases, for example, where
death was reported that you found that it wasn't due to the
vaccine, correct?
Dr. Jernigan. Correct. So, for instance, a hospice patient
who is one of the more vulnerable people that we do want to get
vaccinated, they may have a standing order for ``do not
resuscitate.'' And so that patient may die 2 days after getting
the vaccine, but it really may not be associated with the
vaccine.
There are reports of vehicle injury in folks that have been
vaccinated. There are even reports of family members who died
for--caring for a vaccinated patient, but the death was not in
the vaccinated patient--who had not been vaccinated.
So, there are a number of those reports. But what we want
is to be able to say: What's the impact of those vaccines? And
we look to other datasets to really give us that information.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you.
And as I mentioned in my opening statement, this rigorous
surveillance system has demonstrated its effectiveness for the
COVID-19 vaccines, detecting exceedingly rare cases of
thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome, or TTS, among
patients who receive the J&J vaccine, for example.
Dr. Jernigan, could you explain how the detection of these
cases reflects the effectiveness of CDC's vaccine safety
surveillance system?
Dr. Jernigan. Yes, I think these indicate that the process
works. You mentioned the TTS associated with the J&J vaccine.
The systems have been able to pick up myocarditis and show that
risk of getting myocarditis is much lower among those
vaccinated than among those that were unvaccinated.
It's even a system that we've been able to pick up signals
that turn out not to be signals.
Dr. Ruiz. Uh-huh.
Dr. Jernigan. So, something called ischemic stroke can
occur, and we picked up a signal, but when we continued to
follow it, it went away.
So, we get signals that sometimes are there, sometimes
aren't. But it allows us to see things early so that we can act
quickly and change recommendations when needed.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you.
And, Dr. Marks, my understanding is that, following the
detection of these cases, FDA limited the use of the J&J
vaccine. Could you explain FDA reached this decision?
Dr. Marks. Ranking Member Ruiz, thank you for that
question.
So, we evaluated the data that came in regarding the
vaccine itself, the J&J vaccine. There were also another--there
was another vaccine that was like that vaccine that was being
used outside of the United States, which had a similar issue.
We looked at the totality of those data.
And then we changed the fact sheets for providers and for
patients, making a recommendation that this not be kind of the
first-line vaccine to be used but that it be used in those
where a single-dose vaccine, which that particular vaccine
was--was desirable rather than a two-dose regimen.
Dr. Ruiz. And so, in this instance, our surveillance
systems worked as designed, detecting rare but serious adverse
events and informing a policy decision to best protect patients
and consumers. Is that correct?
Dr. Marks. That's correct.
Dr. Ruiz. And what would you say to Americans who may
believe that action taken to address rare adverse events with
the J&J vaccine draw into question the safety of the broader
universe of COVID-19 vaccines?
Dr. Marks. I would say that this--the--I think what we see
here in vaccine safety surveillance that may be confusing for
the public sometimes is that, as an amateur radio operator, I
sometimes listen to very weak signals, and sometimes that means
you turn up the gain.
We have the gain of our vaccine safety surveillance system
turned up very high. That's the ability to detect signals. That
means sometimes we hear things that turn out not to be true, as
Dr. Jernigan just noted.
I think we have the gain turned up high, and we've
appropriately found signals, and we continue to look for
signals. We sometimes find them.
And, as I speak, we're in the process of evaluating whether
there are signals that have been detected are real or whether
they turn out to be just a statistical anomaly.
Dr. Ruiz. So, I'm not an amateur radio guy. I'm a doctor.
And it kind of sounds like what you're talking about is
specificity and with--or sensitivity. And so, you know, it
sounds like we want to detect as much as we can and then rule
out the false positives, correct?
Dr. Marks. So, in doctor's language--sorry----
Dr. Ruiz. Yes.
Dr. Marks. This is the idea here is indeed to have a very
sensitive system to pick up any signal, and then we then go
back and try to make sure it's truly related to the vaccine.
Thank you.
Dr. Ruiz. So, I hope my colleagues will heed the warnings
we received ahead of today's hearings and keep our discussions
rooted in objective information. Public confidence in vaccines,
which have saved millions of lives and continue to be the most
significant public health intervention of our time, is not
something that should be undermined for partisan gain.
So, I thank you, and I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize the Chairman of the full
Committee, Mr. Comer, from Kentucky for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to talk about the vaccine approval process and some
safety signals that were downplayed.
Dr. Marks, Pfizer submitted their full approval application
on May 18th, 2021, correct?
Dr. Marks. That's correct.
Mr. Comer. And January 18, 2022, was the original required
action due date, correct?
Dr. Marks. That's correct.
Mr. Comer. And you worked with Dr. Philip Krause and Dr.
Marion Gruber on this, correct?
Dr. Marks. That's correct.
Mr. Comer. Thank you.
When Pfizer submitted the application, Dr. Krause and Dr.
Gruber oversaw the approval process. According to documents and
testimony, they believed they could and should approve the
vaccine faster than 8 months. They proposed the end of October
2021. You, Dr. Marks, requested September 15, 2021. They
hesitated, but obliged. You, Dr. Marks, then said you wanted it
approved even faster than September 15, but they declined.
According to them, after they declined, you and former FDA
Commissioner Janet Woodcock relieved them from their roles in
the approval process. They said that they felt, quote,
``substantial pressure,'' unquote, from you to approve this
vaccine faster than they thought was defensible.
My question is, did anyone instruct you to speed up the
approval timeline faster than September 15, 2021?
Dr. Marks. Chair Comer, thank you for that question. I
think it deserves an explanation.
But what was going on during that summer that changed the
situation was, in the week ending July 10th of 2021, there were
1,645 deaths; in the week ending August 14th, there were 9,406
deaths.
There were an increasing number of deaths from COVID-19,
and there was clear knowledge that having an approved vaccine
would help Americans feel more comfortable getting vaccinated.
So, we felt speeding up the vaccine approval process----
Mr. Comer. So let me interrupt. Did anyone instruct you, or
is this just a decision you made on your own?
Dr. Marks. This was a decision that I had made on my own.
Mr. Comer. So why were you pressuring the doctors and then
removing them from the approval process when they disagreed?
Dr. Marks. The approval process was one that was--needed to
move as rapidly as possible. One of the physicians----
Mr. Comer. OK. Let me--let me--we may go back to that.
Do you recall any conversations regarding the need to
approve the vaccines in order for it to then be mandated?
Dr. Marks. There was an acknowledgment that an approval
could allow vaccine mandates to occur, but they were not
conversations over that, that it were----
Mr. Comer. So, Dr. Gruber wrote that you and Dr. Woodcock
expressed your opinion that absent a license states cannot
require mandatory vaccination. Do you recall this conversation?
Dr. Marks. I don't know what you're referring to, but I--
there is probably--it's just a statement of fact that that once
you have a licensed vaccine, a mandate could be placed.
Mr. Comer. Do you recall why Dr. Gruber and Dr. Krause
expressed concern about accelerating the approval of the
vaccine?
Dr. Marks. They were concerned about the workload.
Mr. Comer. OK.
Dr. Gruber wrote that taking a thorough approach was
important because of increasing evidence of association of this
vaccine and development of myocarditis, especially in young
men.
Do you recall seeing safety signals regarding myocarditis
in young men during this time?
Dr. Marks. There were--yes, there were safety signals
known, and they were placed on the label.
But, Chair Comer----
Mr. Comer. Let me finish. Did you ever have any
conversations regarding the vaccine approval with the
Department of Defense?
Dr. Marks. I can't recall any conversation directly with
the Department of Defense.
Mr. Comer. Did anyone else at FDA have conversations
regarding the vaccine approval with Department of Defense?
Dr. Marks. I can't speak to the conversation of others I'm
just not aware of.
Mr. Comer. Did you express your desire to approve the
vaccine by August 20th?
Dr. Marks. I did.
Mr. Comer. And it was ultimately approved on August 23d,
correct?
Dr. Marks. Correct.
Mr. Comer. And just for the record, the military mandate
was issued on the 24th, and that is interesting timing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Mrs. Dingell from Michigan
for 5 minutes of questions.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am concerned that America's confidence in--in the safety
and efficacy of vaccines is of critical importance to our
Nation's public health. For hundreds of years, dating back to
1796 and cow pox, vaccines have saved lives and reduced the
threat of deadly diseases, from polio to measles to COVID-19.
However, we are now witnessing a startling decline in
immunization levels across the board. And I'm deeply concerned
about what this means for our Nation's ability to respond to
public health threats in the future. We're having measles
breakouts. We've got one in Washington, DC, from exposure at
the airport.
So, I want to focus on what we can and should do to promote
vaccine confidence with constructive reforms that enhance
community engagement and strengthen the vaccine systems.
One way I think we can go about this is approaching people
with compassion, but making sure that their questions are
answered honestly, with trustworthy, accurate information that
breaks through some of the noise, by the way, that's a lot of
false information online.
During the height of the pandemic, Democrats passed the
American Rescue Plan, which not only helped get vaccines out to
the American people but also invested in community-based
outreach programs to help increase vaccine uptake. These
programs focused on meeting people where they were, to equip
them with transparent, reliable information about vaccine
safety and development.
Dr. Jernigan, I'd like to get your thoughts--short, because
I have some other questions. How does the CDC work to proceed
people with timely, accurate information regarding vaccine
safety and efficacy?
Dr. Jernigan. Thanks. Yes, at CDC, we are committed to
transparency, and we regularly share that information on
vaccine safety with our Federal partners, state partners,
through our different communication mechanisms that we have--
through the web, through other media, et cetera.
Mrs. Dingell. So, I think it's important that people know
about the known side effects of the vaccine or rare adverse
events that may occur after vaccination.
The Subcommittee is probably tired of hearing me talk about
getting Guillain-Barre after a swine flu shot--which, by the
way, I was mandated to get and assured that it was safe and
effective, and it was obviously neither.
And I was scared to death to get this COVID vaccine. I
sought out accurate information from physicians at U of M and
any doctor I knew walking down the street--some of them may not
have been qualified--to reassure me about the safety of the
COVID-19 vaccine. And I finally did get it, and prepared to
die. But, unfortunately, I'm still here giving everybody a hard
time--well, fortunately. I shouldn't say it that way.
But, ultimately, I supported the Biden administration's
commonsense policies to increase vaccine uptake because I
believed we had systems in place. The systems that we're
discussing today were working to ensure that adverse events
could be detected and meaningfully addressed.
Dr. Jernigan, can you please speak to the ways in which the
CDC provides transparent information regarding rare adverse
events that may occur from various vaccines, including COVID-19
vaccines?
Dr. Jernigan. Thanks.
So, as we mentioned, there are a number of different
surveillance systems that we monitor. Once we see any signal
there, we communicate that to the general public, to the
healthcare providers. We provide that information to the
Advisory Committee, and then recommendations can be changed.
So, we are committed to transparency. We provided
information on risk-benefit analysis at 30 different ACIP,
Advisory Committee, meetings over the last 3 years. So, we get
that information out so people can understand.
Mrs. Dingell. So do you think doctors are getting it.
And what steps do you think Congress should take to support
and strengthen these efforts? For example, what role does
comprehensive funding from Congress play in CDC's ability to
operate these surveillance programs?
Dr. Jernigan. Certainly, we want to work very closely with
healthcare providers. It's really that connection between the
healthcare provider and the patient that is where the decisions
and the understanding comes from many times. We want to get
that information out.
We have safety systems right now that were at one level
before the pandemic, are at a very high level now in terms of
the activities that we're doing. And we are not needing to go
back to where we were before. We need to sustain those systems
that are broad now, help us with new vaccines that come out,
get the most information about safety.
Mrs. Dingell. So, in the rare instances when something does
go awry and an adverse event occurs, people need to know there
is protection and compensation available to them should they
need it.
Commander Grimes, how do our Nation's vaccine compensation
programs work to adjudicate valid claims or compensate
individuals as quickly as possible?
Dr. Grimes. Thank you, ma'am, for that question.
So, the Countermeasures Injury Compensation Program, or the
CICP--we're required by statute to make a determination based
on the compelling, reliable, valid, medical, and scientific
evidence that a serious physical injury or death was directly
caused by the countermeasure.
We have at least three advanced practice providers that
review each claim. And a claim is reviewed for legal
sufficiency to ensure that it meets with the statutes set by
Congress.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm out of time. But
I hope we all will work together to make sure people do keep
confidence in--vaccines prevent death, ultimately.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Ms. Malliotakis from New York
for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Malliotakis. Good morning, and thank you, Mr. Chairman,
for holding this important hearing on vaccine safety and injury
compensation.
I would like to extend my gratitude to all the witnesses
for taking the time to share their expertise with us today.
In March 2020, our world experienced a profound and
undeniable shift, and the rapid spread of COVID-19 brought both
fear and uncertainty. Then, in an extraordinary triumph of
science innovation, a vaccine was developed in record time.
This groundbreaking moment held the promise of protection and a
return to normalcy.
However, subsequent actions, from overstating vaccine
efficacy to the implementation of sweeping mandates and the
suppression of open scientific debate, eroded public trust, and
these decisions left lingering questions about vaccine safety,
sparking both valid concerns and unfounded fears.
We have systems expressly designed to monitor for vaccine-
related harms and provide recourse for injuries. Unfortunately,
the actions surrounding the COVID-19 vaccine have highlighted
areas where these systems may have fallen short. And we can
start rebuilding trust for safe and effective vaccines in the
future. After all, we do know that vaccines really are
oftentimes lifesavers.
But I do want to point specifically to the concerns about
post-vaccination heart issues, particularly myocarditis in
young people. In fact, myocarditis is one of the injuries that
have been compensated for.
And I'd like to know from both--either Dr. Jernigan or Dr.
Marks, what specific monitoring--or, I guess, safety monitoring
or research projects are currently underway by the CDC or the
FDA to delve deeper into this issue?
Dr. Marks. So, I'm happy to start. Thank you for that
question.
We have had multiple go-rounds in our adverse event
reporting systems that use active surveillance--one of them is
called the BEST System--to look among large data bases--claims
data bases and electronic healthcare records--to look at the
incidence of myocarditis in vaccinated individuals versus
nonvaccinated individuals.
And some of that work has now been published. I think it
leads us to understand that, after the first COVID-19 vaccine,
where--the primary series, given two doses 3 to 4 weeks apart--
there was a risk in the younger age range of males that was
about 1 in 10-to 1 in 20,000--1 in 10,000 to 1 in 20,000
individuals got myocarditis. Now, with the spacing out of the
vaccines, that risk is almost undetectable.
And there was a recent study published in JAMA Pediatrics,
in 3-million-plus individuals, ages 5 to 17 years, who had
received 5.9 million vaccine doses, which really only--again,
it confirmed what we had seen: There was a signal for
myocarditis or pericarditis only after the primary vaccination
series with the Pfizer mRNA vaccine in those 12 to 17 years of
age, and that now that signal is not being seen more recently.
So, I think we've learned something about how to deploy the
vaccines. And I think that's why CDC--I can turn it over to Dr.
Jernigan--has changed their recommendations for how they be
used.
Ms. Malliotakis. Yes, if you'd quickly add to that.
Dr. Jernigan. No, just to say that we do have systems--the
VAERS system, the Vaccine Safety Datalink that is also
monitoring, other systems that are continuing to monitor for
myocarditis.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK.
As more time passes, is the FDA actively conducting safety
surveillance on those who received the early COVID-19 vaccines?
Like, are there specific health markers that you are studying
that may signal trends requiring further inquiry?
Dr. Marks. Thanks very much for that question. In fact,
every time we go through and do the safety surveillance, we
start back, and it goes back to 2020. In some cases where we're
looking for certain things, we might use a different window.
But, indeed, we have to look from the beginning of the period
of surveillance.
I can turn it over to Dr. Jernigan because he can speak for
CDC in that regard.
Dr. Jernigan. So, with regard to myocarditis, we certainly
have been monitoring the issue with various different data
systems. I think the most recent data really demonstrates that
there's about eight times less likely to get myocarditis if
you're vaccinated compared to those that are unvaccinated.
Ms. Malliotakis. Yes. Not just myocarditis; everything.
Dr. Jernigan. Repeat the question then.
Ms. Malliotakis. As more time passes, is the FDA actively
conducting extended safety surveillance on those who received
the early COVID-19 vaccines?
Dr. Jernigan. Yes, most of the reports that we get of
adverse events are in the few weeks following the vaccination.
In terms of monitoring these over time, we do have vaccine
effectiveness systems that are in place at CDC.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK.
I've run out of time, but thank you very much.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Ms. Ross from North Carolina
for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you so much to our witnesses for being here
today.
I just want to correct the record on some
misrepresentations that we've heard here but we've also heard
in the public regarding the COVID-19 vaccine and vaccine safety
systems more broadly.
In listening to today's hearing, one might be led to
believe that reports submitted to the Vaccine Adverse Event
Reporting System, or VAERS, are the most meaningful measure of
adverse health events and should be the sole basis for
evaluating whether the COVID-19 vaccines are safe.
However, my understanding is that VAERS is just one
surveillance program within a multilayered vaccine safety
system that CDC operates, and that submissions to VAERS--which
are unverified, can be submitted by anyone, regardless of how
likely a vaccine is to have created an adverse event--can act
as early warnings to be prompt deeper investigations through
these other surveillance programs.
Is that correct, Dr. Jernigan?
Dr. Jernigan. Yes. Yes, so VAERS is a system for getting
information in and quickly identifying trends, but it is not
the data set that we use to determine causality or the impact
of the vaccine.
Ms. Ross. And can you explain in more detail how VAERS
prompts this deeper investigation through other safety
surveillance programs at the CDC?
Dr. Jernigan. Yes. I think, over the last several years,
there have been 676--over 676 million doses of vaccine that
have been administered, and we've had a significantly,
exceedingly rare number of adverse events reported. There's an
even lower number of serious adverse events. Each of those
serious adverse events does have a follow-up. They ask for
medical records and for autopsy records.
We utilize it in different systems, like our Clinician
Immunization Safety Assessment Program that can then evaluate
some of the findings. We also have other data sets that can
really tell us if there's an increased signal across the
general population that we need to be worried about.
Ms. Ross. Thank you for that.
And then, for the reasons you just explained it, it seems
that the VAERS data, on its own, does not provide a strong
basis for evaluating causality and that doing so does require
this multilayered approach. Is that correct?
Dr. Jernigan. Correct.
Ms. Ross. And how far are you into that multilayered
approach for the COVID vaccines?
Dr. Jernigan. Well, in terms of using all those different
systems, we have used--they're on an ongoing basis. And we've
presented at each of the advisory committees on what we're
finding in all of those systems regularly.
Ms. Ross. OK.
And so, just to be abundantly clear, using the VAERS data
exclusively to make claims about COVID vaccines causing adverse
health effects would be flawed?
Dr. Jernigan. VAERS is not intended to determine if a
vaccine is causing an adverse event.
Ms. Ross. OK. Thank you very, very much.
Dr. Marks, my colleagues have attempted to distort an email
that you sent in July 2021 regarding the authorization of the
Pfizer booster. They've claimed that this is evidence of
political interference that undermined patient safety in favor
of expediting the timeline for this product.
Dr. Marks, I'd like to give you an opportunity to correct
the record on the misrepresentations of this email that have
been made, and just give you--I have a minute and 15 seconds.
It's all yours.
Dr. Marks. Thank you so much for the opportunity,
Congresswoman Ross.
At the time that these boosters were authorized, just
before, we had an increasing number of deaths, starting to run
into the thousands per day, in the United States, and there was
great urgency to think about what we could do to try to reduce
that number of deaths. It had become clear that immunity was
waning and that potentially giving a booster could restore
immunity and decrease the number of deaths.
And so, we moved with all due haste, not because of any
kind of external pressure, but because of internal pressure. We
felt compelled to try to save American lives, because thousands
of people were dying. And as somebody who was one of the
architects of Operation Warp Speed, I had a pretty good idea
about how to find efficiencies to move forward.
It was critical to move as fast as we could. And, by the
way, the data that has now been published showed that
introduction of that first booster was probably responsible for
saving hundreds of thousands of lives as we entered the Delta
and Omicron waves.
Thank you.
Ms. Ross. Thank you so much for that explanation.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Mrs. Lesko from Arizona for 5
minutes of questions.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here.
Dr. Marks, we spoke over the phone back on August 10th of
2021, and I was asking about VAERS, because I had lots of
constituents reaching out to me, saying there was tons of
adverse effects, there was thousands of deaths, et cetera, and
they were very concerned. And I asked how many were confirmed.
And, at that time, you said four; there were four cases that
you confirmed deaths of that were caused by the vaccine.
And I suggested at the time that the CDC and the FDA do a
better job of telling the public not just how many cases were
reported but how many were actually confirmed. And if I heard
you right, just recently you said, well, we don't want to give
out too much information because of privacy rights.
But certainly, we could put out how many were confirmed
deaths, couldn't we?
Dr. Marks. Congresswoman, thank you so much for that
question. I fully agree with you that we probably have not done
a good enough job of communicating, sometimes----
Mrs. Lesko. Well----
Dr. Marks [continuing]. The actual numbers of deaths versus
what's in VAERS. In fact, we just nearly fell prey to it here
at this hearing.
There are only handfuls--and I'll ask Dr. Jernigan to
comment on this as well--handfuls----
Mrs. Lesko. Well----
Dr. Marks [continuing]. That we can actually associate
with----
Mrs. Lesko [continuing]. Can I ask why you haven't done it?
I mean, this was August 2021. It's very logical to me that,
if you're saying people--the public shouldn't count on VAERS
because anybody can report to that--which they can--why
wouldn't you as actively report to the public, ``Well, we
confirmed this really low number of cases that actually were
caused by vaccines''?
I mean, it's been years now. Why haven't you done it?
Dr. Marks. We did present that in various settings,
including at, I believe, at the Advisory Committee of
Immunization Practices. It was mentioned at our Vaccine
Advisory Committee. It perhaps did not go as broadly as----
Mrs. Lesko. Is there an easy place for the public to find
this? I remember you gave us some kind of link back in 2021,
but it was really difficult to get to, if I remember right.
And so why not spend the time, like, making--if the goal is
to give confidence to people in getting vaccines, why in the
world would you just not say, ``OK, what we have done is we've
investigated these deaths, we've done this, we've done that,
and we only found, you know, a handful''? I mean, it doesn't
make any sense to me.
But I want to continue. I'm sorry. I have only a short
period of time.
One of my former constituents--and I think I talked to you
about this, Dr. Marks--from Surprise, Arizona, Steve Wenger,
worked for a company that forced him, mandated him, to receive
the COVID vaccine in May 2021. He got the J&J vaccine.
Within a month of receiving the vaccine, he was in the
hospital, paralyzed from his neck down. He spent over 3 months
in the hospital and was eventually diagnosed with Guillain-
Barre syndrome. And, actually, the doctor has said right on his
medical stuff that it was most likely caused from the vaccine.
Steve continues to struggle with his injuries today, all
because he was forced to take an experimental vaccine at the
urging of the health agencies.
Mr. Wenger's injury was also reported to VAERS. And he
filed a claim with CICP about 2 years ago, he said, and has not
heard back at all; he said, not even a form letter.
So, I want you to know that, Commander, so that--maybe my
office can give you his name so you can at least respond that
you got the claim from 2 years ago.
Also, there was a New York man who suffered from HLH after
his COVID vaccine. His initial report was classified as ``life-
threatening.'' His second report, filed after his death, was
classified as ``hospitalized.'' The family called to request a
correction to the second report to be a fatality and was
instructed to file another report and was then sent a form
condolence letter from the CDC. And the fatality was in May
2021; the form letter was received in December 2022.
The family was subsequently sent an automated message at
the end of 2023 to update their VAERS report on his condition.
``He is dead,'' they said.
The family has been very distressed by the lack of proper
investigation done and classification that he's actually died.
And so, all I'm saying--I've run out of time--is that, as
you have said, you've increased the number, Commander, from 4
personnel to, I think you said, 35. Obviously, more work needs
to be done if people haven't been--you know, the person died,
and it still says they're hospitalized. I mean, this is a huge
problem.
And, with that, I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize the Ranking Member of the
full Committee, Mr. Raskin from Maryland, for 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Marks, you said a moment ago that the vaccine booster
alone saved hundreds of thousands of lives. How many lives have
been saved by the COVID-19 vaccine generally?
Dr. Marks. It's estimated about--in the United States,
about 3.2 million lives. And it's estimated that, globally,
COVID-19 vaccines have saved over 14 million lives,
conservatively.
Mr. Raskin. And we've lost more than a million people to
COVID-19?
Dr. Marks. That's correct, about 1.1 million. I kept a
daily record of the number of people dying, which got up to
about 3,300, about a World Trade Center disaster, a day.
Mr. Raskin. Deborah Birx, who was former President Trump's
White House Coronavirus Response Coordinator, stated that a
sequence of missteps and mistakes made by the prior
administration's pandemic response cost hundreds of thousands
of American lives.
So, I take it, one of the points you have to make is that
the public health response of the Federal Government makes a
huge difference in terms of health outcomes for the American
people?
Dr. Marks. I would agree with that.
Mr. Raskin. Whether it's measles or tuberculosis or COVID-
19, would you agree that vaccines save lives in the aggregate?
Dr. Marks. I think that, by definition, for us to approve
or authorize a vaccine, there has to be overwhelming evidence
that many more lives are saved than might be taken by a
vaccine. In other words, the safety profile, by definition, has
to be excellent.
Mr. Raskin. Gotcha.
So, Dr. Jernigan, it seems as if one of the things that's
created political or social conflict around this is the
inevitable fact that, even when vaccines save a huge number of
lives, millions of lives, as Dr. Marks just testified, if in a
small number of cases there are adverse results, the people who
suffer them, and their families, are understandably very upset
about that.
Would you agree that that's a general conflict or dynamic
that exists with all vaccines?
Dr. Jernigan. Correct. I think, you know, we recognize that
no medical intervention is risk-free. So that goes with medical
interventions.
Mr. Raskin. And I can imagine if I had a family member who
suffered an adverse reaction to any vaccine--measles, TB,
COVID-19--I would say, I just wish they hadn't gotten it in the
first place. And, of course, if anyone had been able to predict
it, they would've been told not to get it.
On the other hand, if we just said to everybody, ``There's
a tiny number of people who suffer an adverse result; therefore
nobody should get it,'' we know a lot more people are going to
suffer and die because of it.
Is that a basic problem that you wrestle with in your
field, Dr. Jernigan?
Dr. Jernigan. Correct. I think anytime we're talking about
public health measures, we have to think about the risks and
the benefits. And the way that we communicate that is very
important so that people will take those interventions.
Mr. Raskin. Have you detected anything at the CDC, through
your surveillance systems, that has caused you to doubt the
safety or the appropriateness of the CDC's original and
continuing recommendation that people get vaccinated against
COVID-19?
Dr. Jernigan. So, you know, I dedicated my life to public
health, and I do care deeply about protecting Americans and
using the best available science, and I want to stress that the
COVID vaccine is safe, and it is effective.
We have safety monitoring systems in place that have
detected certain signals; we've acted on those quickly.
Mr. Raskin. Would you agree that the COVID-19 vaccine and
its roll-out in the Biden administration has been one of the
great achievements of modern science and public health?
Dr. Jernigan. I think over the last 4 years we've had a
once-in-a-lifetime event that required an incredible response
from all of us, and so would agree that the use of vaccines has
been a remarkable achievement for us all.
Mr. Raskin. There's a paper that someone sent to me called
``Excess Death Rates for Republicans and Democrats During the
COVID-19 Pandemic'' from the National Bureau of Economic
Research, which makes the point that there were substantially--
or, there have been substantially higher death rates for
registered Republicans when compared to registered Democrats,
and this has been connected to vaccine hesitancy or fears.
And I'd like to submit this for the record.
But I just wonder if you would opine on this for a second.
Have we ever seen a case like in the past, where there's
actually partisan differences in people's willingness to get a
vaccine, their skepticism, and then death rates arising from
such differences?
Dr. Jernigan. I think you point out the importance of us
getting to--so that folks can be vaccinated.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you very much.
And I'll submit this for the record, Mr. Chairman, if I
could.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Ms. Greene from Georgia for 5
minutes of questions.
And, without objection, submitted to the record.
Ms. Greene. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'm not a doctor, but I have a Ph.D. in recognizing
bullshit when I hear it.
I'd like to point out to everyone that we knew early on--as
a matter of fact, everyone knew early on--that the people that
were at risk of hospitalization and dying of COVID were those
that were obese, had diabetes, were over the age of 65. We also
knew that children were at no risk, practically zero risk, of
being hospitalized or deaths from COVID-19. We knew that young
people--healthy young people were not at risk.
However, Dr. Marks, you rushed through this process of
authorizing these vaccines, even though you knew the side
effects, you knew about myocarditis, and you knew about the
studies.
So, let's be very real about the situation that we have.
[Chart.]
Ms. Greene. Here we have--let's talk about the reports on
VAERS. Some people in here are trying to belittle these
reports, but these reports come from people--people that died,
people that got injured.
And in December, in the middle of December--I think it was
the 10th or the 11th--the first vaccine was approved, it was
authorized, under emergency use. Boom, 10,596 reports in less
than a month. 2021, 706,767 reports on VAERS for vaccine
injuries and deaths. 2022, it was 206,676. 2023--and it went
going down because the mandates stopped.
Now, let's talk a little bit more about the vaccines. Here
we have reports: deaths, 18,372; permanent disability, 17,842;
hospitalizations, 86,452; emergency room or office visits,
315,048; serious adverse events, 113,449. This is from the
congressional Research Service about VAERS. All kinds of
injuries--miscarriages, heart attacks, myocarditis, permanent
disability, neurological problems. And it goes on and on and
on.
These are the reports from people being forced to take
vaccines. Shouldn't have happened.
Mr. Grimes, I've just told you the numbers of reports.
However, under CICP, there are only 10,640 of these COVID-19
claims that are currently pending or are in review. And as of
January 1st, 2024, CICP only compensated 11 of the 40--oh,
wait. Let's make that number clear to everyone. Only 11 people
have been compensated. Only 11 people have been compensated out
of the 40 COVID-19 claims that determined were eligible. Only
40 were determined eligible. That is amazing.
And the average award was only about $3,700. On the other
hand, the average VICP payout over the last 35 years is
approximately $490,000. If you die or get injured from a COVID-
19 vaccine, your average payout's $3,700.
I'd like to recognize someone in the room today who's here,
Brianne Dressen.
She's met with you, Dr. Marks. She's met privately with you
about her vaccine injuries.
She participated in a clinical trial, she was injured, and
then she was dropped from the trial for the COVID-19 vaccines.
Her medical expenses are $433,000 a year.
She filed with CICP. Mr. Grimes, she's gotten no response.
She's right here.
Could you raise your hand, Ms. Dressen, please? Thank you.
Perhaps you could meet with her after this meeting.
Dr. Marks, you admitted to her that vaccine injuries are
real--that they're real--although you rushed through the
authorization, and now you've authorized that children should
receive these vaccines, and even babies as young as 6 months
old. That is shameful. That's shame---I'm not asking you a
question. I'm going to continue speaking. Thank you. This is my
time.
The National Institute of Health also saw Ms. Dressen for
her neurological complications that have been quite severe.
They studied her, and then they dropped the study and asked her
to be quiet about it.
These are the real stories of the vaccine-injured. They
were totally, completely wiped off of social media. There's
been thousands of peer-reviewed medical studies, thousands of
them, studying vaccine injuries. They are real. People are
dying. People are having heart attacks, strokes, blood clots.
And many other countries are dropping the COVID-19 vaccine and
saying we shouldn't give them to children.
It's time to be honest about the vaccine-injured. And we
need to stop allowing these COVID-19 vaccines to be given out--
--
Dr. Wenstrup. The gentlelady's----
Ms. Greene [continuing]. To children.
Dr. Wenstrup. The gentlelady's time has expired.
I now recognize Mr. Garcia from California for 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Garcia. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
I am sorry you all had to go through that. That was a lot
of conspiracy theories and wild accusations, which we know have
been debunked by medical science. And we should be clear that
vaccines work and save lives, and they have millions of lives
in this country.
Now, it's really unfortunate that we're actually here
having this hearing trying to poke holes and cause more vaccine
hesitancy amongst the public. But we know that we're here
because Committee Members on this Committee have demanded that
we have this hearing, and we continue to cave and give those
Members everything that they want.
Now, we also know that we have a Member of this Committee
that just actually made some comments, who's been on social
media demanding that we hold this exact same hearing.
[Chart.]
Mr. Garcia. This is the same person that we know that has,
on countless posts, has spread misinformation, encouraged
parents to refuse routine vaccinations for their children--
which you just heard, by the way--and even compared our
pandemic response efforts to the Holocaust.
I want to just actually read something which is in the
public record--I'm not saying anything that's not in the public
record--that a Member of this Committee actually said, this
same person that is actually attacking vaccines, said that
``vaccinated employees get a vaccination logo, just like the
Nazis forced Jewish people to wear a gold star.''
I want to read that again: ``Vaccinated employees get a
vaccination logo, just like the Nazis forced Jewish people to
wear a gold star.''
That is the level of insanity and attacks that we are
having here as we actually debate the lives saved around
vaccinations.
Now, this same Member has also held shadow public hearings
promoting ideas that COVID is a bioweapon to target people of
specific races and the vaccines, and I quote, cause ``turbo-
cancers.''
I want to read you this quote. And it's, again, in the
public record, at a hearing. ``Have the COVID vaccines resulted
in an increase in cancers? And are turbo-cancers real?''
Now, Mr. Chairman, this is, I mean, in my opinion, just
insanity. We know that's not the case.
Dr. Marks, can you clarify once again for the American
people, do the COVID vaccines cause turbo-cancers?
Dr. Marks. I'm a hematologist and oncologist that's board-
certified. I don't know what a turbo-cancer is. It was a term
that was used first in a paper in mouse experiments, describing
an inflammatory response.
There are--we have not detected any increase in cancers
with the COVID-19 vaccines.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. And I--and thank you for correcting
the record----
Dr. Marks. But may I--may I just add something here.
I do need to apologize to the thousand or so parents of
children who are under 4 years of age who have died of COVID-19
who were unvaccinated. Because there were deaths and are
continuing to be deaths in children, and that is the reason why
they need to get vaccinated.
Thank you.
Mr. Garcia. And I agree with you 100 percent. And the fact
that we are now having parents that are choosing to vaccinate
their kids less than before, because of all of the attacks on
vaccinations, is shameful. And it's shameful that Members of
Congress continue to put down vaccinations as an opportunity to
get our communities healthier.
And, Dr. Marks, I want to thank you for the work that you
did. My mom passed away to COVID-19. My stepfather passed away
due to COVID-19. Both would've taken that vaccination in an
instant if it was available to them.
And so, anytime that folks, especially folks on this, you
know, Subcommittee on the pandemic, attack vaccines, it's
personally insulting to all the families that have actually
lost loved ones. We've saved millions of lives because of the
vaccine. It's unfortunate we keep causing this harm.
I just want to say, last, that--Dr. Marks, do you agree
that additional lives would've been saved--additional--the
lives that--the folks that were not vaccinated that we lost--
over a million, obviously, in this country--wouldn't a vast
majority of those lives have been saved had we had the vaccine
and had they been vaccinated?
Dr. Marks. Multiple studies show that 80 to 85 percent of
the deaths that occurred were in unvaccinated individuals. So,
if we would've been able to reach a higher vaccination rate,
it's likely that we would've had fewer deaths. And countries
where they reached higher vaccination rates had fewer deaths
per capita.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you.
And I encourage this Committee and all Members of Congress
to encourage vaccinations across this country to save more
American lives.
With that, I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Mr. Mfume from Maryland for 5
minutes of questions.
Mr. Mfume. Thank you, Chair Wenstrup and Ranking Member
Ruiz.
I want to join in with the previous comments of Members of
the Committee and welcome all of you again for being here with
us today.
Mr. Chair, I would also, on a point of personal privilege,
remind Members of this Committee, even though I am not the
Chair, that there should be some sense of decorum, and
vulgarity should be discouraged.
So, if I ever say that I'm a Ph.D. in BS, it means
``Bulgarian sunshine.'' You will not hear me talk about,
explicitly, the thing that I won't mention here today. There
are people watching across this Nation who want and, quite
frankly, really expect that the Congress, if no other place,
will conduct itself in a way that does not insult any of them
personally because of vulgarities and in a way that we should,
in fact, conduct business.
Mr. Chair, the American ethic has always been one of
independence and self-sufficiency. As a society, we see our
health decisions as deeply personal and deeply private. In some
instances, that proclivity toward individualism can lead to a
hesitancy surrounding certain health innovations such as
vaccines.
In the case of the COVID-19 pandemic, fearmongers amplified
vaccine hesitancy. And it was done, as we all know, without,
necessarily, substance or facts, but through fear, by way of
news networks, late-night talk shows, and syndicated radio
shows.
Those talking heads unfortunately took advantage of certain
communities' negative experiences with the American public
health system by playing on fear and mistrust and by amplifying
over and over again a vaccine hesitancy across the Nation.
Now, when you do that, you really play with fire--in this
case, the fire that the gentleman from California mentioned
also about how we lose loved ones, how people die, and how that
rate of death accelerated over and over again.
I really want to thank God that Jonas Salk, the great
virologist, in 1955, did not run into that nonsense when he
developed the vaccine for polio. Parents were clamoring because
they wanted their children to be able to walk and have a good
life. There was a sense of sense and sensibility that went
along with that.
So, when it's done right, it's done right. So many children
and others were vaccinated for polio successfully. And were
there some bad stories along the way? I'm sure there was, just
as we've heard, when you're dealing with science, there is not
of a 100-percent certainty in everything.
Mr. Chairman, my colleagues on both sides of the aisle know
that COVID vaccines, even under accelerated development
timelines, have proven over and over again to be safe.
I would ask unanimous consent, Mr. Chair, that I submit
into the record this article from Vox, the general interest
news site, entitled, ``Will America continue to turn away from
vaccines?''
Dr. Wenstrup. Without objection.
Mr. Mfume. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Jernigan, can you explain for the Committee again, if
you don't mind--I mean, there are some people watching this
around the Nation who have tuned in late and perhaps missed
some of the earlier discussion.
Can you explain for the Committee again, if you might, the
multilayered process of vaccine safety monitoring that the CDC
implemented for COVID-19?
Dr. Jernigan. Thanks. And, you know, I've worked in public
health since 1994, responded to multiple infectious disease
emergencies, and this is the most robust vaccine safety
monitoring system that we have ever had.
There are five different systems. We use all of those to
determine the impact of those vaccines and the association with
safety. All of those systems are used by CDC.
Mr. Mfume. And can you also corroborate that this seems to
be, at least, by all standards, an incredibly thorough process
that meets all the merits of scientific approach and scientific
roll-out for such? Why are these systems so crucial in
maintaining and strengthening vaccine confidence in the United
States.
Dr. Jernigan. Yes. I think, you know, we want to make the
best recommendations with the best available science. And so,
for that, at CDC, we use a science-based process to get to
those recommendations.
And so, making sure that science is first, and making sure
that we have the data and making the right recommendations with
the best available science.
Mr. Mfume. Thank you.
I want to thank all of you again for being here with us.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Dr. Miller-Meeks from Iowa
for 5 minutes of questions.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank the witnesses for testifying before the
Select Committee today.
I want to also say that I am a former director of the State
Department of Health in Iowa, Public Health, and was
vaccinated, and gave vaccines in all 24 counties of my
district; however, have never been for a vaccine mandate for
COVID-19, both when I was distributing vaccines as well as
today.
Dr. Marks, COVID-19 remains somewhat of a public health
challenge, especially given declining vaccination rates and
growing vaccine hesitancy and fatigue. And let me say, as a
public health director and as a state senator, vaccine
hesitancy and fatigue is not new, this has been an issue, but
it has been greatly enhanced through COVID-19 vaccine mandates.
To optimize the effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines, I
understand that the FDA has recommended periodic updates to
vaccine composition. As we have seen with influenza, a clear
framework for strain selection supports the timely availability
of a diverse supply of COVID-19 vaccine platforms.
I believe that multiple FDA-approved vaccine options can
play a role in preserving consumer choice of products and
ensuring equity of access, both of which can contribute to
increased consumer acceptance and uptake of vaccines without
forcing Americans to receive a specific option.
Can you please speak to how the agency is taking steps to
ensure vaccine manufacturers have the essential time needed to
adapt their products accordingly and scale up production for
vaccines for new virus variants?
Dr. Marks. Congresswoman Miller-Meeks, thanks very much for
that question.
I would certainly agree with you that at FDA we take
seriously the need to have choice among vaccines, because that
will allow a greater vaccination rate, because we understand
that some people may not feel comfortable with certain types of
vaccines; they may want a more traditional vaccine rather than
a newer vaccine.
That's why we've been continuing to work with manufacturers
to try to make sure that, when we roll out the next update, we
will have a diversity of choice, at least more than one type,
of vaccine that will be available. So, you will see, as we move
into the spring, we will, as you've noted, go through a strain
selection process.
We're already having dialog with manufacturers to help them
get prepared--because there's a lot of pre-work that they can
do at risk to prepare for this--so that we can hopefully have
the choice that you're talking about.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. Thank you.
Dr. Grimes, as you know, COVID-19 vaccines are covered
countermeasures under the Countermeasure Injury Compensation
Program, CICP, which is overseen by HRSA, instead of the
National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program, VICP.
With FDA being responsible for authorizing and approving
the COVID vaccines and HRSA being responsible for adjudicating
CICP claims for the COVID shots, I'm concerned that there's too
much government involvement and overlap with COVID-19 vaccine
claim adjudication.
Furthermore, the CICP was not designed for a pandemic as
large as the COVID-19 pandemic was, adding to the argument that
VICP is the appropriate location to house the COVID-19 vaccine
injuries, in addition to the RSV and dengue vaccines, which are
already available.
While I recognize that adding vaccines to VICP is through a
75-cent excise tax on pharmaceutical manufacturers, which would
require congressional action, it nonetheless warrants attention
by this Select Subcommittee.
When a new vaccine is approved and marketed, what steps are
required to ensure access to compensation under the VICP
program? And what happens if a new vaccine is not added to the
list of taxed vaccines?
Dr. Grimes. Thank you for that question.
So, as you note, we have two programs that are administered
through HRSA--the Countermeasures Injury Compensation Program
and the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program--that are
both in my division.
With the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program, it's
a tripartite system, though, where we work with Department of
Justice and with the U.S. Court of Federal Claims to do
separate duties to adjudicate the claims.
For a vaccine to be covered under the CICP, three criteria
must be met. One is the routine recommendation by the CDC for
routine administration in children or individuals who are
pregnant. The second is the excise tax imposed by Congress, as
you note. And the third is a notice of coverage that the
Secretary of HHS would add.
For a dengue or RSV or COVID-19 vaccine to be added to the
program, all of those would need to be met.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. So, Dr. Grimes, what's the rate of denial
for compensation for claims for COVID-19 vaccines in CICP?
Dr. Grimes. So, thank you. I don't have the rate, but we
have adjudicated 2,214 claims.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. I think it's about 98 percent.
And if I can just quickly followup, I understand that
there's a current backlog of claims in CICP by about more than
10,000. Why is there a backlog of claims for the COVID-19
vaccines?
Dr. Grimes. Thank you for that question.
So, at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, we had not
had a direct appropriation with the CICP. We also had only four
staff. When we received our first direct appropriation in
Fiscal Year 2022, we were able to ramp up quickly, and now we
have over 35 staff who are assisting to adjudicate claims.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. Thank you.
My time's expired, but I'd like to submit some additional
questions to be answered after the hearing.
Dr. Wenstrup. So, ordered.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. Thank you very much.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Ms. Tokuda from Hawaii for 5
minutes of questions.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I am deeply concerned about some of the dangerous rhetoric
we've heard throughout today's hearing, which appears purposely
aimed at undermining confidence in vaccines.
I agree with you, Mr. Chair: Words matter. So do facts.
Ahead of today's hearing, the Select Subcommittee received
a letter from the Association of State and Territorial Health
Officials, an organization representing public health officials
from red states and blue states alike. This letter underscores
the importance of, quote, ``informing the public truthfully
about the safety and effectiveness of vaccines,'' end quote,
and urging the Select Subcommittee to, quote, ``engage this
topic responsibly and with the utmost integrity,'' end quote.
Mr. Chair, I'd like to enter this letter into the record.
Dr. Wenstrup. Without objection.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I am concerned that, with today's hearing, my Republican
colleagues have failed to handle this subject with the care our
public health officials have asked for, recklessly amplifying
the spread of misinformation about the COVID-19 vaccine.
And while my colleagues on the other side of the aisle may
claim that today's hearing is only about the COVID-19 vaccine,
they cannot and must not ignore the fact that the COVID
misinformation--intentional spread of disinformation of the
COVID-19 vaccine has resulted in across-the-board decreases in
immunization levels over the last few years. In fact, the world
is experiencing the largest global decline in decades in the
number of children receiving basic immunizations.
A recent survey conducted by the Annenberg Public Policy
Center at the University of Pennsylvania found that the number
of Americans who viewed vaccines as less than effective has
increased since April 2021. According to the survey, roughly
one in three Americans think it's likely safer to get COVID-19
than to get the vaccine; one in six Americans believe that
vaccines cause autism; and Americans are now less likely to
consider getting the measles, mumps, rubella vaccines than they
were in April 2021.
As a mother of two boys, I am deeply concerned about what
this means for our children, especially when we are seeing
outbreaks of previously controlled diseases like polio and
measles pop up not just in other countries but right here in
the United States.
Since measles was declared eliminated in the U.S. in 2000,
we have seen consistent outbreaks, mostly especially in under
vaccinated communities. These have included outbreaks of 8
cases in Philadelphia in December 2023 most recently and an
outbreak of 85 cases among unvaccinated children in central
Ohio in 2022.
The savings of vaccination to medical economic costs and to
human lives cannot be ignored. CDC estimates that immunizations
for children born between 1994 and 2021 will prevent over 1
million deaths, 29 million hospitalizations, and save nearly
$2.2 trillion in societal costs. And already we know that
COVID-19 vaccines have saved more than 3.2 million lives, as
has been referenced in this hearing.
Let's be clear: No parent--no parent at all--wants to do
their children harm. But many parents are, sadly, getting and
trustingly acting upon false information like what we have
heard in this hearing room today.
So, I'd like to discuss today how we can make sure that
parents get the best and most accurate information they need so
that we can promote confidence in long-trusted lifesaving
vaccines and prevent outbreaks of deadly diseases.
Dr. Marks, can you please explain how the FDA evaluates
vaccines to ensure that they are safe and effective for age
groups that they are intended to be used for?
Dr. Marks. Thanks, Congresswoman, for that question.
So, every vaccine that we authorize or approve, we require
to have manufacturing information to show that it's high
quality, and that we have to have information on its
effectiveness and safety in the specific age population that
it's being prescribed in, or we have to be able to understand
that it's going to function similarly in that age group that
we're authorizing or approving it for.
So, it is a process that we take very seriously at the
agency. And there is a very dedicated group of people that
spend their time poring over data to make sure that, in the
thousands of records that are submitted to us, thousands of
pages--for instance, over a million pages for one of the
biologics license applications for one of the mRNA vaccines--
that we get that authorization or approval right.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you.
Mr. Marks, if parents have questions about vaccines for
their children, what steps do you recommend that they take to
get their questions answered? And I'm not talking about the
internet.
Dr. Marks. No. I think Chair Wenstrup and I talked about
this the other day.
The primary thing that I think we need are conversations
between parents and their providers. And that provider doesn't
have to be a physician; it could be even a nurse practitioner
or someone in a doctor's office that's a physician assistant.
But having that conversation, that individual conversation,
where people can ask questions and have them answered--at
least--I've spent a lot of time during the COVID pandemic doing
that, and it makes a huge difference. So, I believe in the
primacy of the provider-patient relationship.
Thank you.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you.
I am out of time, but I would reiterate that, today, while
we have seen Republican lawmakers across the country attempt to
sow distrust in lifesaving vaccines, I hope that this Committee
can correct course and focus on work that matters--keeping our
people alive, keeping them safe. And that means preventing
outbreaks of deadly diseases, expanding access to critical
vaccines, and safeguarding the health and safety of Americans--
--
Dr. Wenstrup. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Tokuda [continuing]. Across our country.
Thank you very much.
Dr. Wenstrup. The gentlelady's time has expired.
I now recognize Mr. Cloud from Texas for 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you all for being
here.
We often hear from agencies that they could fix everything
if only they had more funding, more authority, more data. The
COVID-19 pandemic showed us that we had a different problem,
and that is a perverse incentive structure that governs our
approach to public health.
Early on in the pandemic, the Federal Government provided
billions of dollars to pharmaceutical companies for
development. Much of that work was aided by the work of
taxpayer-funded scientists at NIH.
Then we purchased the vaccines back from the pharmaceutical
companies.
Next, the FDA and the CDC, which were responsible for
evaluating the safety and effectiveness of the vaccines,
cleared them for emergency use.
Then, not content with recommending the vaccines and
providing information for the American people to make their own
decisions, the Federal Government attempted to force everyone
to get the vaccine, blatantly disregarding scientific evidence
and constitutional considerations.
At the same time, the government provided the vaccine
manufacturers with special liability protections, ensuring they
can't be sued for any adverse effects.
And, instead, a government bureaucrat gets to decide
whether or not someone was injured and offer them a minuscule
amount of money as compensation if they manage to make through
an arbitrary process, which is very intensive.
So, right now, we have the same agency funding the
research, approving and mandating, and then finally
adjudicating the COVID vaccines. It concentrates too many of
the critical government functions in the same unaccountable
hands.
Now one of the big issues on top of this is the fact that
so much of the misinformation that came out during COVID was
actually fostered by the Federal Government in the sense that
we actually had the Federal Government colluding with system
social media companies to discourage scientific opinion that
went against what was the stated mandate at the time.
And so, to help clear the record, I'd like to ask y'all a
couple of things.
And, Dr. Marks, you stated that vaccines work at the
outset. I don't think this Committee is designed to question
that. But there is a--an attempt in this conversation to kind
of throw the COVID-19 a very new, different scientific approach
to vaccines, with a new data set that's still developing and
all those kinds of things, with very well-established vaccines
like polio or chicken pox or meningitis or these types of
things, when, I think, Americans rightfully so, after watching
the government over the last couple of years, could have some
concerns about COVID-19 and the information that's been
presented.
So, I wanted to ask you each a couple of questions. It's a
simple yes or no.
Does the COVID-19 vaccine prevent the disease from getting
it--from you receiving the disease?
Dr. Marks. You can't have a yes-or-no answer to that
question because it will reduce your risk of serious outcomes,
such as death or----
Mr. Cloud. Right. I'm not--I'm not debating whether or not
it helps people--it mitigates some of the--but what the----
Dr. Marks. I care if I'm alive or dead. So, I think they do
a very good job of preventing death and hospitalization.
Mr. Cloud. I----
Dr. Marks. They may not prevent--they may not prevent----
Mr. Cloud. I agree.
Dr. Marks [continuing]. Infection.
Mr. Castor. The mantra at the time was to stop the spread,
and so we were understood that we either did not receive it or
could not transmit it when it was released.
Could you speak to that, Dr. Jernigan? Can you receive it,
or can you transmit it after receiving the COVID-19 vaccines?
Dr. Jernigan. Yes, I think, having worked at CDC for 30
years and seeing the benefits of vaccine, you know, we have to
make the best recommendation.
Mr. Cloud. Can you transmit it, or can you receive it after
receiving the COVID-19 vaccine?
Dr. Jernigan. I think we need to make the best
recommendations that we have.
Mr. Cloud. That's a yes-or-no question. It's very simple.
Commander Grimes, can you receive?
Dr. Grimes. I think we make the best recommendations for
the public----
Mr. Cloud. Can you still----
Dr. Grimes [continuing]. As we possibly can.
Mr. Cloud [continuing]. Get COVID after getting the COVID-
19 vaccine?
Dr. Jernigan. Yes.
Dr. Marks. Yes.
Mr. Cloud. Yes. OK.
Dr. Marks. That's correct.
Mr. Cloud. Does it prevent you from transmitting it?
Dr. Marks. Although it may--there's--there's data that
shows that, earlier in the pandemic, there was some reduction
in transmission, the data on that are very challenging to--to
pin down, but it does not absolutely prevent transmission.
Mr. Cloud. It does not prevent transmission. Thank you very
much.
I would ask you, Dr. Jernigan, why does the CDC website
then list it as a vaccine-preventable disease? And why does it
call it a recommended immunization?
Dr. Jernigan. Well, vaccine-preventable diseases are
referring to things that benefit from getting the vaccine. What
we know from COVID is it does prevent you from getting severe
disease, hospitalizations, and deaths.
Mr. Cloud. I agree. No one's questioning that. No one's
questioning that, but it's listed among these other--the issue
right now and why we're seeing a bunch of vaccine hesitancy is
because the information coming from the Federal Government has
been murky at best on this subject and so people don't know
what to trust.
And so, my question to you is, why do you list this, along
with very other proven that have a long set of scientific data,
as a--as a vaccine that prevents disease?
Dr. Jernigan. All vaccines have variable different levels
of effectiveness, and so this is a vaccine-preventable disease
just like all the others are.
Mr. Cloud. OK. Y'all have done a great job of filibustering
my time.
I have to yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Dr. Joyce from Pennsylvania
for 5 minutes of questions.
Dr. Joyce. Thank you, Dr. Wenstrup, for convening this
hearing for our panel for appearing today.
This is an incredibly important discussion topic and as our
continued work on this Committee to get to the bottom of both
the origins of COVID-19 and also the government response.
Understanding how Federal agencies tracked the rollout of
the COVID-19 vaccines and documented instances of injury or
adverse effects is critically important for any future
responses.
As a doctor, having accurate and up-to-date information
before treating patients during a public health emergency is of
utmost importance.
While Federal health agencies have several systems for
vaccine safety surveillance, the most well-known during the
pandemic became the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System, or
VAERS. The government also has two systems for adjudicating and
compensating vaccine-related injuries, the Countermeasures
Injury Compensation Program, which is CICP, and the Vaccine
Injury Compensation Program, which is VICP.
Two of the key differences between the CICP, which covered
the COVID-19 vaccines, and the VICP, which covers most other
vaccines, are who adjudicates the claims and who covers the
damages.
In CICP, in CICP, claims are adjudicated by HRSA whereas,
in VICP, claims are adjudicated by the Court of Federal
Appeals. And, in terms who pays for the CICP, it is
appropriated funds whereas, in VICP, the money comes from an
excise tax that is levied on manufacturers on each vaccine
dose.
Before the COVID-19 pandemic, CICP was a very small program
due to its limited scope. However, claims have exploded now
that widely distributed and even mandated COVID-19
countermeasures are covered under the program.
As of January 1 of this year, the total number of CICP
claims ever filed was 13,406, and COVID-19 claims account for
12,854, nearly 96 percent of the total. Because of CICP's
design and their limited resources, adjudication of claims is a
lengthy and a burdensome process. It is also reported that
10,640 of these COVID-19 claims are currently pending or under
review.
Commander Grimes, how is the CICP structured to ensure
accessibility and fairness to petitioners? And how does this
compare to VICP or even the traditional litigation system?
Dr. Grimes. Thank you for that question.
So, in the CICP, we administer the program by statute. An
individual that we call a requester files a request for
benefits and then must submit medical records to the CICP to
show that there is compelling, reliable, valid medical and
scientific evidence to support that it was directly caused by
the use or administration of a covered countermeasure.
A covered countermeasure could be COVID-19 vaccine. It
could be a smallpox vaccine.
Dr. Joyce. Let's stay focused on the COVID-19 vaccine,
because that's what our obligation is in this Select
Subcommittee.
Do you feel it is more appropriate to have petitioners,
your word, for COVID-19 claims to be paid by the vaccine
manufacturer or by the American taxpayer?
Dr. Grimes. So, the petitioners are for the National
Vaccine Injury Compensation Program, and those are through the
routine administration with an excise tax levied on it whereas
the requesters through the CICP are paid for compensation of
claims through appropriated funds and through administration of
the program--is also paid from those appropriated funds.
Dr. Joyce. As a physician, I am also worried that, in some
cases, health practitioners do not know where and how to report
adverse effects, which is critical to ensuring that all vaccine
events are accounted for. I also have concerns of how these
events and potential risks are reported to healthcare
providers.
For each of you, could you take turns and describe what
your respective agency ensures against any adverse effects that
are reported and how those reports are managed and how those
information is conveyed to the frontline individuals who are
dealing with this?
Dr. Marks.
Dr. Marks. So, thank you for the question.
So, we--each vaccine label actually, whether it was the
authorized vaccines or the approved vaccines, has information
on where to report adverse events, into the Adverse Event
Reporting System.
When we get those, we could combine with CDC, sort through
those events, and we take them seriously and investigate them
to sort out whether there are any signals there.
Dr. Joyce. Dr. Jernigan.
Dr. Jernigan. Yes. So, we provide information through the
vaccine information sheets that are provided to everybody that
gets vaccinated, so they understand the potential risks.
We also communicate to the public and then take information
that comes in through VAERS, put that together, put that and
communicate that with the advisory committee. And then
recommendation can be changed, if needed.
Dr. Joyce. Commander Grimes, do you see any faults in this
system?
Dr. Grimes. I'm here to testify on behalf of the Director
of the Division of Injury Compensation Programs and not to such
of the--CDC and FDA systems.
Dr. Wenstrup. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Dr. McCormick from Georgia for 5 minutes of
questions.
Dr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'll cut straight to the point because I know we're on a
timeline, and I'm the last. So, congratulations on that.
I want to point out that it was President Trump's Operation
Warp Speed that had unprecedented delivery of a vaccination in
record time.
I think it's ironic that this scientific achievement will
forever be tainted by the government's handling of COVID-19 and
the mistrust that was created from this vaccine policy and the
Federal programs that surround it.
To void myself of partisanship in this case, I'd like to
highlight that it is the Democrats that have touted this
program that President Trump not only came up with but received
the vaccination himself and admits openly to getting the
booster, as well. So, there are some ironies in this argument
all the way around.
So, the question is, why has America become so distrustful
of vaccinations, as my colleagues have pointed out. Why is it
that they no longer want to get a vaccination that may have
potential benefit? I would make the--a couple of points on
this.
First of all, when you insert yourself between a doctor and
a patient and some doctors contradict you and you sensor them,
even when you're not a doctor treating patients, people are
going to say, why does the government have authority to do
that, to sensor my doctor?
And then, second, when you start requiring people to do
something instead of encouraging, the natural resistance of a
freedom-loving people that were founded on those principles
will be to resist what you're requiring.
So, it shouldn't be any surprise to us, when the people
say, ``I'm not going to do what you're telling me I have to do,
when my doctor may agree with me and not you. You're the
government.'' Why do I--assert ourselves in inappropriate ways?
And really, when we talk about the evolution of science,
when you have immunity and you're still requiring a vaccination
that could cause a hyperimmune response, which we're all
scientists and we can admit to, there's risks versus benefits
on every decision; when the government says we're going to make
a carte blanche requirement without taking science into
account, it's no wonder people are mistrustful of our
recommendations. This is the problem we have right now.
So, let's talk about the vaccination liability and
compensation program. It came to my attention last February
when I heard from constituents that COVID-19 vaccine injuries,
claims that were sent to CICP were constantly lost, ignored, or
denied, or caught up in the bureaucracy with little or no
transparency.
Now, March 3 of last year, several of my colleagues and I
wrote a letter to HRSA about our serious concerns regarding the
Countermeasures Injury Compensation Program, the CICP, and its
failure to respond to our constituents in a reasonable
timeframe.
Now, first of all, I appreciate Commander Grimes. I will
say, unlike a lot of the government agencies that are high up,
you responded. You actually came by my office, and I do
appreciate that. I think you care.
And you also point out that you had a very small, when you
started out, you had, what, four people working for you, which
was based on the pre-pandemic response force on injury that can
cause and you're trying to respond to 13,000 people with four
employees. Since then, you've been plussed up to 35 people, I
believe.
Am I accurate in saying it was 13,000 claims approximately?
Dr. Grimes. We have approximately 13,000 COVID-19
countermeasure claims, about 9,600 of which allege vaccine.
Dr. McCormick. OK. And of those, which ones have--how many
have been closed?
Dr. Grimes. 2,200, about.
Dr. McCormick. Yes, OK. And then the number is 35 employees
now that are handling those claims, right?
Dr. Grimes. Yes, so since we----
Dr. McCormick. That's OK. I got to be quick because we're
on a timeline here.
Dr. Grimes. Understood.
Dr. McCormick. How many claims are you processing per month
now?
Dr. Grimes. So, in the year 2023, we processed 90 claims
for a month over that year, and that velocity increased
throughout the year.
Dr. McCormick. Of those 2,200 claims, how many have been
shown to have some merit for injury?
Dr. Grimes. Currently there are about 40 that have been
found to have an injury that was directly caused by a covered
countermeasure.
Dr. McCormick. OK. So, a pretty small percentage, correct?
Dr. Grimes. Yes, sir.
Dr. McCormick. OK. So, just to do the math, that means that
each employee's handling about 2.7 cases per month and showing
40 out of 2,200 cases that have been processed so far. Of the
13,000, that means we probably have about 10,800 cases in
backlog.
I know you've asked for more employees so you can process
faster, but at 2.7 per employee, it would take us about 10
years to process the remaining claims.
And the application process to get this denial processed
through some sort of appeals process has an even smaller
approval rating. It's a judge, jury, executioner.
I just don't think it's right. I think we need to
streamline this process. You need as a leader, in my opinion--
we talked about this any office--make sure you know what
paperwork is required, how it's processed, and we need to
spread the process about tenfold in order to do our job for the
American people.
And, with that, I'm out of time, and I yield.
Mr. Cloud. Mr. Chairman, I'd ask unanimous consent to
submit this for the record. It's an article from The New York
Times that said COVID--entitled ``COVID Shots for People. Much
of the world has decided that most young children don't need to
receive COVID booster shots. The U.S. is an outlier.''
Dr. Wenstrup. Without objection.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now would like to recognize Ranking Member
Ruiz for a closing statement.
Dr. Ruiz. Yes, this just, again, you know, medicine is very
nuanced. Our human body is so remarkably beautifully made, and
our physiology is a complete wonder still. You know, taking a
snapshot of a time and using it to go back and define the
entire experience of COVID in children is, again, misleading.
Now with rates that are low, with information that we have
on children, children that are at high-risk, immunocompromised
should get the vaccine. And, in certain areas where the rate is
low and the risk of getting infected in an otherwise healthy
child, then one would reconsider whether that child would need
a booster or in this--in this situation.
So, you know, throwing these kind of facts out there
without the context and understanding is wrong, and it's very
misleading.
In fact, you know, we've talked about how VAERS here is a
screening, not the definitive tool, to use the rate of side
effects or serious side effects from getting the vaccine. These
are individuals who get the vaccine. And whatever they feel
afterwards for a certain time period, they report it, which we
want them to do that. We want them to do that. It is a way to
screen for this, and we want to have high sensitivity to reduce
the false negative. But then, with this kind of screening test,
you have a high false positive.
And that's why we need to reevaluate, do more in-depth
investigation on an individual basis to determine whether, in
fact, it was caused by the vaccine.
So, we already laid out the reasons scientifically why
VAERS is not the, of the five systems, the five multilayered
system, VAERS is not the system to use as the definitive rate
of infections. But to use it, because it has the false
positive, is intentionally falsely misinterpreting the data
that is causing vaccine hesitancy.
And people know but they intentionally still speak to it as
if it's the definitive data, and that's the part that gets me.
That's disinformation. That's not misinformation. That is
intentionally giving false information for their own personal
and partisan political gain. That's a clear example of what
we've been talking about of politicizing science. OK?
So, let's just go back and summarize that, in total, COVID-
19 vaccines saved 3.2 million lives, prevented 18.5 million
hospitalizations, and saved the United States an estimated
$1.15 trillion in medical costs.
So, when we say that the vaccine doesn't prevent getting
sick or it doesn't stop the spread of disease, let's go back
and talk about the nuanced aspects of the use of vaccines,
which is supposed to boost your immune system. And, if you have
a high enough immune response to the virus, then, yes, for
those individuals, it does prevent them from getting sick.
Am I right, Dr. Jernigan?
Dr. Jernigan.
[Nonverbal response.]
Dr. Ruiz. Am I right, Dr. Marks?
Dr. Marks. Correct.
Dr. Ruiz. Correct.
So, by lowering the risk of getting infected, yes, it does
prevent getting vaccines for those individuals. OK? But it's
not an absolute.
But, when we talk about absolutes, again, we are
intentionally giving disinformation to the American public that
they don't work. OK?
Now, if you lower the risk of getting the illness and
getting sick or if you increase your immune response enough to
prevent symptomatic infection, then wouldn't you say that that
reduces the risk of spreading it to other people?
Dr. Jernigan.
Dr. Jernigan. I think the more you can lower the viral
load, the more likely you are to be able to----
Dr. Ruiz. The ``viral load'' is a medical term that's
important to understand.
So, when you--the vaccines increase your immune response,
combats the virus, lowers the viral load. If you have a small
viral load, you decrease the risk of spreading the disease.
Is that correct, Dr. Marks? Do I have that physiology or
pathophysiology ready--right?
Dr. Marks. That will be correct.
Dr. Ruiz. That will be correct.
So, would it be correct to say that, indeed, vaccines
reduce the spread and, for some individuals, prevent the spread
of the virus to other people? Correct?
Dr. Marks. I think we can say that that's a general
statement. I wouldn't want to make it as an absolute statement.
Dr. Ruiz. Correct. That's my point.
Dr. Marks. But in the spirit of today's hearing----
Dr. Ruiz. That's my point----
Dr. Marks [continuing]. More information.
Dr. Ruiz [continuing]. Is by--is by intentionally using
absolute statements like that without the nuances and you know,
and people should know better They're disinforming the
community.
And what I said was not absolute. What I said was it
reduces the risk of spread. And, for some people, it reduces
the spread. So, it does, and it can reduce the spread with that
nuance.
And it is because of the safety and efficacy of these
vaccines that we are ultimately able to overcome the pandemic.
It's because of the vaccines that we're able to change the
vaccine guidelines over time or our social distancing practice
or wearing a mask, correct?
And, yes, there is work to be done to promote vaccine
confidence in the United States and strengthen existing
compensation programs. Yes, we can agree on that. It requires
funding, capacity, human resources. We can fix the systems to
help make it better.
But there's no doubt that the multitiered, multisystem
vaccine safety apparatus surveillance systems is the best in
the world. And we should talk about that instead of focusing on
these false positives or false narratives so that we can build
confidence in the American people.
So, misusing our platforms as Members of Congress to spread
false or disinformation about vaccines does a disservice to the
American people. It manufacturers distrust. Conspiratorial
accusations manufacturer distrust. Fearmongering manufacturers
distrust.
And, with increased distrust, you increase vaccine
hesitancy. With less people taking the vaccine, more people get
infected. The pandemic spreads, and more people die.
So how does this help us prevent or better prepare for the
next pandemic? It doesn't. It makes it worse and puts people's
lives at risk and harms, actually harms, the American people.
So, this is the opposite of helping to prepare and mitigate the
harms of the next pandemic.
So, I hope that we can find a path forward in the serious
work that needs to be done to save lives in the event of a
future pandemic and keep people safe in the here and now from
current threats.
And, as I said when we started today's hearing, we are
already in the process of undoing decades of progress in
overcoming infectious diseases. So, we must handle each
opportunity to discuss this matter with immense care before we
reach a point from which we cannot return.
So, I hope going forward everyone can drop the outrageous
false rhetoric that we've heard by some today and instead
identify a constructive path forward that protects the people's
health.
I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
This hearing should not have been political, and most of it
was not, I would say, today fortunately. But the fact that it
is simply is further evidence this conversation is completely
necessary to take place.
You know, I can say that I have invested in all sides of
the issues around the pandemic, starting in 2020 being on the
Intelligence Committee and also researching what other
countries were doing. How are we going to try and treat people?
How are we going to try and save lives, right? Learned a lot.
As Representatives, we're the conduit to asking their
questions. It's not easy for them to just call you and get an
answer, although I thank you for taking my call early on, Dr.
Marks, during the pandemic.
Perception is reality. I mentioned that at the beginning.
And that's what we have to--that's what we have to face. And
words matter because when you say ``reduce,'' it's different
than saying ``prevent.'' And that happened too often, not
necessarily from your voice, but it happened, and that's what
America heard.
I think it became clear today about the VAERS system. It's
not the be-all to end-all. It's the initial recycling can, if
you will, and then you decide what actually goes further. But
we didn't say that, but it's the only one America saw. It's the
only thing that was out there for the public. So, what do we
expect? And I think that that matters.
You know, we see things on some of these natural items in
the drug store. It will say on there ``not approved by the FDA
as legitimate treatment.'' But it's OK to take, but it isn't
necessarily going to meet all its claims necessarily. We put
that out there. That's an honesty. That's an honest approach to
what--what America is out there.
You know, look, I think there's never been a question that
vaccines save lives by anyone. I'm from Cincinnati. Do you know
how much pride in Cincinnati we take because it's the home of
Albert Sabin and the polio vaccine? You know, it's huge. That's
in our DNA in Cincinnati. We grow up knowing that. We take
pride in it.
But we can't leave behind those that have been injured
simply because they don't necessarily fit a narrative regarding
the vaccine safety. We got to take all that into consideration.
We heard today patients and parents should have a
conversation with their personal healthcare provider to assess
the vaccine, whether it's appropriate for their particular
position, condition, whatever. You know, Dr. Marks, I heard you
today very caringly, I feel, say you have regret about those
under 5 years old that may have died from COVID.
But I talked to pediatricians. And some say, yes, I think
they should be vaccinated if they've got A, B, C, D, or E.
And I think that's important. One size doesn't fit all in
medicine. It never has and never will. That goes back to
talking to your doctor, and that goes back to revealing all the
data about those that may have died. You know, these are
children that maybe would have died if they got the common
cold. I don't know. But those are things you have to take into
consideration.
I've learned a lot about COVID-19. I think if we want to
assess somebody's vulnerability, maybe we should check their
furin levels, and I won't go into the science of that, that
maybe you all understand, because that's what it takes to
cleave the furin cleavage site, which makes it more infectious
to humans. That's another story.
But, you know, this Committee, I think we did a good job
today if we really look at the facts that we revealed and
discussed openly about where our pitfalls are. And I'm not just
blaming the government because it's politicians, too. It's
politicians that drove a lot of distrust in what was coming out
of public health.
Look, I just go back to the beginning. President Trump says
we need to restrict travel. Dr. Fauci told us that he
recommended that we restrict travel. What happened to President
Trump when he said that? He's a racist.
And people started--politicians say, ``Oh, no, there's
nothing to worry about here. That's a racist comment. Come to
Chinatown.'' You know, let's create a super spreader.
That's a problem. That's a problem on our side, and that's
why I say we need to hear from the doctors treating COVID
patients more than anyone else.
You know, again, lives have been saved. Well, we can't
ignore the maladies. We can't ignore certain things, you know.
You know, I mentioned before, Dr. Marks, you're advocating
Operation Warp Speed. We were with you all the way. But you
have a politician saying that, in essence, Dr. Marks, if it's
your vaccine, she's not taking it. That doesn't help us. That
creates vaccine hesitancy.
When a politician stands up and says, ``If you take this,
you're not going to the ICU and you're not going to die,'' yet
some were going to the ICU, and some were dying, that's a fact.
And it may have been a lot of other reasons for it.
China comes out, says, ``We've got this under control.''
The WHO parrots it. Dr. Lane goes to China. They got it all
under control. That's the advice given to politicians.
So, of course, there's distrust. But there, that came from
China themselves. They didn't have it under control. Yet that's
what they were telling everybody. That leads to distrust. So,
we must trust but verify, especially when we're taking advice
from an adversary.
Look, the risks have to be put out. No drug can run a
commercial--regardless of what you think of commercials on
drugs--they can't run it without listing all the risks. Doctors
have to sit--or it's malpractice if they don't go over the
risks. We weren't doing that, and we issued a mandate, said you
got to get it, or you'll lose your job. They go to the drug
store, and get it and get their card. Did they have a sit-down?
I'm glad to hear you all agree today, at least I think you
do, that it requires--the best practice is to have a
conversation with your doctor about your personal health. And
the better data the doctor has, the better we can treat
patients. That's what we're after, saving lives, treating
patients better.
I mentioned before about, you know, there's a difference
between saying--effectiveness data is different than just
saying it's effective. There's data that might say it's not a
hundred percent effective, right? And we know that. But this is
what the public hears.
And so, they get confused because they know, ``Well, I know
some people had an adverse reaction. Why are we saying it's
safe? It's not a hundred percent safe.''
So, you may have done work completely 100 percent right,
but if it's not messaged clearly or accurately down the line,
that's a problem.
I often ask, where's our Surgeon General to be talking
about this? You know, when I grew up, it was C. Everett Coop,
and people trusted it.
The reason I said we need to hear from doctors treating
COVID patients, I'm reminded of General Schwarzkopf during the
Gulf War. Every night America tuned in to see what the general
had to say about the war, not what a politician had to say
about the war. I think that makes a huge difference.
We recognize today gratefully that what you're telling the
American people, when we recognized myocarditis is a problem,
we did something about it. That's important. That builds public
trust. But if it's perceived that we're just ignoring it and
mandating this anyway, it's a problem.
I question why we quit talking about convalescent plasma as
a form of treatment. Especially when we knew that the vaccine
we had did not prevent you from getting COVID--you just got
less sick--why were we not focusing more on treatments like
that that were very effective? At least in Cincinnati, I saw
that.
Why did we ignore natural immunity? I was told I needed a
booster to go to Germany. I had been vaccinated, both doses of
Pfizer. I got COVID several months later, and the only reason I
knew is because I couldn't smell garlic salt. That's the only
way I knew.
And, when I got my antibodies checked--I wanted to do T
cells, as well. When I got my antibodies checked, when I'm
being told I need a booster, the strong number was 40; my
number was 821, and I've got the lab report to show it.
Now you have a conversation with your doctor about that.
Why did we put this aside?
And that's what America understood. Why are we not talking
about the benefits of natural immunity? Why are we not saying,
if you have natural immunity, you are less likely to get
another round of COVID? Why were we not looking at that kind of
data to see?
Those are things we should have done. Actually, I wanted to
do that through the military, and Secretary Austin never
responded. Matter of fact, it was 22 physicians that signed
that letter to the Secretary of Defense, and he never
responded. He never answered our question even after several
attempts.
So, we have some things that, you know--we've got people
here that want to make a difference, especially going forward.
But we can't ignore these hiccups. We can't ignore these
questions that the American people have.
If I only sat here in Washington, I can't have this
discussion with you the way I'm having it. But it's you go
home, and you're the conduit to the government. And you know
what? If we aren't honest, if we can't be trusted, we don't get
elected. But they see people in Washington never leave amongst
the unelected. Just understand that. That's why it's important
we have this conversation. That's why it's important that we do
better going forward.
And I thank you all for your time today. I appreciate the
work that you do. We want to be helpful to make it even better
in the future. So, I thank you all again for being here, for
your important, insightful testimony.
With that, and without objection, all Members will have
five legislative days with which to submit materials and to
submit additional written questions for witnesses, which will
be forwarded to the witnesses for their response.
If there's no further business, without objection, the
Select Subcommittee stands adjourned.
And thank you all for attending.
[Whereupon, at 12:37 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[all]
