- OVERSIGHT OF THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 10, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-121

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-322 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Michael Cloud, Texas                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Ro Khanna, California
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Katie Porter, California
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Cori Bush, Missouri
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Shontel Brown, Ohio
Byron Donalds, Florida               Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Robert Garcia, California
William Timmons, South Carolina      Maxwell Frost, Florida
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Greg Casar, Texas
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Dan Goldman, New York
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
Nick Langworthy, New York            Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Eric Burlison, Missouri
Mike Waltz, Florida

------
Mark Marin, Staff Director
Jessica Donlon, Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel
Daniel Flores, Senior Counsel
David Ehmen, Senior Counsel
Kim Waskowsky, Senior Professional Staff Member
Ellie McGowan, Staff Assistant and Administrative Clerk
Mallory Cogar, Deputy Director of Operations and Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5074

Julie Tagen, Minority Staff Director
Contact Number: 202-225-5051

------

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on July 10, 2024....................................     1

WITNESS

----------

The Honorable Michael S. Regan, Administrator, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency
Oral Statement...................................................     5

Opening statements and the prepared statements for the witness
are available in the U.S. House of Representatives Repository
at: docs.house.gov.

INDEX OF DOCUMENTS

----------

* Statement for the Record; submitted by Rep. Connolly.

* Statement, PJM, on Greenhouse Gas and Related Regulations;
submitted by Rep. Perry.

* Article, Wall Street Journal, ``EPA and Its Biden Admin
Critics''; submitted by Chairman Comer.

* Report, Climate Change and Children's Health and Well-Being
in the US; submitted by Rep. Frost.

* H.J. Res. 161, May 28, 2024; submitted by Rep. Higgins.

* Article, Politico, ``Coal dust concerns''; submitted by Rep.
Mfume.

* Letter to Administrator Regan, June 21, 2024; submitted by
Rep. Mfume.

* Petition for Rulemaking, NPDES, Coal Train; submitted by Rep.
Mfume.

* Letter, ABC to Committee, July 10, 2024; submitted by
Chairman Comer.

* Letter, NAM Coalition to Congressional Leadership, April 29,
2024; submitted by Chairman Comer.

* Report Page, NAM, Map of NAM and EPA; submitted by Chairman
Comer.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Regan; submitted by Chairman
Comer.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Regan; submitted by Rep.
Gosar.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Regan; submitted by Rep.
Fry.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Regan; submitted by Rep.
Higgins.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Regan; submitted by Rep.
Fallon.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Regan; submitted by Rep.
Donalds.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Regan; submitted by Rep.
Burchett.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Regan; submitted by Rep.
McClain.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Regan; submitted by Rep.
Langworthy.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Regan; submitted by Rep.
Connolly.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Regan; submitted by Rep.
Crockett.

The documents listed are available at: docs.house.gov.

OVERSIGHT OF THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

----------

Wednesday, July 10, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Oversight and Accountability

Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. James Comer [Chairman
of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Comer, Gosar, Foxx, Grothman,
Palmer, Higgins, Sessions, Biggs, Mace, Fallon, Donalds, Perry,
Timmons, Burchett, Greene, McClain, Boebert, Fry, Langworthy,
Burlison, Raskin, Norton, Lynch, Krishnamoorthi, Mfume, Ocasio-
Cortez, Bush, Brown, Stansbury, Garcia, Frost, Lee, Crockett,
Goldman, Tlaib, and Pressley.
Chairman Comer. The hearing of the Committee on Oversight
and Accountability will come to order.
I want to welcome everyone here today.
Without objection, the Chair may declare a recess at any
time.
I now recognize myself for the purpose of making an opening
statement.
Today, we are conducting oversight of the Biden
Administration's Environmental Protection Agency.
EPA Administrator Michael Regan leads EPA as it implements
President Biden's environmental agenda.
Not only did President Biden have a disastrous debate
performance, but his entire Presidency has also been disastrous
for the American people. President Biden's radical agenda has
pushed out massive, costly regulations.
From the moment he stepped into office, President Biden, or
at least those around him, pushed out sweeping executive orders
and regulations aimed at transforming critical sectors of our
economy. From transportation to power generation, this
Administration has enacted a whole-of-government approach to
change how these sectors operate, in service to the left's
radical climate agenda.
And no cost is spared. But folks at home around this
country will be left footing the bill for the price of these
massive rulemakings. The EPA's largest regulations, such as the
tailpipe emissions rules for light-, medium-, and heavy-duty
vehicles, have been estimated to cost nearly $900 billion to
implement.
Those rules require automakers to completely redesign their
operations to produce more electric vehicles, regardless of
what consumers are demanding in the actual marketplace. Instead
of letting consumers and the market decide what products fit
their lifestyle needs, the Biden Administration wants to force
them into these decisions, no matter what the cost is.
EPA is also implementing costly regulations designed to
force coal-fired power plants out of the power-generation
sector. Coal produced over 16 percent of the total electricity
generation in the United States in 2023, according to the U.S.
Energy Information Administration. In my home state of
Kentucky, over two-thirds of our electricity is generated by
coal-fired plants.
But EPA's rules will force the premature retirement of
reliable sources of electricity like coal plants at a time when
electricity demand continues to rise. Removing reliable power-
generation capabilities undermines the stability of our
electric grid and puts consumers at risk of rolling blackouts
and forced rationing of electricity. As these rules go into
effect, Americans will be left literally powerless.
How can the Administration push to electrify the U.S.
vehicle fleet on the one hand, while it undermines the
reliability of the electric grid on the other?
During the 118th Congress, this Committee has investigated
numerous regulations of various sizes and scopes, but one thing
keeps reappearing: higher costs of regulation leads to higher
costs for consumers.
The Biden Administration has either ignored or refused to
learn this basic economic lesson. It is very simple. When the
Federal Government imposes new massive regulations, the costs
of compliance just do not magically vanish into the air. Those
costs are passed on to consumers, who will be faced with higher
prices and fewer choices in the market.
And the numbers are staggering. By their own estimates, the
Biden Administration, in just 3 1/2 years on the job, has
imposed over $1.6 trillion in estimated new Federal regulatory
costs. And $1.3 trillion of those costs, over 80 percent of the
total, are from you, EPA regulations.
Americans are already starting to see higher prices and
fewer choices because of regulation, and we can expect it will
only get worse as these rules really kick into high gear. Gas
prices have skyrocketed, utility bills continue to increase,
and inflation has eaten into every household's spending power.
Administrator Regan, you committed at your confirmation
hearing to build consensus around pragmatic solutions and to
work in partnership with Congress. Well, sir, the sheer cost of
the regulations coming out of the Biden Administration does not
strike me or many Americans as pragmatic solutions at all. $1.3
trillion just from the EPA is setting us down a dangerous path
of over-regulation.
I hope that we can impress upon the Administration today
how much it needs to start putting the interests of the
American people first and not simply look to appease these
well-organized left-wing special-interest groups and climate
scaremongers. Americans cannot afford the bill they will
ultimately be left paying by this Administration.
I want to thank you.
And I now yield to the Ranking Member for his opening
remarks.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you kindly, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to Administrator Regan for joining us here
today.
It is another brutal summer in Washington, but, as we say
on Capitol Hill, it is not the heat, it is the stupidity.
And Americans today face the accelerating ravages of the
climate crisis, including extreme heat waves. Last year was the
hottest year on record in more than 100,000 years. And the
hottest year before that was the prior year. And the hottest
year before that was the year before that.
So, we are talking about record extreme heat, record
violent flooding, record wildfires destroying millions of acres
of land in the West, record-velocity hurricanes and tornadoes.
And yet, a lot of our colleagues are still in denial. In
fact, their ``Project 2025'' plan for America would ban the use
of the word ``climate change.'' They want to delete the
possibility of even talking about climate change, much less
taking any action on it.
Millions of Americans are suffering the health effects of
legacy pollution, dangerous air quality, and other kinds of
toxic contamination. The work of the EPA has never been more
urgent.
Under the Presidential Administration of Joe Biden and
Kamala Harris, the EPA has taken decisive action to put the
health of the people before the profits of polluters and to
confront climate change and toxic contamination of our
communities.
This includes new rules limiting pollution from coal and
natural gas power plants. It includes a new rule limiting
pollution from chemical plants that will reduce cancer risks
for vulnerable communities; new rules for cars and trucks that
will cut pollutants and reduce premature deaths, heart attacks,
asthma, and fuel costs for Americans; and sweeping efforts to
protect our population from lead and carcinogens in the
drinking water.
Our colleagues who support a twice-impeached convicted
felon for President would have us believe that EPA's agenda is
a radical one. The agenda we should be concerned about is
Donald Trump's radical, anti-science, corporate polluter agenda
which he would give away to Big Gas and Big Coal and Big Oil
for a billion dollars in campaign contributions.
The week before last, the Supreme Court gutted the Chevron
doctrine, which will invite the Justices now to impose their
policy preferences over the agencies that are working to
implement congressional will.
And with last week's Corner Post decision, the Court's
extremists rejected decades of precedent to open Federal
agencies up to what Supreme Court Justice Jackson described as
a ``tsunami of lawsuits that threaten to devastate the
functioning of the Federal Government.''
These cases were backed by dark-money, corporate-power
interests, including the Koch network and the Chamber of
Commerce, both who come to lobby against environmental rules
that are being adopted by the EPA.
These are just the latest GOP attacks on the environmental
protections that Americans want and need. According to a recent
Gallup poll, a sweeping majority of Americans believe climate
change is real and that we need to act on pollution of our air
and our water and destabilization of the climate.
Yet, just 2 months ago, Trump met with Big Oil executives
and lobbyists to sell out U.S. energy policy. At a steak
dinner, Trump told Big Oil and Big Gas CEOs that, in exchange
for a billion-dollar contribution to his campaign, he would
roll back environmental rules that protect us from unchecked
pollution by the fossil-fuel industry.
We sent a letter to these CEOs in order to get more
information about what happened at that dinner, and I am still
hoping and waiting for our colleagues to join us in getting to
the bottom of that.
The extremist Republican anti-environment agenda is laid
out clearly in the infamous ``Project 2025'' playbook, which
would pick up where the Trump Administration left off by
gutting clean-energy programs, repealing environmental rules,
and eviscerating the EPA's budget and staff and their ability
to act against pollution.
To anybody who doubts the role that environmental rules and
the EPA has played, I suggest looking at the Cuyahoga River
near Cleveland, Ohio.
In 1969, this river was one of the most polluted waterways
in the country, and it actually caught on fire. A river caught
on fire. That catastrophe and its health consequences led to
the creation of the EPA and enactment of the Clean Water Act
that our colleagues now want to undermine and destroy.
Here is what the Cuyahoga River looked like before the EPA
existed. And this is the America that some politicians want us
to go back to, a time when the rivers were so polluted that
prolonged exposure to the water would result in an emergency
room visit.
Now, on the other hand, after decades of work with local
and state governments and communities, here is what the
Cuyahoga River looks like today. We can literally see the
physical difference made by the work of the EPA.
This is what we have been able to do with the Clean Water
Act and the Clean Air Act and the muscular enforcement that
both the right-wing MAGA Court and the right-wing MAGA Congress
want to destroy and reverse.
While extreme Republicans continue to prioritize Big Oil
and corporate polluters over the health and safety of our
people, and as our health and environmental protections are
dismantled before our eyes by the Supreme Court, it is
essential that we back the EPA and we sound the alarm about
this attack on essential environmental regulations. The
American people need to know the truth about what is at stake
and what it means for our future.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Comer. The Ranking Member yields back.
Today, we are on joined by the Honorable Michael S. Regan,
who was sworn into office on March 11, 2021, as the
Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Prior to his nomination as EPA Administrator, Mr. Regan
served as the secretary of the North Carolina Department of
Environmental Quality.
Pursuant to Committee rule 9(g), the witness will please
stand and raise his right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony that you
are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
Mr. Regan. I do.
Chairman Comer. Let the record show that the witness
answered in the affirmative.
And I thank you. And you may take a seat.
We certainly appreciate you being here today and look
forward to your testimony.
Let me remind the witness that we have read your written
statement and it will appear in full in the hearing record.
Please limit your oral statement to around 5 minutes. You are a
very important witness, so if you need to go over a little bit,
that is certainly fine.
As a reminder, please press the button on the microphone in
front of you so that it is on and the members can hear you.
When you begin to speak, the light in front of you will turn
green. After 4 minutes, it will turn yellow. And when the red
light comes on, we ask that you please wrap it up.
But, again, we know that you have a lot of important stuff
to talk about today, and we certainly appreciate you being
here.
I now recognize Mr. Regan for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MICHAEL S. REGAN

ADMINISTRATOR

U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

Mr. Regan. Well, thank you, Chairman Comer and Ranking
Member Raskin and members of the Committee.
I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to
share the U.S. EPA's work to advance a cleaner and healthier
Nation while ensuring that all people have clean air to
breathe, clean water to drink, and that we remain globally
competitive.
Our partnership and our open and transparent dialog with
Congress is key to ensuring that my agency can carry out its
mission of protecting public health and the environment.
And over the last year, EPA has been hard at work doing
just that.
We are cleaning up our water. I am proud to say that we
finalized historic protections that address PFAS contamination
and will bring more than 100 million people cleaner drinking
water. This will prevent thousands of deaths and reduce tens of
thousands of serious illnesses across the country.
We are protecting people from toxic chemicals. We recently
banned chrysotile asbestos, the last remaining kind of asbestos
used in our country, which has been linked to more than 40,000
deaths in the United States each year.
Additionally, EPA's Toxic Substance Control Act program
demonstrates how effective our work is when we receive adequate
resources from Congress. With the increased resources we
received in 2022 and 2023, EPA more than doubled the number of
chemical reviews each month and cleared out more than half of
the older backlog cases.
And we are also cleaning up our air. In March, EPA
announced the final national pollution standards for passenger
cars, light-duty trucks, and medium-duty vehicles for model
years 2027 through 2032. These standards will avoid more than 7
billion tons of carbon emissions and provide nearly $100
billion of annual net benefits.
EPA's greatest and most fundamental responsibility is
protecting public health and the environment, and every single
day we are upholding our commitment to the American people. EPA
follows the science, we follow the law, and we remain committed
to openness and transparency.
I am proud to say that, in April, my agency announced four
final rules under separate authorities to reduce climate, air,
water, and land pollution from fossil-fuel-fired power plants.
Finalizing these standards on the same day helps ensure that
the power sector can confidently prepare for the future by
enabling strategic long-term investments and establishing an
informed multiyear planning process.
Folks, I understand just how important our role is in the
power sector and our Nation's economic growth and
competitiveness. And I also understand that protecting public
health has never come at the expense of a strong and durable
economy. EPA's action reflects this understanding.
Transparency is key, and engagement is vitally important. I
want to be clear. Through all of our rulemakings, we engage
with and receive input from the regulators, the institutions,
the stakeholders--all of the individuals who will help shape
the future of our country.
Furthermore, President Biden's Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law and Inflation Reduction Act provide a historic, once-in-a-
generation opportunity to invest in America's future--a future
that will change people's lives for the better.
The historic funding Congress has provided my agency is
creating millions of jobs, modernizing our Nation's
infrastructure, combating climate change, and putting us on a
path to win the 21st century and beyond. And EPA is doing the
job Congress has asked us to do, by putting these funds to work
to fulfill our critical mission.
As an agency, EPA is dedicated to open communication,
fairness, and transparent engagement with Congress and with the
American people. EPA recognizes and respects the importance of
Congress's interest in obtaining information necessary to
perform its legitimate oversight.
With respect to the Oversight Committee, we have responded
in good faith to Committee requests by providing approximately
23,000 pages of documents, a response to every letter from the
Committee, 8 briefings, testimony at a Subcommittee hearing,
and numerous staff-level calls.
And we are fully committed to continuing to cooperate with
you as well as the Office of Inspector General and the U.S.
Government Accountability Office.
I am confident and proud of the hard work at EPA, and I am
proud of the work that we have undertaken to protect public
health and the environment while responsibly stewarding
taxpayer resources. Under President Biden's leadership,
Americans in every state and every town will lead healthier
lives, breathing cleaner air, drinking cleaner water, and
seeing a brighter economic future.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here today to submit
the testimony for the record, and I look forward to our
continued partnership and answering all questions.
Chairman Comer. Thank you very much.
We will now begin our 5 minutes of questions. The Chair
recognizes Mr. Palmer from Alabama for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. I thank the Chairman.
Mr. Regan, you and my Democratic colleague mentioned the
great work of the EPA. And I just wanted to point out that the
photograph that he showed and the subsequent cleanup of the
Cuyahoga River is indicative of all of our commitment to
cleaning up our environment.
And we have made remarkable progress. Since 1980, our
economy has grown by 791 percent, vehicle miles traveled has
gone up 113 percent, population's increased by 47 percent--and
that is probably not counting the illegals that have crossed
our border--energy consumption's up 29 percent, but the six
criteria gases that the EPA tracks have all gone down 60
percent. And that is your data.
One of the things that concerns me is about how you have
gone about things, in basically taking the lawmaking authority
away from Congress. I am very encouraged by the overturning of
the Chevron deference that the Supreme Court did last week,
because it restores the responsibility for lawmaking and the
accountability for law-making to Congress, where it belongs.
But there is another thing that the EPA has been engaged in
that concerns me, and that is basically sue and settle.
In March of this year, the inspector general issued a
report that found the EPA does not properly store its
procurement data, paving the way for fraudulent, collusive
behavior with vendors receiving contracts and subcontracts.
This prevents the inspector general from adequately conducting
oversight.
Are you doing anything to correct this? That is----
Mr. Regan. We have.
Mr. Palmer [continuing]. A ``yes'' or ``no.''
Mr. Regan. We have. Yes.
Mr. Palmer. OK. Good. I would like to know, if you would
report to the Committee in writing, what you have done to
correct this.
Because it is not the first time these questions have been
raised about the EPA's potential collusion with friendly
outside parties, especially with environmental groups during
litigation. As I said, it is sometimes referred to as sue-and-
settle litigation.
So, when was the last time the government audited the EPA's
litigation? Have you had an audit?
Mr. Regan. I am not quite sure of which specific audit you
are referring to, but we----
Mr. Palmer. Your litigation.
Mr. Regan [continuing]. We welcome all audits.
Mr. Palmer. Well, I would like to know, in a report to the
Committee, whether or not you have had an audit of EPA
involvement in litigation.
The Biden Administration revoked the Trump Administration
policies to publish and notice settlement details and pre-
litigation announcements. And I want to know what efforts the
EPA has made to reduce the settlement costs using taxpayer
dollars.
Can you report that to the Committee as well?
Mr. Regan. Yes, we can report to the progress we have made
to evolve that document to provide more transparency, which is
what those changes----
Mr. Palmer. But I want to know how much you have spent of
taxpayer dollars in these settlement cases.
And if the government auditors cannot access data to
adequately track management of contracts or litigation costs,
then what resources are available to the Congress and the
public to track the taxpayer expenses for these activities?
Do you have any response to that, in terms of your
oversight? Because you should be reporting to Congress with
full transparency about your litigation efforts in these sue-
and-settle cases.
Mr. Regan. I do believe that we are reporting responsibly
to Congress. I meet frequently with my Inspector General. We
have taken just about all of the recommendations----
Mr. Palmer. Well, your Inspector General, as I said,
reported that you do not properly store your procurement data,
which paves the way for fraudulent, collusive behavior. And
that is one of my big concerns, is that there has been
collusive behavior and involvement with these outside groups.
I want to move to something else that concerns me too, is,
the House of Representatives sent two letters to the EPA--one
was in December of last year; one was April of this year--
signed by 22 Members respectively, including 10 members of the
House Energy and Commerce Committee. Both letters raised
serious questions about whether the EPA's proposed $2 billion
regulation on the lime industry is necessary, given that the
EPA's own scientists have determined that the emissions from
lime plants are already acceptable with an ample margin of
safety.
And in September of last year, the House Science Committee
held an oversight hearing, and you testified that you think--
and you said this: ``I think what we want to do is to ensure
that we are meeting the letter of the law with as much
flexibility as possible. I think we have to be reasonable, and
I think we want to do--what we want to do is protect public
health and ensure that these industries can be productive.''
How in the world is finalizing a $2 billion regulation
providing as much flexibility as possible and being reasonable?
Mr. Regan. Well, I think if you look at that finalized
action, we took into consideration many of the recommendations
that industry asked us to----
Mr. Palmer. Do you know what lime is used for?
Mr. Regan [continuing]. To also protect health and----
Mr. Palmer. Administrator Regan, do you know what lime is
used for?
Mr. Regan. I absolutely do.
Mr. Palmer. What is it used for?
Mr. Regan. Well, it can be used for a lot of things,
especially----
Mr. Palmer. Yes, but what is it primarily used for in the
construction?
Mr. Regan. You can use lime for agriculture. You can use
lime for construction. I mean, there are a lot of uses for
lime.
Mr. Palmer. You cannot make--it is a key ingredient in
concrete, cement.
Mr. Regan. It is a key ingredient in a lot of things; it is
not just cement.
Mr. Palmer. And you just imposed a $2 billion regulation on
it. Then all that cost is going to be passed on to consumers
and increase food prices, increase----
Mr. Regan. We put protective standards in place so that
workers and people who are exposed to lime are not----
Mr. Palmer. But your own----
Mr. Regan [continuing]. Unduly----
Mr. Palmer [continuing]. You own Administration says that
you have determined it is acceptable with an ample margin of
safety. That is not reasonable.
Mr. Regan. Acceptable in certain instances. I think that
is----
Mr. Palmer. Yes, well----
Mr. Regan [continuing]. A narrative or a context that--I
would love to have this conversation. Maybe we could look at
the full breadth of the statement that the scientists are
making.
Mr. Palmer. Your----
Mr. Regan. I am very aware of the statements that our
scientists are making, and so I think that may be out of
context.
Mr. Palmer. Well, I am very encouraged by the Chevron
deference being overturned, because it will restore to Congress
our lawmaking authority and remove it from these agencies.
I yield back.
Chairman Comer. And the gentleman's time's expired.
We went a minute over, so the Democrats can have that extra
minute at some point.
The Chair recognizes Ranking Member Raskin.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you kindly, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Regan, let me just follow-up on that, because I do
think that there is a significant philosophical difference that
was just surfaced in the colloquy between Mr. Palmer and
yourself.
There is no doubt that there is industry that wants more of
a freedom to pollute without having environmental rules imposed
against them.
But your purpose is to defend the freedom to breathe clean
air and drink clean water and have a safe working place.
And I wonder if you would describe what the mission of the
EPA is.
Mr. Regan. Well, the mission of the EPA is to protect
public health and the environment, look at cost-effective
technologies to do so, and ensure that this country can remain
globally competitive.
And I do that in concert with state regulators in blue and
red states, but also actively engaging industry to come up with
the right solutions.
Mr. Raskin. And that is a mission that has been, for a lot
of American history, a bipartisan one. It was under President
Nixon that the EPA was first created, right?
Mr. Regan. Correct.
Mr. Raskin. And so, there is nothing that should be
partisan about the pursuit of clean air, clean water, clean
working conditions. Do you agree with that?
Mr. Regan. I agree with that.
Mr. Raskin. OK.
I wonder, what is your perspective on what would happen if
the proposals in the ``Project 2025'' blueprint for a MAGA
takeover of government were implemented? What would happen if
all of the rules that they want to repeal at the EPA were
repealed?
Mr. Regan. Well, listen, I think when you look at the
massive cuts that are being suggested, we will not get new
pesticides, new registrants on the market. We will
significantly hurt our agriculture industry, reducing the
herbicides that we can get on the market. We will not clear all
of the litigation that has tied our hands to get chemicals on
the market that we rely on every day.
Listen, we would have significant impacts to our water
quality. Emerging contaminants like PFAS would run amok. We
would continue to have lead-poisoned water all across the
country.
We would not be able to look at how to clean up brownfield
sites and benefit not just from a health standpoint but from
the economic vitality and opportunity of cleaning up these
blighted sites.
The list just goes on and on. America needs a strong EPA.
Mr. Raskin. I remember when Donald Trump took out his
sharpie and purported to change the direction of a hurricane. I
think it was Hurricane Dorian back in 2019. But he basically
said it was not going to hit the Florida coast, it was going to
hit Alabama.
And he did this without any consultation with the National
Weather Service or NOAA, where the National Weather Service is
located. And then it created huge confusion and consternation.
I mean, what would happen if we replaced professional,
scientific, civil-service management of agencies, like the
Weather Service or NOAA or the EPA, with political flunkies,
basically, people who are just willing to say whatever the
President wants to say? What would that do to our ability to
have effective public policy, if science is something that
could just be made up by a President?
Mr. Regan. If we do not follow the science and have
qualified people in these positions, Americans will die.
We have a role to play, and we need to be able to predict
the weather. We need to be able to respond to the weather. We
need to be able to alert the public if danger is coming their
way.
And once many of these communities are hit, whether it is a
wildfire or a flood or a hurricane, we need to be able to go in
and be activated to help bring those communities back to life.
Whether it is Maui, Hawaii, or whether it is East Palestine,
Ohio, or Jackson, Mississippi, when a city is hit, we need
experts to come in and ensure that there is clean air and clean
water.
Mr. Raskin. So, how have you regarded the war on science
and the war on public health that we saw during COVID-19, we
saw on this Committee when Dr. Fauci came the other day? We had
members of this Committee accusing Dr. Fauci of having created
COVID-19 and profiting from it.
How do you experience that attack on science in terms of
your ability to get your work done?
Mr. Regan. Well, you know, it is threatening reality and
the facts. And what we have done under this Administration is
restore scientific integrity, which, by the way, industry,
businesses, all of our economic partners applaud us for doing
this.
We are saving lives, and we are putting pragmatic,
practical regulations in place so that we can provide many of
our industries regulatory certainty. They need to have
regulatory certainty so that they can make the proper
investments.
Mr. Raskin. So, would you say that the success of the EPA
depends on the integrity of the science that goes into it, and
you are threatened by the political science of the MAGA people
who say, we want to dictate a political agenda to people who
work for EPA or the Weather Service or NOAA?
Mr. Regan. Politics of no party has any role in scientific
integrity. And if we do not remain in a place where we are
transparent and bolstering our scientific integrity, we will
lose the trust of the public.
Scientific integrity is the core--is at the core of EPA's
mission to protect all people.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you very much for your hard work.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back to you.
Chairman Comer. All right.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Higgins from Louisiana for 5
minutes.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Regan, you said you do not want to lose the
trust of the American people. Too late. It has already
happened.
Economic prosperity is the cornerstone of societal
advancement worldwide. And the cornerstone of economic
prosperity is affordable, abundant, transportable energy
product.
Ladies and gentlemen and you young Americans across the
country, please join me in loving your planet and living your
life in a manner that you intend to protect your planet for
future generations by recognizing that economic prosperity
worldwide is the number-one driver of clean air and clean water
and reduced pollution worldwide.
So, the energy product that the world consumes, including
the fuel that you used to get here, the petrochemical products
produced by the fossil-fuel industry that Mr. Regan is wearing
upon his back, the clothes that you are wearing, the carpet
upon which you are standing, the finish on the chair where you
are sitting, the petrochemical products that make up 100
percent of the phone or the computer that you are typing on, is
consumed worldwide.
Our world being one, if you are concerned about the
ecological impact of mankind upon your planet and you recognize
that mankind is going to consume petrochemical products, then
you would want it produced in the region of the Earth where it
is produced the cleanest, under the most stringent regulations
and the most industry-driven technological advancements to
deliver clean, affordable product. That is the United States of
America.
Men like Mr. Regan have carried a torch that is 100 percent
driven by an agenda to smash the American energy industry. He
is the one that is agenda-driven, not me.
The American energy industry and the American petrochemical
industry is, with no debate, the cleanest producer of
affordable energy product and affordable petrochemical product
in the world. And every one of you consume it. Own that,
because that is where we are.
In the future, I have no doubt that there will be a gradual
transition to things unknown. This is the nature of life. It is
the way things roll. But to have it--have an agenda-driven
Green New Deal, anti-American, anti-American-energy, anti-
American-petrochemical agenda shoved down our throat by an
Administration that claims it is doing so on behalf of
protecting the world's ecological stability by forcing the
production of these products into regions of the world that
have far less concern about their ecological impact, that is
hypocrisy at its worst.
And I, for one, am going to use every authority that
Congress allows me to legally wield to push back against it.
Mr. Chairman, I ask for unanimous consent to enter into the
record the Joint Resolution 161, a joint resolution calling for
the reversal of the EPA rule submitted by this gentleman and
his department. I ask for unanimous consent.
Chairman Comer. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Higgins. Mr. Regan, do you have plans for next year,
sir? Do you have plans for next year?
Mr. Regan. I have plans for every year.
Mr. Higgins. What are your plans for next year?
Mr. Regan. Well, my plans are personal, and I do not----
Mr. Higgins. Well, I am asking you professionally.
Mr. Regan [continuing]. I do not know you. Well, I----
Mr. Higgins. Do you have plans to continue----
Mr. Regan [continuing]. Am not obligated----
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. Your battle----
Mr. Regan. I am not----
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. That you are carrying that torch
for?
Mr. Regan. With you just assaulting me and saying I am un-
American, now you want to know----
Mr. Higgins. You think this is an assault?
Mr. Regan [continuing]. Now you want to know what my
plans----
Mr. Higgins. We are definitely living in two different
worlds.
Mr. Regan. Oh, yes, we are in two different worlds.
Mr. Higgins. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Mfume. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. I appreciate----
Mr. Mfume [continuing]. I have an inquiry.
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. This hearing being convened.
Mr. Mfume. Mr. Chairman? Mr. Chairman, I have an inquiry.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Mfume.
Mr. Mfume. I have an----
Mr. Higgins. I am going to reclaim my time.
Chairman Comer. And you have--you have time left, Mr.
Higgins.
Mr. Mfume. I have an inquiry of the Chair.
Mr. Chairman, we disagree on a lot of issues in this
Committee a lot of times, but we always ought to look and put a
stop sign in front of ourselves when we start assailing, by
name, the personal integrity of any witness. I mentioned this a
few weeks ago with Mr. Fauci. It continues to happen.
I want to make sure I am on the record so that members of
the Committee on both sides of the aisle will at least respect
the personal integrity of a witness before this Committee.
Chairman Comer. The Chair recognizes Mr. Higgins for his
final few seconds.
Mr. Higgins. Mr. Chairman, this is the Oversight Committee.
This is where government is forced to sit in front of Congress
and be held accountable for their actions.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman,----
Mr. Higgins. If that is----
Mr. Raskin. The gentleman's time, is it not----
[Crosstalk.]
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. His personal integrity, that is
not my problem.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Mfume. But it is not the McCarthy era.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Mfume. It is not the McCarthy committee.
Chairman Comer. Order.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Norton from Washington, DC.
Ms. Norton. Administrator Regan, thank you for being here
today.
Climate change and pollution are among the most urgent
crises of our time. Addressing them requires real action and
innovative solutions.
The Biden-Harris Administration and Democrats in Congress
took real action and delivered innovative solutions when we
passed the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and Inflation
Reduction Act.
As a result, we are making historic investments in our
communities to fight climate change and protect our environment
and public health, including more than $50 billion for EPA to
strengthen our Nation's water infrastructure after decades of
underinvestment.
The District of Columbia is benefiting from billions of
dollars in funding, much of which will go toward replacing
toxic lead pipes. Removing these dangerous pipes will make our
drinking water safer, prevent health crises, and protect
children from lead poisoning that can lead to lifelong harm.
Administrator Regan, why is investing in our water
infrastructure an urgent priority for the Administration?
Mr. Regan. Well, thank you for that question,
Congresswoman.
And it is vital for public health and for our economy. Our
Nation's water infrastructure is crumbling, which will have an
impact on our global competitiveness.
But, more importantly, I have met with so many mothers
whose children are lead-poisoned, and we are seeing lead-
poisoned children all over this country. And that is why the
President and Vice President have prioritized removing 100
percent of our lead pipes.
I am happy to say that D.C. will receive more than $28
million to reduce--or replace their lead pipes in our most
recent funding announcement this May.
But it is vitally important that every single person in
this country has access to clean drinking water--clean,
affordable drinking water.
Ms. Norton. Administrator Regan, the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law also provided D.C. with much-needed funding
to help with ongoing brownfields cleanup projects and to
replace antiquated, diesel-fueled buses with modern, battery-
electric buses.
D.C. is also using Pollution Prevention Grants which were
robustly funded under the law to support a range of projects,
including those aimed at improving public health and the
environment in D.C.'s disadvantaged communities.
The Inflation Reduction Act, meanwhile, has provided D.C.
with millions in grant funding focused on pollution reduction
and creating a carbon neutrality plan for D.C.
We are seeing important projects like these not only in the
District of Columbia but throughout the country.
Administrator Regan, what are some other success stories of
the Administration's historic investments in protecting our
environment?
Mr. Regan. Well, we have quite a few. And I would say, when
we think about Washington, DC, and we look at the success of
our brownfields program, we are revitalizing blighted
communities and turning these communities into economic centers
but also reducing the pollution to many communities, which
increases the tax base, increases the healthiness of
communities.
You mentioned electric school buses. We have issued
electric school buses in Washington, DC. We have also issued
about $62.5 million to expand the benefits of solar energy to
lower-income communities in the District as well.
We are looking at a combination of infusing new
technologies that will make the city more competitive while
cleaning up pollution and making citizens healthier. I call
that a huge success, and we are seeing that all over the
country.
Ms. Norton. Well, I do too.
Looking at all these important environmental projects, who
would be left behind--who would be left behind if we choose
nothing? What would the consequences be of inaction?
Mr. Regan. Well, you know, who would be left behind are the
least amongst us, our low-income communities.
Disproportionately hit would be our Black and Brown and Tribal
communities. Most of these communities are not the communities
that have generated the pollution or used the energy but are on
the receiving end of the brunt of the storms or the pollution.
And so, it is imperative that we take a look at ensuring
that every single person in this country has clean air to
breathe, clean water to drink, and that we engage with our
communities to invest in solutions that they have had for
decades. We cannot afford, as a country, to leave anyone
behind.
Chairman Comer. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Gosar from
Arizona.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you very much.
Administrator Regan, there has been a big push in this
Congress to expand the RECA, the Radiation Exposure
Compensation Act, in areas that are far away--very far away
from the original testing sites, which were in Nevada. In fact,
there was 1,054 detonations in Nevada, which compromises--which
composes almost 95 percent of all those exposures. And yet,
when we had RECA, there was an administrative error in which
southeastern Nevada, northwestern Arizona were excluded from
this aspect.
Now, we started investigating this. And I have been doing
this bill for forever, since 2010, because--before it was even
cool to talk about.
One of the things that it seems we can argue about should
we expand RECA is to St. Louis, Missouri. Very important here.
However, I take an acute interest in the existing Superfunds on
the EPA's National Priorities List that cover radiation in this
area. Let us look at these.
One Superfund site, the St. Louis Airport/Hazelwood Interim
Storage/Futura Coatings Company site, was listed in October
1989 and consists of three areas used for the storing of
radioactive waste from uranium processing in St. Louis.
Another, the Westlake Landfill site, was listed in August
1990 and covers a site where 43 tons of uranium ore processing
residues in soil were disposed of in 1973.
Here are my questions. These Superfunds are supposed to
contain and deal with the effects of this radiation, right? Do
you believe your agency is effectively addressing the issue of
radiation exposure in the St. Louis area?
Mr. Regan. I do. I do believe that it is--as you have
mentioned, a tough topic and hard to get your arms wrapped
around. I think that we are. And I think that the combinations
of cleanups and closures that we are offering do provide
adequate protection for surrounding communities.
Mr. Gosar. OK.
So, then, why is there a reason to expand RECA to this
area? It does not make any sense to me, because RECA was
developed for the exposure of above-ground bombing that the
Federal Government took acknowledgment from.
So, why do we have to expand RECA? I know these people need
some help, but why would Superfunds not follow that up?
Mr. Regan. Well, this is a specific issue that maybe we
should discuss, because I know that, when these sites or
expansions occur, that typically means more Federal dollars
come in to help with the cleanup if there is a different use
for the sites----
Mr. Gosar. So, I agree with you. But my point is, is, we
spent a ton of money on these Super sites. Why are they not
addressing these exposures to radiation from this point
forward, instead of RECA?
I mean, I have got people who have waited now--their
exposure has now been almost 70 years, and they have been
excluded because of an administrative error from what Congress
intended to the bill writing. It had nothing to do with us
being here.
And I have been pushed off, pushed off. We tried to do this
in the NDAA, we tried to do this all the way around. I have
been told by bureaucrats, ``You know what? Tough luck. You have
to have more money. We have to get it included.''
And now all of a sudden, I find that these poor people,
these Native Americans in northwestern Arizona, these
southeastern Nevada folks, do not have any compensation
possibilities. I have got some problems with that.
You know, I want this money to be appropriate----
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Gosar [continuing]. Because you can talk all about the
Administration and rules and regulations, but the other part of
wasting money is, is it the contractor who is not doing their
job? Is it the supervision of the Army Corps of Engineers is
not adequate? I do not know. But we have to have some answers
here. Because we have got one more chance at this. The rest of
these people are not going to be around.
And it is meager, folks. You have to show--prove that you
lived in this area for an amount of time just to be able to get
$35,000. I find this a radical injustice, in that regard.
And so, I would like--I have got a lot of other things, the
PM10's and all that stuff, but this is very poignant to me.
Mr. Regan. OK.
Mr. Gosar. So, I would love to have your full force pushing
this right away. Because we have not renewed the RECA
standards, and we need to, but I need to understand why all of
a sudden we are getting this big push from Missouri from these
Superfund aspects to be included in that. I want people to get
their due----
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Gosar [continuing]. Due diligence. But why does RECA
have to be this part? Why can the Superfunds not take that?
Could I get that answer from you?
Mr. Regan. Yes. You have my personal commitment that we
will work on this and see what we can do.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you.
My last little question was: You know, we have all these
pharmaceuticals in our water supply. The gentlelady from D.C.
talked about it. What--and I know you do not really have the
jurisdiction; the FDA really does.
But how clean is our water with regards to the disposal of
these pharmaceuticals, most of them going down into our water
supply? Could you address that real quickly?
Mr. Regan. Yes. At--presently, in my conversations with FDA
and other health agencies, our water is clean. Our water is
clean and drinkable.
And when it is not, we advise citizens to follow boil-water
advisories or any other advisories that a local entity might--
--
Mr. Gosar. Can I interrupt you right there?
But steroidal manufacturing of the pharmaceuticals bypasses
our normal-type prospectus , if I understand this right. I am a
dentist by profession--or was. So, how can you assure me that
those compounds are not still in the water?
Chairman Comer. The gentleman's time has expired, but
please answer the----
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Chairman Comer [continuing]. Very important question.
Mr. Regan. I think what we do is we match our expertise
with the expertise of FDA and, from a regulatory standpoint,
try to ensure that a wastewater treatment facility, a drinking
water facility, has the best technology. And that is where we
run those tests.
I think, to your point, this is more of an FDA-EPA-combined
answer, and we can get our staffs together to work on getting a
better answer for you.
Mr. Gosar. If you would, please. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Lynch from
Massachusetts.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the Ranking
Member.
First of all, I want to say thank you, Administrator Regan.
We have been working in my district--I represent a coastal
area that goes from the North End neighborhood of Boston all
the way down to Hingham. So, we are right on the coast. And we
have been working with your regional people in my area on
seawalls because of the--even just during my lifetime, we have
seen incredible sea-level rise along that coast in
Massachusetts. And I am sure there are other communities that
have benefited from your good work as well.
And also, we had tremendous PFAS issues. We have got an
older area, formerly heavily industrial. So, the EPA in our
region has been extremely helpful in helping us put in
filtration systems that now allow people to turn on their taps
and get clean water instead of having to have the town
administration provide free bottled water, which was happening
for quite a while.
I want to talk to you about the Chevron case, the Chevron
decision.
So, just to be clear, up until last week, when Congress
passed legislation that might have been general in nature and
had some ambiguity to it--which is basically every single bill
that we pass, because we cannot address every eventuality--in
the past, the courts were required to defer to agency expertise
as long as the agency interpretation was reasonable.
In other words, you know, it is not just the EPA. On
pharmaceutical development, you know, the FDA interpretations
of statutes that they are directed by held sway as long as it
was reasonable.
Same thing with labor laws. You know, the labor laws are
meant to protect workers. And as long as the Department of
Labor made interpretations that were consistent with that
mission, it was accepted by the court, and they afforded the
deference.
The SEC, the mission was to protect investors. And as long
as the SEC was making interpretations of ambiguous sections of
the law that was consistent with and reasonable within the
contours of the four corners of that law, that deference was
afforded to the agency.
Now, that is over. That is over.
And so, I am just wondering--I mean, I am sure you have had
a chance to look at this with counsel. What do you think the
impacts are going to be for the EPA and your responsibility,
your mission, to make sure that we have clean air, clean water,
and the sundry other missions that you must follow?
Mr. Regan. Well, as you can imagine, I and we are deeply
disappointed. This hits EPA extremely hard.
We have world-class experts who for decades have been
honing their skills to work on behalf of the American people
and render judgment on policies and regulations that would be
most protective of everyone in this country.
And so, we will gather ourselves and continue to leverage
that expertise in every way we can, because, again, our charge
is to ensure that every single person in this country, all of
our children, have access to clean drinking water and clean air
and healthy lands.
Mr. Lynch. Well, thank you.
I also want to just thank you again. We, in this Congress,
have passed legislation to provide for zero-emission vehicles,
not only private vehicles but--and a framework that would allow
people to, you know, charge those vehicles--but also we have
looked at the United States Postal Service and the 237,000
vehicles that they use each and every day, and we are in the
process of converting many of our older vehicles to electric
vehicles. And I just want to thank you and the EPA for your
cooperation on that measure. And it cannot happen soon enough.
Mr. Chairman, the previous Republican member consumed an
additional minute, and I would ask to have access to that extra
60 seconds, if I might.
Chairman Comer. We have been going back and forth. I have
been keeping up with it. I thought we were about even because
Mr. Raskin went over a minute. But if you need a--if you have a
good question to ask----
Mr. Lynch. Well, I would like to yield the last minute to
the Ranking Member.
Mr. Raskin. OK.
I will find some other time to get in, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Comer. OK.
Mr. Raskin. I will yield back. And thank you.
And I thank the gentleman from Massachusetts.
Chairman Comer. The Chair recognizes Mr. Sessions from
Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Administrator, welcome.
There is already, this morning, some disagreement about the
questions that we are asking you. I have heard you very clearly
talk about the EPA under your leadership as ``cost-effective
solutions,'' ``pragmatic,'' ``America needs a strong EPA,''
``scientific-based answers,'' ``fairness.''
So, I would like to engage in a dialog with you, if I can,
as opposed to a longwinded opportunity here.
Please tell me, as we talk about formaldehyde, are you
aware that the European Union occupational exposure limit was
just codified at 300 parts per billion?
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Sessions. You were. Thank you.
Are you aware that the air outside this building and the
air in this room is naturally occurring with formaldehyde?
Mr. Regan. I cannot speak to the----
Mr. Sessions. Well, you are the head of the EPA. If you do
not know that formaldehyde is everywhere, as we breathe it not
only in this building but outside--so I will tell you, that
answer is ``yes.''
Let it be noted, the head of the EPA did not understand
that formaldehyde is a naturally occurring substance.
Are you aware that the Human Studies Review Board, known as
HSRB, within EPA opposed and had problems with the
recommendation of 11 parts per billion that is now being
codified into your rules and regulations? Were you aware that
they had problems with 11 parts per billion?
Mr. Regan. I was not aware.
Mr. Sessions. Were not aware.
Are you, the gentleman, aware that the permissible parts
per billion is 750 parts per billion under OSHA for exposure
limit for formaldehyde?
Mr. Regan. Congressman Sessions, for the types of questions
you are asking, we have----
Mr. Sessions. They are very direct.
Mr. Regan [continuing]. Experts that have----
Mr. Sessions. You are the head of this organization, and
you have proposed taking to 11 parts per billion.
You showed up here and you talk about ``fairness,'' ``cost-
effective solutions,'' ``pragmatic,'' ``scientific-based,'' and
yet your own--within your own boards that provide you with data
and information, they have said 11 parts per billion is well
out of line and cannot even be measured.
And yet our friends--your friends that are up here on this
Committee, as we are, are asking you what are not tough
questions; they are really pragmatic, they are science-based,
they are cost-effective things--ways to look at things.
And you are standing behind changing some 20 of these
different chemicals and putting them to standards that would
be, once again, Europe has, their occupational exposure limit
is 300 parts per billion. America's, at this time, under OSHA,
is 750 parts per billion. You did not know that it is regularly
occurring all around, in every room, outside. And yet your own
committee within your department, the Human Studies Review
Board, said, please do not do this, we have problems. And yet
you have put your stamp on 11 parts per billion that is not
even able to be calculated.
And yet, if you look at 11 to 300 to 750, you chose to show
up here and to say to this Committee and to plead with us you
have to save every single life, and yet it cannot even be
measured.
You talk about fairness, you talk about cost-effectiveness,
you talk about being pragmatic, you talk about science-based
answers. And the head of EPA showed up today and said he did
not even know that formaldehyde was regularly naturally
occurring, at levels well above 11 parts per billion.
Mr. Chairman, this is why we seemingly have problems and
why my side--yes, we are Republicans, and we are not these
crazy-eyed people that you have heard about today. We are
saying, we want you to be pragmatic, we want you to be fair.
But you cannot even justify 11 parts per billion, because it
cannot even be measured. There are no scientific measures to
measure that on a regularly reoccurring basis. And you have put
an onus on industry.
Formaldehyde is used in plastics. It is used in cars. It is
used in national security. It is used all over the United
States, what we would call the free-enterprise system, but it
is capitalism.
Ms. Mace. [Presiding.] Thank you.
Mr. Sessions. And it is a cost-effective----
Ms. Mace. Thank you, Mr. Sessions.
Mr. Sessions [continuing]. Way to look at things.
Ms. Mace. You are out of time. Thank you.
Mr. Sessions. I yield back my time.
Sir, we do want to talk with you----
Ms. Mace. All right.
I would now like to recognize Congresswoman Ocasio-Cortez
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you. Thank you very much, Madam
Chairwoman.
We have heard a lot today. I would like to bring this
conversation a little bit down to Earth, about--and make it
more about the people that we are here to serve.
I am the Congresswoman for the Bronx and Queens. I
represent a community that has some of the highest childhood
asthma rates in the United States.
And when we hear this conversation about how regulations
threaten economic prosperity and--I jotted it down earlier
because I could not even believe that I heard it--that economic
prosperity, quote, ``is the number-one driver of clean air and
clean water,'' as though our rivers were somehow--I mean, our
rivers and forests were clean and unpolluted before a single
factory was constructed in this country. That is the state of
nature. I want us to be clear about that.
Now, when we hear people use this term ``economic
prosperity,'' I want folks to know at home, what that is a
shadow screen for is a term otherwise known as ``profit''--Wall
Street profit, very often.
And, Administrator Regan, you have been accused of
sabotaging, here, the economic prosperity of this country for
enforcing and introducing regulations about chemicals that this
Committee itself has investigated, such as PFAS.
I would like for us to dig into that a little bit.
PFAS is a chemical byproduct of--and it is a chemical that
is in almost everything--Teflon pans, workout gear, fire
extinguisher foam.
What are some of the health consequences that we have seen
as a result of elevated levels of PFAS in everyday--for
everyday Americans?
Mr. Regan. Well, you know, they range from various types of
cancers, death.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Uh-huh.
Mr. Regan. These carcinogenic elements are wreaking havoc
on communities all across the country.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. We have had people from PFAS-affected--
especially PFAS-affected communities that have had fertility
issues. Is that correct?
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Testicular cancer? Is----
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez [continuing]. That correct?
Developmental delays in children? Is that consistent with
what you have seen?
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thyroid issues? Increased risk of
cancer? Correct?
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And that--those people, those kids,
those parents who are struggling to conceive now--that is who
we respond to. That is who we answer to.
Correct, Administrator Regan?
Mr. Regan. Absolutely.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. The American people.
Now, I want to name something. This is not just economic
prosperity. There are people and organizations and companies
responsible for this.
DuPont and 3M are two of the largest corporations that were
responsible for PFAS dumping in the United States. Is that
correct?
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Did they know that these chemicals were
potentially toxic? Is that correct?
Mr. Regan. We believe they did.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And yet there are members here of this
Committee that want to defend the quote/unquote, ``economic
right'' for a company to poison its people--the American
people.
Now, when we talk about economic prosperity, if you are a
kid in the South Bronx, if you are a mom in rural Pennsylvania
near a PFAS dumping site, who comes ahead when you get cancer
and have a medical bill to pay? Who comes out ahead from that
PFAS dumping? The CEO of DuPont or that mom?
So, when we talk about the bills and the prosperity that
gets made from here and who has to pay that, we need to
understand a very simple economic concept called
``externalities.'' Externalities. The costs of pollution, the
costs of poisoning that are not factored into the profit margin
of a corporation that is actually wreaking havoc on this
planet.
And when we talk about issues like climate change, it is,
at its core, an issue of externalities. Because ExxonMobil and
all of these oil companies can afford to burn this planet to a
crisp, because it makes them a pile of money.
Now, Administrator Regan, I want to--I want to thank you,
because in the character attacks that you have experienced in
this hearing, I know that you have spent your entire time and
your entire Federal service----
Ms. Mace. Thank you. Your time is up--I----
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez [continuing]. Protecting families----
Ms. Mace [continuing]. Appreciate it--this morning.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez [continuing]. From being poisoned.
Ms. Mace. Thank you.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez [continuing]. And I want to thank you for
that.
Mr. Regan. Thank you.
Ms. Mace. All right.
I would now like to recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Regan, as part of the so-called Inflation Reduction
Act, the EPA established the Office of Environmental Justice
and External Civil Rights, which now manages $3 billion for
environmental and climate justice to fund community-based NGOs.
As part of the allocation, $600 million is devoted to the
Environmental Justice Thriving Communities Grantmaking Program,
which has shown serious signs of waste, fraud, and abuse. More
alarmingly, some of this money has been designated for groups
opposed to the interests of the United States and her allies.
So, my questions today, Mr. Regan, are ``yes'' or ``no,''
very simply ``yes'' or ``no.''
Administrator Regan, environmental justice grantees have
partners and affiliates who also receive funds from the EPA.
Are any of these groups or affiliates who receive this money
anti-American, yes or no?
Mr. Regan. Not that I am aware of.
Ms. Mace. Are any of these groups who receive this money
anti-Semitic, yes or no?
Mr. Regan. Not that I am aware of.
Ms. Mace. Are any of these groups explicitly anti-Israel?
Mr. Regan. You are talking about that have received money?
Ms. Mace. That are on the list to receive money, correct.
Yes or no, are any of these groups----
Mr. Regan. None of these----
Ms. Mace [continuing]. Explicitly anti-Israel? Do they hate
Jews?
Mr. Regan. None of these groups have----
Ms. Mace. OK.
Are any of these groups opposed to police and law
enforcement, yes or no?
Mr. Regan. I think we have to establish the point that none
of these----
Ms. Mace. The question is ``yes'' or ``no.'' Are any of
these groups opposed to police and law enforcement, yes or no?
Mr. Regan. None of the groups have received money.
Ms. Mace. That is not the question. Are any of these groups
who are allotted to get money from this fund anti-police, yes
or no?
Mr. Regan. I am not quite sure----
Ms. Mace. You know exactly what I am talking about.
Are you familiar with the group called Climate Justice
Alliance, yes or no?
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Ms. Mace. OK. I was surprised to learn that $50 million has
been designated for Climate Justice Alliance, a group which
explicitly publishes a ``Free Palestine'' section on its
website.
On the website, there are dozens of anti-Semitic and
alarming images designed to be printed and used in the violent
pro-Hamas protests we have seen across the country. Here are a
few of them this morning.
This first image includes a slogan that is widely
recognized as a call to eradicate the state of Israel.
Is this the official position of the Biden EPA, yes or no?
Mr. Regan. Is it the what?
Ms. Mace. Official position of Biden's EPA. Yes or no?
Mr. Regan. That is not our product.
Ms. Mace. Does this sign protect the environment, yes or
no?
Mr. Regan. That is not our product.
Ms. Mace. This group, where this image came from, is
designated to receive $50 million.
Mr. Regan. Has that group received any money?
Ms. Mace. So, this sign says, ``Freedom for Palestine.''
What does it say at the bottom? ``From the river to the sea,
Palestine will be free.''
Should taxpayers pay for this kind of thing, yes or no?
Mr. Regan. Well, I think you are misrepresenting the facts.
Ms. Mace. We are not misrepresenting.
My second image that I am going to show you today----
Mr. Regan. You are misrepresenting the facts.
Ms. Mace [continuing]. This image calls--I am speaking, and
I am going to reclaim my time.
Mr. Regan. Yes. You are misrepresenting the facts.
Ms. Mace. This image calls to defund the police and accuses
the United States of violence.
Is this the official position of Biden's EPA, yes or no?
Mr. Regan. No. That is a product----
Ms. Mace. OK. Does----
Mr. Regan [continuing]. Of a third party.
Ms. Mace [continuing]. This sign protect the environment,
yes or no?
Mr. Regan. I do not know what that sign----
Ms. Mace. The group that produces this sign is allotted
to--is allotted to get $50 million from U.S. taxpayers.
The next image----
Mr. Regan. What is your definition of ``allotted''?
Ms. Mace. The next image I am going to show you, I would
like you to read this poster from your seat. Can you tell me
what this says?
Mr. Regan. I think you can read it for yourself.
Ms. Mace. I am asking you to read the poster. What does it
say?
Mr. Regan. I think you can read it for yourself. I abhor
bigotry----
Ms. Mace. What does it say? This image says----
Mr. Regan. I abhor bigotry, and I will not repeat----
Ms. Mace [continuing]. ``Abolish prisons everywhere.'' This
image says, ``Free Palestine.'' This image says, ``Stop Cop
City.''
This group that produced this poster is allotted to receive
$50 million from U.S. taxpayers.
Mr. Regan. That group----
Ms. Mace. This is disgusting.
Mr. Regan [continuing]. Has not received one dime from EPA.
Ms. Mace. This image, this next image, adds an anti-Semitic
message, and it calls for defunding the police. This is
particularly special.
Is this the position, the official position, of Biden's
EPA, yes or no?
Mr. Regan. That is not--they have not received one dime
from the EPA.
Ms. Mace. Does this sign protect the environment?
They are slated to receive $50 million----
Mr. Regan. They have not----
Ms. Mace [continuing]. From taxpayers.
Mr. Regan [continuing]. Received one dime from EPA.
Ms. Mace. So, you are saying--on this next image--this is
probably the left's favorite. The quote on this image is from a
convicted murderer of a police officer that is still at large
and wanted by the FBI.
Does the Biden EPA support this position, yes or no?
Mr. Regan. These hypotheticals----
Ms. Mace. So, today----
Mr. Regan [continuing]. Have nothing to do with EPA.
Ms. Mace [continuing]. Our witness cannot even answer the
questions.
$50 million was going to go to this organization vis-`-vis
U.S. taxpayers.
So, you are going to tell me today--are you promising that
this group will not receive a single dime, yes or no?
Mr. Regan. None of these groups that you have paraded up
here have received one dime from EPA.
Ms. Mace. Will you promise to ensure that they will not
receive a single taxpayer dollar? This particular group is
slated to get $50 million. Will----
Mr. Regan. Listen, first of all----
Ms. Mace [continuing]. You promise me today that they will
get zero, yes or no?
Mr. Regan. First of all, half the things you have put up
there are offensive, right?
Ms. Mace. They are offensive. And----
Mr. Regan. OK.
Ms. Mace [continuing]. Like I said----
Mr. Regan. And second of all----
Ms. Mace [continuing]. It is a fact this group is going to
get--is slated to get $50 million from U.S. taxpayers.
Mr. Regan. None of these groups----
Ms. Mace. So, our witness today----
Mr. Raskin. Madam Chair----
Ms. Mace [continuing]. Let it show, cannot even answer the
questions.
Mr. Raskin. Madam Chair, will you just allow him to answer
you? I think it would be fair to allow him to answer you.
Mr. Regan. None of these----
Ms. Mace. He has not answered a single question.
Mr. Regan [continuing]. Groups have gotten one dime from
EPA, for the record.
Ms. Mace. Will you promise today that they will receive
zero dollars?
Mr. Regan. None of these groups have gotten one dime from
EPA.
Ms. Tlaib. [Inaudible.]
Ms. Mace. I am sitting in the chair. You are not.
Ms. Tlaib. [Inaudible.]
Ms. Mace. So, thank you.
And I yield back.
All right. I will now yield to Ms. Brown from Ohio.
Ms. Brown. Mr. Regan, I would like to yield to you as much
time as you would like to consume to respond to the allegations
that were hurled upon you.
Mr. Regan. Well, I appreciate that, because I think it is a
``gotcha'' game, to put posters and statements that many of us
may not agree with, see for the first time, and then accuse the
agency of supporting something that is not true.
None of the groups that were presented there have received
one dime from EPA. People have applied for resources. We are
going through a very thorough evaluation, and we have a process
to determine who should and should not receive Federal funding.
Those are the facts.
Ms. Brown. Thank you very much.
Welcome to Oversight. And it is great to see you again.
Mr. Regan. Good to see you too.
Ms. Brown. I want to begin by thanking you for the
Environmental Protection Agency's diligent work in my district,
northeast Ohio, where, as the Ranking Member pointed out, is
just one example of how the Cuyahoga River was historically
polluted--one of the most polluted bodies of water due to the
amount of industrial waste dumped into it. As you know,
Cuyahoga could not sustain any life at one point; caught fire
more than a dozen times. But thanks to the hard work of the EPA
and the Cleveland community, this is no longer reality.
I am proud to have cast one of my very first votes in
Congress in support of President Biden's and Vice President
Harris's and Democrats-led Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to
continue to clean up our precious water resources which are
critical to Cleveland, northeast Ohio, and the country.
EPA's commitment to restoring the Cuyahoga River area
economically and environmentally shows how this Administration
is prioritizing environmental justice.
So, Administrator Regan, can you explain what more needs to
be done to clean up and support the Cuyahoga River and
surrounding areas both environmentally and for the people who
live there?
Mr. Regan. Well, thank you for the question. And, also,
thank you for hosting me and Secretary Fudge in Cleveland a
while back.
Listen, I think since the Great Lakes Initiative started in
2010, significant progress has been made. But under your
leadership and the leadership of your colleagues partnering
with President Biden, we anticipate investing approximately
$100 million of EPA bill funds to support and continue the
great work that you all are leading.
Construction resulting from this funding will start at the
end of this year--or this year, and it will remove the largest
impediment to water quality remaining in the Cuyahoga River.
So, that will drive regional economic development, it will
restore important ecosystems, and it will turn this precious
body of water back to the natural state that it should be.
So, thank you for your advocacy there.
Ms. Brown. Thank you so much.
On a related point, my district has long faced challenges
in accessing healthy and safe drinking water. According to
Cleveland Clinic, lead-poisoning rates in the city of Cleveland
are four times--four times--the national average. This is
preventable, and we must overcome such a significant disparity.
That is why the Infrastructure Law's investments have been
critical in addressing this public health emergency. These
funds are used to remove lead pipes leading to homes--to our
homes and improve the access to safe drinking water.
This May, the Biden-Harris Administration announced an
additional $184 million in Bipartisan Infrastructure Law funds
to support safe drinking water and replace existing lead
service lines in Ohio.
So, Administrator Regan, can you share the impact of these
investments on improving access to clean drinking water, in
particular for low-income families and in the Black community?
Mr. Regan. You know, these investments are transformational
and life-changing. I have met, you have met, we have met with
mothers whose children are lead-poisoned, whose families have
been poisoned by lead or have not had a--a lack of access to
clean drinking water.
These investments will: (1) Create jobs for those who are
pulling these lead pipes out; (2) Drinking fresh clean water,
for these children, that is not lead-poisoned, will give them a
competitive edge as they pursue their education; (3) The
economic vitality and opportunities for these communities that
are now lead-free are endless.
Black and Brown communities are disproportionately impacted
by these pollutants, have a lack of economic investment. So, we
are doing--this is a win-win. We are infusing capital, we are
creating jobs, we are creating economic opportunities, and,
most importantly, our children and our families and our
grandparents will be drinking clean, affordable, safe drinking
water.
Ms. Brown. Thank you.
Under the Biden-Harris Administration, the restored EPA----
Ms. Mace. Time is up. Five minutes is up. I apologize.
Ms. Brown. Requesting equal time. You went over your time,
Madam Chair. Just requesting equal time, please, and thank you.
Ms. Mace. We are at 20 seconds over. I did not----
Ms. Brown. The attempts on----
Ms. Mace [continuing]. Go that far over.
Ms. Brown [continuing]. The other side of the aisle----
Ms. Mace. You have 10 seconds.
Ms. Brown [continuing]. To undercut, defund, and dismantle
the EPA are deeply dangerous. Our environment and our health
depend----
Ms. Mace. Order. I am going to call----
Ms. Brown [continuing]. On a fully funded, functional----
[Crosstalk.]
Ms. Brown [continuing]. EPA.
Ms. Mace. I would like to call on----
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Mace [continuing]. Mr. Perry from Pennsylvania.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Just out of curiosity, since one of my colleagues from the
other side of the aisle brought it up, I do wonder if the then-
senior-Senator from Delaware, now the President of the United
States, ever challenged DuPont's production and prolific
distribution of PFAS and PFOA. Just curious.
But I need to talk to you, Administrator--welcome--about
Pennsylvania.
My bosses, the people that I represent, complain to me
nearly daily about their electricity prices. And I am sure you
know that grid operators around the country are sounding the
alarm about the potential disruptions--blackouts, brownouts--
due to regulations, particularly the ``Clean Power Plan 2.0''
rule.
As a matter of fact, the PJM Interconnect, the largest
multi-state grid operator, which includes the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, stated that in the very years when we are
projecting significant increases in the demand for electricity,
the final rule will work to drive premature retirement of
traditional units that provide essential reliable services and
dissuade new gas resources from coming online.
I am just curious, how does the EPA factor in the cost to
the people that I represent that cannot afford their
electricity bills or the grid operators who are saying, do not
do this, we cannot sustain this? How does the EPA factor that
into the decision to just move forward and say, kind of, damn
the torpedoes?
Mr. Regan. Well, I think there is a process and maybe a
difference in some of these statements.
When the rule was proposed, we engaged in a lengthy round
of conversations. I even--Congressman Bill Johnson, who was our
Subcommittee Chair at the time, hosted a number of meetings
with me and industry and the like, and grid operators. And so,
we have had robust conversations.
I think PJM has made a statement that acknowledges that
numerous adjustments were made in between the proposal and the
final that really began to help address some of their concerns
about reliability.
Mr. Perry. So, are their claims about the reliability and
the inability to provide power and the fact that it will result
in blackouts and brownouts--is that--is that not true? Are
they----
Mr. Regan. We believe that we have resolved all anxiety
about----
Mr. Perry. But they are still making the statement.
And what about ratepayers? What about people paying the
bill? Pennsylvania, it is hot right now in the summertime.
Mr. Regan. Sure.
Mr. Perry. It is cold in the wintertime.
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Perry. They cannot afford their bills now. The bills
are going to go up, right? It is essentially supply and demand.
There is going to be a great demand but less supply.
Where does their need factor into your decision-making?
Mr. Regan. It factors in heavily.
And as I have conversed with numerous utility executives
and those that manage, they are going to be looking at a suite
of technology to provide electricity. So, our estimates are a
less than 1-percent increase in price over the next 10 to 15
years because of----
Mr. Perry. OK. So, your estimates are less than a 1-percent
increase in price over 10 to 15 years.
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Perry. Can you attest to that and promise that it will
not go up more than 1 percent in the next 15 years?
Mr. Regan. What we can do is we can provide you all the
data----
Mr. Perry. No, no, no, no. Sir, you are moving with the
rule. It is being fought in the courts.
Mr. Regan. Sure.
Mr. Perry. But the people that I work for, my bosses that
cannot afford their groceries, cannot afford gasoline, cannot
afford their daycare, cannot afford electricity, you are saying
that you have gotten their input and this is not going to
impact them, essentially, more than 1 percent over the next 15
years.
I want you to promise me right now, because I have got to
go face them. I have to face them.
Mr. Regan. Yes. I think you can tell----
Mr. Perry. That----
Mr. Regan. I think you can assure them that the EPA
Administrator said that his experts, the experts at FERC, DOE,
and EPA, all agree on the assessments that have been made on
reliability and cost.
Mr. Perry. OK.
Mr. Regan. Three agencies.
Mr. Perry. So, it is not going to go up more than one
percent. And if it does, then what? Then what do you do? What
do I--do you quit your job? Do you pay them the difference?
What happens then?
Mr. Regan. Well, you know, the way these rules are
designed, they are designed and each state has a state
implementation plan. So, it is not like----
Mr. Perry. So, we are going to pass the buck, it is not
your problem----
Mr. Regan. No--no----
Mr. Perry [continuing]. And somehow it was the states that
did it to them.
Mr. Regan. States have flexibilities in terms of how they--
they are delegated programs. So, we give the states the
autonomy. They design special state implementation programs.
And they are ensuring that the individuality of that state is
met with that planning. The planning for North Carolina is
different from the plan in Nevada.
Mr. Perry. And I appreciate that. And God bless the people
from North Carolina; I do not want them to have to pay any more
either. But I do not represent them. I have got to face the
people of south-central Pennsylvania that cannot afford their
bills right now.
And you are telling me it is not going to go up more than 1
percent over the next 15 years, but if it does, somehow, it is
the state's fault----
Ms. Mace. Thank you, Mr. Perry.
Mr. Perry [continuing]. And it is not yours.
Mr. Regan. The states have flexibilities to address----
Ms. Mace. Our time is up. Five minutes is up.
Mr. Perry. I yield.
Ms. Mace. I would like to yield 5 minutes to Mr. Garcia
from California.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you.
Thank you, Administrator, for being here. I appreciate your
service. You are obviously helping to implement the biggest
climate bill in history, which we passed under President Biden.
My district includes the Port of Long Beach. I am the
former mayor of Long Beach. We know that the port itself--you
were just in the Port of Los Angeles, I think, our neighbor--
huge economic engine for the country.
We are fighting to electrify the Port of Long Beach right
now under the $3-billion EPA Clean Ports Program. I wrote to
you last week; you responded. We are very grateful to your
response and the team. And so, we are excited about that
opportunity.
But I want to turn also--on this issue, broader issue, of
environmental justice, I want to just quickly highlight a case
where polluters are getting a pass and residents in my
community, the northern part of my district, are feeling the
impact.
In Vernon, California, a small city in southeast Los
Angeles, Exide Technologies spent decades recycling batteries
and dumping lead and toxins into the air. This includes soil
and water, which has now seeped through. Now, the company
poisoned surrounding communities in southeast L.A., where
people suffer from cancer, asthma, learning disabilities, and
dangerous levels of lead in their blood.
Now, the Obama Administration forced Exide to make
commitments to fix and fund the cleanup. But, in 2020, Trump's
EPA and Department of Justice abandoned those responsibilities
and approved a bankruptcy plan that let Exide essentially walk
away from the cleanup.
This is not acceptable to me and certainly not to the
communities that I represent.
Now, Administrator, one of my first acts when I came to
Congress was to lead the call for a Federal Superfund
designation, along with Senator Padilla. This will secure, of
course, Federal funds to clean the site that is desperately
needed to provide this community true justice.
I have been glad this process has moved forward, and, in
fact, just recently, we passed a major milestone. Last week,
the EPA site inspection report showed the site is eligible for
a Superfund listing based on the levels of groundwater
contamination.
So, I want to thank your team for partnering with us there.
And I just want to formally ask you to, once again, just
continue to commit to really push for this issue as we move
forward to that Superfund designation.
Mr. Regan. Absolutely. You have my commitment on that.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, sir.
Now, as we are talking about environmental justice, I want
to just highlight that your agency is working every day to
implement the biggest climate bill in history. And we are in a
climate crisis; I think we all understand that.
But I also want to look at an alternative plan for your
agency. Now, this is ``Project 2025,'' which is Donald Trump's
anti-environmental agenda. And I want to just note some of the
main features of ``Project 2025.''
It includes shredding pollution regulations; gutting clean-
energy programs; repealing the Inflation Reduction Act,
President Biden's climate law, which we know is landmark; and,
of course, empowering corporate polluters.
Now, we know that Donald Trump's ``Project 2025'' destroys
the EPA. He will let corporations dump more toxins into our air
and water like he did the last time he was President. We know
that he will empower corporate polluters and fill the EPA with
hand-picked extremists rather than actual climate experts, and
he will destroy the progress that President Biden has fought
for.
Now, he is promising to repeal the Inflation Reduction Act.
And let us be clear: Repealing the bill does not just mean
reversing the historic progress that we have made; it means
threatening jobs and businesses all over the country. Over a
thousand projects already are underway deploying hydrogen,
hydropower, wind, batteries, solar energy, which will all make
us more green and independent and really leading us to a
greener future. That is also hundreds of thousands of jobs.
And we know why he is pushing this dangerous agenda. Donald
Trump met with Big Oil executives to promise to carry out their
policy agenda in exchange for $1 billion in campaign
contributions, which Oversight Democrats are actually
investigating.
And if that was not enough, he promised he would pay back
his Big Oil donors with tax cuts for the rich.
And, as we know, worst of all, his agenda will be enabled
by an extremist Supreme Court that Donald Trump himself
appointed.
Now, Administrator, I know you cannot address a candidate's
policy platform. I know that is not why you are here. So,
instead, I want you to just please explain how important it is
that the agency continues to implement the Inflation Reduction
Act and the climate gains that we have already achieved.
Mr. Regan. Well, listen, I will say this. One program in
the Inflation Reduction Act is the Greenhouse Gas Reduction
Fund. Congress allotted us $27 billion. We designed a program
in consultation with the financial sector, every aspect of the
financial sector. We believe that we can pull hundreds of
billions of dollars off the sidelines to make homes more
energy-efficient, to build manufacturing capacity in this
country, to create jobs.
It is important for me to say that these are not just
happening in blue states; they are happening in red states.
They are happening in Alabama, in Georgia, North Carolina,
South Carolina.
And so, this really does prove that clean energy has a role
in the new economy, and it is creating hundreds of thousands of
jobs all across this country. But, more important, it is making
us secure, because we are bringing the manufacturing back
domestically.
Rolling back these types of provisions, eliminating career
scientists at EPA, you know, it is just going to ruin the
economy and it is going to ruin the progress that we are
making.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Chairman Comer. [Presiding.] The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Biggs from Arizona.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Administrator, for being here.
Administrator Regan, the National Ambient Air Quality
Standard Rule sets a standard based on airborne particulate
matter. What are some of the sources of particulate matter?
Mr. Regan. Many stationary sources, as well as mobile
sources.
Mr. Biggs. Right. And the stationary sources include energy
production, industrial processes, agriculture activities, et
cetera, right? And mobile, diesel-and gasoline-powered
vehicles.
But you just mentioned anthropogenic, or manmade,
particulate production. But there is also natural sources as
well. And does EPA have a breakdown of emissions generated by
source sector between--I am talking specifically between
manmade versus naturally occurring?
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Biggs. And let us go over that. Here is what they break
it down to: Energy production, industrial processes, mobile
sources account for only 21 percent of total PM emissions. Ag
accounts for 14 percent, dust for 16 percent, and fires account
for 43 percent.
Does that sound right? I am reading from the National
Emissions Inventory of May 2022. Does that sound right to you?
Mr. Regan. I do not have that document in front of me, but
it sounds in the ballpark.
Mr. Biggs. OK.
So, the question is, as you are no doubt aware--I am from
Arizona, so many areas in Arizona, including those in my
district, are in desert ecosystems featuring new natural
sources of emissions. The May 2022 EPA policy assessment
actually--for Phoenix actually cites a 2011 dust storm as
affecting particulates in Phoenix. We also have a drought that
has been going on for 26 years. That contributes to wildfire
risk. We have wildfires out there.
And so, my question for you ultimately becomes this. How do
you propose that Arizona non-attainment areas, areas with
significant naturally occurring background particulate matter,
comply with the new standards that EPA has proposed?
Mr. Regan. Well, I am proud to say that, because of
consultation with Members like you and others----
Mr. Biggs. By the way, just to clarify, not to interrupt--I
am interrupting, but I do not mean to be rude about it.
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Biggs. You and I did not ever consult. But go ahead.
Mr. Regan. Yes. But we have consulted with Members in
Arizona and Nevada and places that you described. And this is
why we have a very strong exceptional-events policy.
You know, monitoring technology is advanced enough to
determine where the pollution comes from. And so, we do not
want to penalize states where we see an exacerbation of PM 2.5
that comes from a wildfire or a dust storm or something that is
not manmade, so we have procedures in place.
Ninety-nine percent of counties in this country are
projected to meet the standard by 2032, and the reason that is,
is because we do not count some of the things that you just
laid out.
Mr. Biggs. Well, I will just tell you that I would invite
you to come out and live in Arizona for about 6 months in the
Phoenix metro area, and the number-one particulate, it is not
pollution caused by man; it is caused by dust storms and dust
coming up.
And we have been counseled, ``Go ahead and wet it down. Use
that, if you are going to stir up dust.'' Now, that is absurd.
I want to get to another question, another area, real
quick. And that is on May 8, 2024, EPA formally awarded less
than $2 billion of its $42 billion in IRA-related funding.
Is that accurate? I mean, that was just about 2 months ago.
Is that accurate, that you have only awarded $2 billion of the
42 out of IRA?
Mr. Regan. I would have to get back to you. I do not have
that number in front of me.
Mr. Biggs. The reason I ask is because that is supposed to
expire on September 30, and that's $27 billion in EPA funding
under the IRA which will not have been disseminated.
And the reason that that is important is because I want to
know if you have any in the pipeline that you are going to
grant before the end of September 30, this fiscal year, or is
that $2 billion in total, is that going to be it?
Can you find that out for me, if you do not know that
today?
Mr. Regan. Yes. I mean, I am making the assumption, which I
believe is true, is that it is going to be in the pipeline and
pushed out before. But let me--let me be specific and get back
to my staff on that.
Mr. Biggs. All right. I would like that. I appreciate that
very much.
Last question, last area, is we have had three recent
cases--one a little older, and that is the West Virginia case;
you have also had the Ohio v. EPA case, which is the EPA's
Clean Air Act FIP, which is being stayed until the duration of
that litigation; you have Loper, which set aside and overruled
Chevron.
I want to know what your agency is doing to respond to
that, to those particular cases. Because it looks like West
Virginia was ignored by EPA, because you actually--well, let us
just, because I am out of time, I wanted you to answer that, if
you would, please.
Mr. Regan. Yes. I can absolutely say that EPA did not run
afoul of the West Virginia Supreme Court issue. So, we would
have to talk a little bit more about that. I am not quite sure
what you are referring to there.
On the other court cases, a lot of these court cases are
recent. For the Good Neighbor Rule, yes, the Supreme Court
stayed it. I feel pretty good about our case and how we are
going to pursue that in a lower court.
In terms of Chevron, listen, when I signed up for this job,
I pledged to follow the law and follow the science. And the
Supreme Court has spoken, and so we have to figure out how we
get our work done under this new ruling.
Mr. Biggs. All right.
Chairman Comer. Thank you.
The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Lee from Pennsylvania.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, Administrator Regan, for sharing your time
with us today.
Environmental rules and regulations are not just important
for tackling the climate crisis. They are essential for
addressing the toxic legacy of environmental racism and
injustice.
Growing up in the Mon Valley of western Pennsylvania, I saw
firsthand the devastating effects of unchecked pollution. Back
then, when I was growing up, I did not quite have the language
or the expertise to explain the science of pollution, but I had
my years of experience living in an environment where the air
we breathed was harmful. I knew that, wherever you were, if you
were Black or you were Brown or you were poor, you were likely
breathing toxic air too.
Our county ranks in the top one percent nationwide for
cancer risk from air pollution. In my hometown of North
Braddock, cancer rates are more than double the rest of the
country. Approximately 90 percent of residents are at risk of
exposure to particulate matter. Our childhood asthma rates are
nearly three times the national average.
These statistics are not just numbers. They represent very
real people, and very real families, and very real communities
overburdened by industrial pollution.
Administrator Regan, under your leadership, addressing
environmental racism and injustice has become a core component
of the EPA's work, including through the rulemaking process.
Can you speak to how the EPA's recently finalized rules
such as the Soot Rule and the carbon pollution standards will
specifically improve conditions for individuals in overburdened
and underserved communities?
Mr. Regan. Well, absolutely. And thank you for sharing your
personal testimony there. There are so many of us that have
grown up and lived in areas where we are hit by unchecked
pollution.
And the way to do this is the way we have done it, which is
create a separate office, a national program Office of
Environmental Justice and External Civil Rights, that spends
time with our national programs that look at air and water
issues to be sure that, as we are designing our regulations, we
are not leaving any communities behind.
And what we have done a great job of is really ensuring
that the statistics that you just laid out, the statistics in
communities all across the country, are infused into the
ultimate result of these regulations.
We--our regulations are not only better for the United
States; they are absolutely better for those who have been
disproportionately dumped on for decades. Our children now are
breathing cleaner air. They are not drinking lead-poisoned
water. And they are doing better in school. And they are
happier. And they are healthier.
And so, that is what we have been doing the last 3 1/2ars,
and we are going to keep doing that.
Ms. Lee. Thank you.
While developing strong environmental regulations is
crucial, we know that it is just half of the battle. These
regulations are only as effective as they are backed by
rigorous enforcement.
Across the country, many Black, Brown, and poor communities
continue to bear the brunt of environmental hazards as their
corporate polluters just flout the rules with little
consequences.
For decades, industry has promoted this myth that pollution
is merely an unavoidable price to pay for economic growth. Yet
we know that this narrative is just a false choice that
primarily serves to shield big polluters from accountability
for their chronic environmental harms, ultimately harming both
those frontline--fenceline--communities and the workers.
In just the past 2 years alone, one facility in my district
has been fined as much as $14 million for hundreds of
violations. And, unfortunately, we know this company is not an
outlier. For corporate polluters all across the country, it is
clear that these fines are just a fraction of their massive
earnings and they do not actually serve as a deterrent. It is
just a cost of doing business.
So, Administrator Regan, how is the EPA working to ensure
that chronic corporate polluters face real consequences when
they consistently dump toxins into our communities?
Mr. Regan. Well, (1) we have to continue to be vigilant
with our enforcement capabilities and not let any of the
polluters off the hook. We believe, I believe that the
polluters should pay.
But second, as we take a look at these facilities, there is
communication with the arms of our office that design
regulations that show many of these companies cannot only meet
these standards, they can go below.
So, when we design a new regulation, then there are stiffer
penalties associated with those newer regulations. So, as we
ramp down pollution through a regulatory approach, we also give
our enforcement teams more authority to hit them a little bit
harder.
Ms. Lee. So, what additional enforcement authorities does
the EPA need from Congress to address this--the chronic
polluters effectively?
Mr. Regan. Well, I think--listen, we have a very strong
enforcement team. I think the only limitations we have is, does
the fine match the action, which you have laid out.
And I think we have some statutory constraints in terms of
just how much we can fine a facility. Some of these facilities
have very egregious behavior, as you have laid out, but the
statutory authority only allows for us to fine them a certain
amount.
And so, if those amounts are raised and are proportionate
to the crime, we will do our job and we will hold those
polluters accountable.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Administrator, for your time.
I yield back.
Chairman Comer. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Grothman from Wisconsin.
Mr. Grothman. I represent Wisconsin. I think a lot of
people do not know it, but Wisconsin has the highest percentage
of manufacturing jobs in the country.
Did you know that, Administrator Regan?
Mr. Regan. I did.
Mr. Grothman. Man, that is my type of guy. That is great.
OK. So, you know we have a little bit of a problem, though,
with our Wisconsin manufacturing along Lake Michigan--you know,
Milwaukee County, the counties to the north of there, Ozaukee,
Sheboygan County--in that it is real non-attainment because of
high ozone levels.
Now, those ozone levels only occur on certain days along
Lake Michigan, and it is something to do about the interaction
of the sun and the lake and that sort of thing. And even
insofar as there is pollution on Lake Michigan, most of that
pollution comes up from Chicago or even further south. In other
words, even if there are no factories in Milwaukee or the
counties north of there, we might be in non-attainment.
And because we are in non-attainment, it results in having
to do things like having special tests on your car. Maybe, if
you are somebody who cannot afford a new car, you are really
getting harmed, because you might have to spend $1,000 to get
your car up to snuff, when, you know, the amount of pollution
is minimal anyway.
So, I always feel this thing really disproportionately
affects a poor person, who--you know, if I have a new car for 5
years, I will pass that thing no problem.
Mr. Regan. Right.
Mr. Grothman. But if I have an old car, like I said, it may
be, pay $800 or pay $8,000, or get yourself a new car.
Are you guys working toward or do you have a plan toward
getting places like Milwaukee and the surrounding area back in
attainment so our factories do not have to be at a competitive
disadvantage, not only with the rest of the--rest of the
country but the rest of the world?
Mr. Regan. We do.
And I am very sympathetic to what you just laid out. I
witness that time and time again in North Carolina.
The plan that we had in place to begin to help places like
Milwaukee, the Supreme Court just shut it down.
I believe that when air pollution comes from another state
and impacts a state, that state should not be penalized. And
so, our Good Neighbor Rule was designed to stop pollution from
coming across borders and being an economic disrupter or health
disrupter for other states.
We will continue to work with our state agencies to be sure
that, when we look at high-ozone-action days or ozone
pollution, that we can properly assess where it is coming from
so that we are not penalizing the wrong people.
Mr. Grothman. I would be happy to work with you.
And, like I said, my heart goes out to the people who
cannot afford a new car. They buy, you know, a 7-or 8-year-old
car with 200,000 miles on it, they flunk the test, and the
government comes down and, you know, nails them, and they have
got to pay 2,500, 3,000 bucks. So----
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Grothman [continuing]. I hope you do something about
that.
Mr. Regan. OK.
Mr. Grothman. Now, in October of last year, a group of
trade associations representing at least 70,000 small firms
engaged in the production of formaldehyde sent you a letter
asking you to establish a small-business advisory panel. And I
think that is because, whenever new regulations come out, they
disproportionately affect small business.
You have not acted yet to establish such a council. Is that
something you would consider doing to look out for the little
guy or at least get their viewpoint as the rules are being
promulgated?
Mr. Regan. Let me check back with my staff so I can take a
look at that letter and also to see if our top political in
that office has also given it any thought, and we will circle
back with you.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you.
I am glad you are here today, by the way.
Previously, the Environmental Protection Agency told
Congress it would ``consider all credible and readily available
assessments''--and this is with regard to the TSCA risk
evaluation of formaldehyde based on IRIS value.
Despite this promise, why has the EPA decided to rely on
the IRIS value for ethylene oxide, formaldehyde, and other
chemistries and ignore other regulation?
Mr. Regan. So, if I believe I understand your question
correctly, IRIS is just one of the tools that we use in the
regulatory process.
Now, IRIS is very valid and is used and respected by states
and Federal agencies and international bodies.
So, that IRIS value and the work that goes into that is
widely accepted, but it is one tool in our toolbox as we make
determinations on chemicals.
Mr. Grothman. OK.
At least I am told you have a value from ethylene oxide
that is 19,000 times lower than naturally occurring levels of
ethylene oxide in the human body. In other words, you are
looking for a tolerance that is just tiny, you know? I mean, we
would be more worried about what is naturally occurring in my
body.
Could you--I guess, could you look at that stuff again, see
if you feel you guys are going a little bit overboard, and then
look and see what they're doing in other countries?
Because it is very frustrating when I have the businesses
in my office explaining, ``These are the standards in Europe,
these are the standards in Asia. Why is it so much more, almost
impossible standards, that our businesses in America have to
live under?''
Mr. Regan. Yes. Let me--let me get our staffs together, and
we can--we can go through that.
Mr. Grothman. Yes, I will give you a call.
And, again, thanks for coming over here. Really appreciate
it.
Mr. Regan. Looking forward to your call.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman's time's expired.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Mfume from Maryland.
Mr. Mfume. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking Member.
I appreciate the opportunity, Mr. Regan, to have an
opportunity to talk with you and to welcome you to this
Committee. I do not know what to say except that the
gentlewoman who was here earlier said, ``Welcome to
Oversight.'' It is challenging sometimes. But this issue before
us is very, very important.
I want to commend you, Mr. Administrator, for the critical
role that you have played in our fight against climate change
and reducing the public exposure to air pollution and toxins.
My district in Baltimore has reaped the benefits of the
Biden Administration's commitment to environmental justice
firsthand. And, more specifically, you may be familiar with the
Baltimore-based Green and Healthy Homes Initiative, which was
selected to serve as 1 of 11 regional grantmakers under EPA's
Environmental Justice Thriving Communities Grantmaking Program.
It was created by the Inflation Reduction Act. It is working
well in Baltimore, and my assumption is that it is working well
in other cities that are just not here to talk about it today.
On a personal level, like many of my colleagues, I am
concerned about our Nation's carbon footprint; I am concerned
about deforestation and what it is doing; about lead poisoning
and water pollution; about climate change, which has not been
referenced here enough, I think, today; and about all the
respiratory diseases that people are faced with, particularly
people in communities where they cannot move, they do not have
the mobility to get away from toxic sites and dumping and all
the things that go with it.
And so, if I can speak at all today, I want to speak on
behalf of those people. Because our job, at the end of the day,
is to preserve and protect the environment and to protect the
people who cannot get away from the environment they are in.
I want to, if I might, just raise one community's
attention--or, to your attention, and that is the community of
Curtis Bay in Baltimore.
And I would like to have, Mr. Chair, unanimous consent to
enter into the record a Politico article that says, ``Coal Dust
Concerns Mount After Baltimore Bridge Collapse.''
Chairman Comer. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Mfume. I would also like to enter into the record a
letter that I sent to Administrator Regan outlining the perils
of that community and seeking help.
Chairman Comer. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Mfume. And I would also like to enter into the record
the petition for rulemaking that many of the communities in
that area have fought long to get.
Chairman Comer. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Mfume. And, if I might, I want to commend people who
are kind of nameless and faceless in one of those communities,
like Mr. David Jones in Curtis Bay; Greg Salwell--Sawtell,
excuse me, President of the Curtis Bay Community Association;
Mike Middleton; Dr. Meleny Thomas; Angela Smothers; Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health; and Coal Free Curtis
Bay, all of which are working together, and have been for a
long time, to underscore the problem that I want to take a
moment to talk about, and that is the moment that I have before
me.
There are problems in that community, Mr. Administrator,
with coal dust. When the bridge collapsed, the mounds of coal
continued to increase. We have tried to have discussions with
CSX and others who are around and responsible in many respects
for the mounds of coal. Those discussions have gone nowhere at
all. They have been cute and courteous, but we have not seen a
change from them.
And then I hear today this whole notion of profit, which
was dressed up by using two other adjectives that did not make
sense that all mean the same thing: that you cannot take away
profit margins from companies, but you can allow people to
suffer.
In Baltimore, we have the second-highest rate of asthma in
the whole country. Thirty-three percent of all schoolchildren
in Baltimore City have asthma. And national studies show that
unmanaged asthma contributes to missed schooldays and,
obviously, to disparate educational outcomes.
Poor White, poor Black, poor Latino kids are living there
right now, breathing that air, growing and developing, and
increasing the numbers of asthma and other related respiratory
diseases. To me, that is much more important than the profit
margin of some of these companies.
So, I have sent the letter. Your staff has acknowledged
receipt of it. I would appreciate, to whatever extent you can,
if you could get back to us right away.
And if we at some point can get you to that community----
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Mfume [continuing]. To meet those people and their
children, who are crying out even at this moment for help.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Timmons from South Carolina.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
For over 100 years, my district in upstate South Carolina
led the country and arguably the world in textile
manufacturing.
Starting in the 1970's, not coincidentally when the EPA was
created, unsustainable increases in regulation and bad trade
deals from Washington resulted in manufacturing jobs moving to
China. This devastated our community, with tens of thousands of
people losing their jobs.
We all agree that environmental standards matter, but our
policies must balance interests and seek to mitigate the
unintended consequences of new standards. Washington must
always remember that it is a global economy and our policies
cannot disadvantage the competitiveness of U.S. businesses.
Luckily, my district has rebounded and is again a hotbed of
manufacturing. We are home to the largest BMW production
facility in the world, and we manufacture clothing for our men
and women in uniform, among countless other innovative and
essential products.
But continued innovation is central to the success of these
industries and manufacturers, and, frankly, the EPA is standing
in the way of that continued growth.
Recent delays in approvals for new innovative chemicals are
hindering American innovation and yet again driving production
offshore. A vehicle contains about $4,400 worth of different
chemicals. This amount has grown drastically, over 30 percent,
in the last decade as automakers push for lightweight and more
efficient vehicles. Milliken, a large employer in South
Carolina known for leading the way in chemical innovation, has
not received a single approval from the EPA faster than 9
months.
And important to note that many of the chemicals are
required precursors to chip manufacturing, something that your
Administration allegedly emphasizes. It takes almost 500
different chemicals to produce 1 semiconductor. American
businesses on the cutting edge of alleged Biden Administration
priorities are suffering the consequence of a mismanaged
system.
So, it seems history is again repeating itself. It goes
something like this: Washington intervenes, regulation
increases, companies relocate overseas, and American workers
suffer.
As you know, under the Toxic Substances Control Act, the
EPA is statutorily mandated to make a determination within 90
days of a manufacturer submitting an application. Despite this
requirement, the EPA is not making timely reviews. Recent data
shows 88 percent of the 408 pending pre-manufacture notices are
beyond 90 days. Even worse, 243 new chemicals have been in the
system for over 365 days, an entire year.
How can we expect American companies to be on the cutting
edge of innovation when large chunks of our government cannot
even follow its own mandates? This backlog is just wholly
unacceptable. This has been a consistent problem in the last 3
1/2 years.
So, my question is this, Administrator Regan: What is the
EPA doing to reduce delays and improve performance?
Mr. Regan. Yes. Well, let me start, Mr. Timmons, by saying
I agree with you. And we petitioned Congress, and in 2022 and
2023 Congress gave us small increases. We more than doubled the
number of new chemical reviews per month, and we cleared out
more than half of the backlog that we inherited from the
previous Administration.
Now, this time, that budget was cut. So, we could----
Mr. Timmons. OK. I appreciate that answer.
Let me show you really quick--so I do not think that that
is accurate. It is not a funding issue. And you are not doing
more with less; you are actually doing less with more.
As you can see from this chart--look right here. We were
processing almost double the number of applications relative to
4 years ago, and your funding has gone up $20 million. So, I
just do not think that that is accurate.
Again, in Fiscal Year 2017, the Office of Pollution
Prevention and Toxics received $62 million and completed 469
new chemical reviews. In Fiscal Year 2023, the same office
received $95.3 million and only completed 142 requests.
So, I mean, I just do not think that you are being
effective with your money. You have received more, and your
outcome is worse.
In your opening testimony, you stated that the goal of your
organization is to ensure that American innovation leads us
into the future. Yet the EPA has clearly reduced its
efficiency. And what is worse is that you have increased
application costs. You have received 50 percent more funds
compared to 4 years ago, reduced the application process by
over 60 percent compared to 4 years ago, and you have the
audacity to implement an exorbitant price increase for PMN
applications, from $19,000 to $37,000?
Manufacturers are paying more and getting more delays and
more uncertainty. I do not know where this money is going if it
is not being used to complete more reviews, because it is not
helping American businesses.
I will close with this. There have to be procedural steps
that you can take to improve efficiency and timeliness. I would
suggest maybe you ask the EPA Administrator under the previous
Administration.
We have $35 trillion in debt, and we are adding a trillion
dollars to our debt every 100 days. We have to do more with
less, not, as your agency over the last 3 years has done, less
with more.
I hope you can take a look at this issue and respond in
writing with what steps the EPA can take to address this
problem.
And, with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Frost from Florida for 5
minutes.
Mr. Frost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Administrator Regan, for being here. I
appreciate the great work that you do.
And I hope a lot of members that are bringing up concerns
with the office will actually follow-up with you all and create
a good relationship with you instead of just taking 5 minutes
to get a clip for YouTube or whatever to post online.
Many Floridians acutely recognize that their future is at
stake in discussions about climate policy. We are a frontline
community; we are a frontline state.
Not long ago, I met with Orange County Utilities, the water
provider for communities like the area of Bithlo, which is in
my district. Most of Bithlo does not have access to municipal
water and wastewater, only using wells and septic systems.
Thanks to ARPA, the American Rescue Plan, Orange County is
able to invest $12.6 million in the rural community of Bithlo.
Future phases will require further investment. And the
implementation has begun on Phase 1 of the transformational
rural water infrastructure project in a portion of the
community of Bithlo.
We are also looking forward to having the Region Four
Administrator visit Bithlo to provide technical assistance
resources.
I also want to uplift the historic town of Eatonville,
which is also in my district. Eatonville is the country's first
and oldest Black municipality. They are finalizing awards from
the EPA's SRF program through the clean water projects and
drinking water initiatives. And so, we are excited about that
and appreciate the EPA for your work.
For those who do not know, last year the EPA established
the National Environmental Youth Advisory Council. The council
met earlier this year for 2 days, on February 28 and 29. And,
of course, I was honored to be at the launch of this council
last year.
Administrator Regan, during the 2-day inaugural session of
the National Environmental Youth Advisory Council, what
recommendations or points of focus stood out to you the most?
And how do you plan to incorporate them in your vision for the
agency?
Mr. Regan. Well, first of all, thank you for joining us
last November. I think the young people were more excited to
see you than see me, so you gave us some street cred there.
Yes, we pulled together 16 of some of the smartest young
people from across the country, ages 16 to 29. And they spoke
very passionately about: (1) Our ineffective ability to
communicate and connect with young people, you know, bringing
the bureaucratic conversations down a notch. And so, we have
looked at our educational outreach, our social media
strategies, to be sure that our information is getting to
folks; (2) They have made a number of suggestions on how young
people can be more involved in our regulation-making, our
regulatory opportunities. They have given us a number of
recommendations that we are still combing through; and (3) You
know, when they have looked at EPA's agenda for the next 2 to 3
years, there have been some things on our agenda that they have
asked us to prioritize and move up a little bit higher.
So, I just want you to know that we are listening to our
young people. They absolutely have a permanent seat at the
table. And, quite frankly, from what I am seeing, they are
going to make the agency and our products better.
Mr. Frost. That is amazing. Thank you so much.
Last April, the EPA put out a national-scale report showing
how climate change and the climate crisis is disproportionately
harming our Nation's children.
I ask unanimous consent to submit that report to the
record.
Chairman Comer. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Frost. Some of the key findings highlighted how climate
change is expected to increase the incidence of asthma in
children, increase asthma-related emergency department visits,
increase climate-driven temperature increases that are
projected to result in four-to-seven-percent reductions in
annual academic achievement per child. And, also, if no
additional adaptations are taken, 1 to 2 million children are
estimated to experience temporary home displacement or complete
home loss due to the climate crisis.
With at least half of the National Youth Advisory Council
members coming from or working primarily in disadvantaged
communities, how is the EPA ensuring that these voices are not
only heard but their concerns are acted upon in a meaningful
way?
Mr. Regan. Absolutely. As we push these reports out, we,
you know, in between sessions, ensure that they have this level
of information.
Each session--this is a FACA, this is a formal group. So,
each session they have with me and my leadership team, they
come prepared with recommendations that they adopt, or we
adopt, procedurally. And so, it is my hope, at the next
meeting, they will come fully prepared to discuss this report,
along with the series of reports that we are pushing to this
group.
Mr. Frost. Well, I thank you so much for bringing young
people to the table to be a part of the great work the EPA is
doing. As we know, young people are disproportionately impacted
by the climate crisis.
And I think we all know the cost of not doing anything is
far greater, or the cost of not doing anything is far greater
than the cost of waiting. We have to ensure that we defeat the
climate crisis and do everything we can.
Thank you so much.
And I yield back.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Burlison from Missouri for 5
minutes.
Mr. Burlison. Administrator Regan, on March 28 of 2022, you
revoked a policy that was put in place by the Trump
Administration that was designed to protect taxpayer dollars by
curbing some of the impact of these special interest groups
that use sue and settlement agreements.
Reports indicate that the Biden Administration has already
spent more taxpayer dollars on these settlement agreements than
any other recent President.
Are you aware of how much money that the EPA is spending on
these attorney fees and other litigation?
Mr. Regan. I do not have that specific number in front of
me. We can get you that specific number.
Mr. Burlison. OK. I would appreciate that. Also, are you--
do you have an account for how many times--how many events are
occurring, how many lawsuits are occurring?
Mr. Regan. Well, you know, I think you and I know that sue
and settle has been a tool that has been used for lots of
administrations. And I can say that we have successfully picked
up one that the previous Administration was using on a mega
suit.
The sue and settle procedure or policy a lot of times gets
us out from under the court's jurisdiction so that we can
retain the flexibility and autonomy we need, like when we are
digging out of the Endangered Species Act or looking at all of
the litigation we are facing for pesticides and herbicides.
And so, you know, we use this tool strategically to make
sure that it is in the best interest of the taxpayer and the
Agency and the industry.
Mr. Burlison. But it does cost the taxpayers in litigation
costs, correct, in increased litigation costs?
Mr. Regan. Not necessarily. I think we try--we have to
balance, right, taxpayer dollars.
Mr. Burlison. Has there been an audit done recently?
Mr. Regan. An audit done?
Mr. Burlison. Right. When was the last time that an audit
was done in relation to using taxpayer dollars for these sue
and settlement agreements?
Mr. Regan. I am not sure when that last audit was done.
Mr. Burlison. My staff note that the last time they could
find, it was 2011, which is not at all recent.
In a briefing that you provided----
Mr. Regan. 2011?
Mr. Burlison. Yes, 2011. Might be time for another one.
Mr. Regan. We should check that. We will check that fact.
Mr. Burlison. And I wanted to kind of, with the limited
time that I have, jump to an issue that is kind of--that is
important to the Midwest, and that is, you know--and I thought
the Biden Administration noted that this was an important
problem when they recognized that meat packers--I think it is
even on the White House's website--that they have a plan to try
to bring more competition, try to bring more resiliency to the
meat processing industry.
And yet one of the sue and settlement agreements and rules
has caused a new rule to be proposed by the EPA that will have,
according to meat processors, particularly small meat
processors, very, very detrimental if not devastating impact.
Are you aware of the inconsistency--or the impact that that
might have on small meat processors?
Mr. Regan. I have to circle. Tom Vilsack and I have been
working hand-in-hand on looking at the Administration's
position on meat packing. And I would venture to say that our
regulation is in concert with the direction of USDA.
I would need for you and your staff maybe to provide to me
the specific rule or the specific meat packer so that we can
address your question directly, because I am not quite sure. If
you have the name of the meat packer or the rule, maybe we
could have some more conversation.
Mr. Burlison. I really greatly appreciate that. From what
I--my understanding is that it is requiring them to have the
most advanced technology to process phosphorus and nitrogen so
that they do not end up in the water system. And that there is
debate about, you know, obviously, there is an amount that can
be, you know, detrimental, but our environment also needs
nitrogen and needs phosphorus. So, this is a--these are natural
products.
This is particularly of concern to the small producers who
would have little impact on the environment, and that is--those
small businesses are what make up America.
Mr. Regan. Yes. Let us talk. Let us get our staffs together
and talk about these specific instances so that we can look at
where the producers are, how much nitrogen and phosphorus are
they producing, and whose regulations they may be running afoul
of. This could be a USDA or EPA issue, so I would like to make
sure we know.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman has 6 seconds left. I assume
you will yield.
Mr. Burlison. Yes.
Chairman Comer. Just wanted to touch up on that point. That
is a huge issue in my district as well with the wastewater, new
wastewater regulations from EPA. I have five poultry processors
in my congressional district and hundreds and hundreds of
poultry farmers in my district, most of whom are young farmers.
So, they are all extremely concerned by this ruling, and that
is something that we would hope to expect to hear from you soon
on that.
Mr. Regan. Absolutely.
Chairman Comer. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Stansbury from New Mexico.
Ms. Stansbury. All right. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Administrator Regan. First of all, I just want to
say I think you are doing a truly exceptional job. I think you
have put together an extraordinary team at EPA. I want to just
take a moment to recognize our regional administrator, Ms.
Earthea Jones--I mean, sorry, Nance, who is just doing a really
exceptional job, and we really, really love her. Yes, she is.
And I also want to just say thank you to all of the civil
servants who are here sitting behind you and out there serving
in the EPA, because I am going to be honest, it has been a
rough, rough 7 1/2 years since we have crawled out of the Trump
days.
And I am a former environmental science professional. I am
a former fed. I used to work for OMB, not in the evil parts.
No, I am just kidding.
But, you know, it is really hard on our Federal workforce
when you have an administration like the Trump Administration
that came in and systematically gutted the Federal workforce,
they dismantled the policies that had been in place for years,
and that really tried to undo all of the progress that our
country has experienced over the last 50 years since we have
been trying to clean up our environment.
And so, I want to just take a few moments, because I think,
you know, right now in this moment, our country is having a
little bit of collective amnesia about how bad it really was,
because I remember. I was here on the Hill, actually, when the
Administrator under Trump took over, and I remember what it was
like, and I remember the hundreds of people that were leaving
EPA, and I remember all the rollbacks of all the policies.
And so, I want to ask you, after 4 years of Trump--you came
in early in the Biden Administration--what was it like at EPA?
What was going on with the workforce? What was going on with
the office's morale and the policies that were happening there,
and what did you have to do to clean it up?
Mr. Regan. Yes. I appreciate that question. I worked at
EPA, started as an intern, worked there for 10 years before I
left and came back. And it was not the EPA that I had left. It
was a completely different place.
And in my conversations with old colleagues and new
colleagues, talking to me through tears, they talked about
feeling disrespected. Science was ignored. They were asked to
leave meetings. So, the culture was not the best. We lost, as
you said, hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of scientists, and
with that we lost decades of experience.
So, you know, the President came in with a very bold
agenda, and we had to ensure that the EPA staff would be a part
of that new vision. So, we created new policies to make our
interactions more transparent. We started to reengage with the
press and outside world to say that EPA is open for business.
But, more importantly, we improved our scientific integrity,
and we started to bring the career staff back into the big
meetings. And we listened to the science, we listened to the
data, and we have taken a lot of their recommendations.
We were at record lows in terms of staff. Thanks to your
partnership with the President and Members of Congress, we have
hired about 5,000 people under BIL and the IRA resources. Some
of those are term limited.
But the short of the story is that there has been an
infusion of enthusiasm and excitement, and a lot of our
employees are making up for lost time and working 5, 6, 7 days
a week. So, EPA is as strong as it has ever been today.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you. And, you know, I think it is
evident--I do not know if you have had a moment to kind of take
a breath this morning and look behind you, but we have a packed
audience this morning, and it is full of young people. And so,
I think, in addition to restoring our Nation's Environmental
Protection Agency and the laws that are protecting our air,
water, and climate, you are inspiring the next generation of
leaders. And it is really cool.
Mr. Regan. It is.
Ms. Stansbury. I do want to just use my remaining time to
say, you know, we have talked and some of my colleagues have
covered the terrifying ground of Project 2025.
I think it is worth noting that Trump's Chief of Staff, who
served in the EPA, this lady here, wrote Project 2025's EPA
chapter. And so, when President--former President Donald Trump
says he has no idea what Project 2025 is, well, his politicals
from EPA who planned the dismantling of EPA under his
Administration are now planning for him to do it again.
And, you know, there is not time here to talk about all of
the terrifying things that are going on inside this policy
proposal, but for anyone out there that hasn't read it and the
chapter of what they plan to do to dismantle our climate
programs, our environmental programs, to do away with Tribal
and public health programs, and to literally move and close
down offices and fire people, you all should wake up and be
terrified.
So, you know, I appreciate your service. We got a lot of
work ahead of us, and we are going to keep on fighting. Thank
you.
Mr. Regan. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. The Chair now recognizes Dr. Foxx from
North Carolina.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate the
Administrator for being here.
Mr. Regan, the Biden-era EPA has managed to add $1.3
trillion in cost on Americans. In contrast, in 8 years, the
Obama EPA added only--only--about $300 billion in cost.
Can you help me understand how the Biden EPA under your
watch has found so many new ways to impose cost on the American
people?
Mr. Regan. Well, I am not quite sure if I agree with that
level of cost, but what we have attempted to do is to balance
cost-benefit analysis, cost-effective technologies, providing
the market some certainty while also protecting the environment
and public health.
We think that we are walking and chewing gum at the same
time and doing it in a way where we are not sacrificing the
economy.
Ms. Foxx. The Clean Air Act amendments are well over 50
years old. That means the EPA has had more than half a century
to develop regulations that touch nearly every facet of life in
industry in this country.
How is it that in the last 3 1/2 years the EPA found so
many new costly and creative ways to regulate Americans?
Mr. Regan. Well, I would not necessarily say that they are
costly. I would say that, when I took office, the power
industry asked me to not look at regulations in a series but
think about how they could be bundled so that they could
leverage their investments. And so, what we have tried to do is
listen to industry, fulfill our statutory obligations, but do
it in a way where we get thoughts from them, whether it is
regulating methane or looking at coal plants and new natural
gas.
We have tried to really use the latest and greatest
technologies to help propel us into the future and remain
globally competitive.
Ms. Foxx. If these new regulations from the Biden EPA are
so important, how could the EPA under previous administrations,
which possessed the very same authorities the EPA wields today,
have missed such great opportunities to fundamentally reshape
American industry, transportation, and nearly every aspect of
our life?
Mr. Regan. Well, I would say that the difference and the
opportunity is coming from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law
and the Inflation Reduction Act, which is providing tax credits
and monetary infusion into the market and into companies that
complements our regulations, which is helping us to move faster
and further than we ever have before.
So, I would not necessarily say that it is EPA being more
aggressive from a regulatory standpoint. This is the first time
in history that we have had hundreds of billions of dollars to
develop grant programs or infuse capital into the private
market to help us begin to look at efficiency and lowering
pollution.
Ms. Foxx. We need to stop adding to the regulatory burden
that threatens to choke off innovation and economic growth in
this country. That is why I introduced H.R. 3230, the Unfunded
Mandates Accountability and Transparency Act, or UMATA. This
bipartisan bill will strengthen Congress' ability to stop
Federal regulators from loading up the private sector and state
and local governments with costly new unfunded mandates.
UMATA requires Federal agencies to accurately consider the
cost of their regulations, consult with stakeholders, publish
their assessments, and ensure that any new regulations produce
the most benefits for the least cost.
In your confirmation hearing in 2021, you said that you
would ``work in partnership with Congress,'' ``build consensus
around programmatic solutions,'' and strengthen relations with
the private sector.
Will you support a commonsense solution like UMATA since it
does exactly what you claimed you would do in your confirmation
hearings?
Mr. Regan. Well, you know, the appropriate answer for me is
to say I would love to provide technical assistance to that
legislation or bill. That is the proper role of an agency. And
so, we would love to have some staff look at that and see how
we could provide technical assistance to that.
Ms. Foxx. I thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I think that we have an EPA that is basically
out of control and imposing horrible regulations and costs on
the American people, and there are things we need to do to
contain it. I yield back.
Chairman Comer. Absolutely.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Bush from Missouri.
Ms. Bush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And it is great to see you again, Administrator Regan.
St. Louis and I are here today in support of essential
regulations to ensure clean air, clean land, and clean water in
every community. As we continue to suffer from the record heat,
drought, floods, and wildfires, the Environmental Protection
Agency is an essential force at the front lines of addressing
the climate crisis and toxic pollution in neighborhoods like
ours in St. Louis.
Under your leadership, Administrator Regan, the Agency has
taken bold steps to limit pollution and contamination from
fossil fuel, power plants, chemical facilities, vehicles, and
forever chemicals like PFAS. You have continued the critical
work of cleaning up toxic sites around the country and
advancing President Biden's critical Justice40 Initiative,
including through my Environmental Justice Mapping and Data
Collection Act.
You have achieved so much, all while weathering an
extremist assault on the basic functioning of the Agency by
far-right Members of Congress and Supreme Court Justices who
are hellbent on catering to industry profits above basic needs
of regular people. The Republican Party is pro-pollution, pro-
big oil, pro-disaster, and pro-disease.
The EPA's work is saving lives in states like Missouri and
communities like St. Louis. Last year, the Agency began
investigating toxic fumes and odors in south St. Louis after I
heard from constituents and requested action from the EPA. And
over the last few years, my team and I have worked closely with
the EPA to minimize the impact of historical legacy pollution
in our community.
The essential role of the EPA is underscored by the harms
my constituents continue to face from environmental
contamination and nuclear waste dating back to World War II.
For over 80 years, St. Louis has grappled with the consequences
of radioactive waste left over from the Manhattan Project that
has contaminated Coldwater Creek, which is a core waterway in
our community, and the West Lake Landfill, where radioactive
waste is buried next to an underground chemical fire.
For decades, the Federal Government both hid and downplayed
the risk of these--of this radioactive waste in our district.
People in my district who were unknowingly exposed to this
radiation are now living with serious chronic health
conditions, including several types of rare cancers.
As this toxic waste exposure continues to devastate my
community, neither the Federal Government nor the private
sector contractors who reaped profits from it have provided
financial compensation to the victims of the Manhattan Project
in my district, and we know who this exposure
disproportionately impacts.
When we look at Black children in the city of St. Louis,
they account for more than 70 percent of children suffering
from lead poisoning. Our Black and Brown children in our
community are also 10 times more likely than White children to
go to the emergency room for asthma.
That is why these issues are personal to me. It is why I
worked with Ranking Member Raskin to secure a GAO report on how
to improve remediation efforts at nuclear contamination sites.
That is why I have successfully pushed to include my
Environmental Justice Mapping and Data Collection Act in this
Inflation Reduction Act.
That is why the House, under a Democratic majority, passed
several of my amendments relating to toxic exposure. That is
why I have worked closely with Secretary Granholm and the
Department of Energy to ensure the EPA has the resources
necessary to clean up West Lake Landfill.
And that is why I am pushing hard for Congress to
reauthorize the Radiation Exposure Compensation Act, which
provides health screenings and compensation for people sickened
by U.S. testing of nuclear weapons, as well as expanded to
communities like St. Louis and other areas that have been
historically excluded.
In March, the Senate passed bipartisan legislation to do
just that, but Speaker Johnson refused to take action to help
the people who need it most and their families. And RECA
expired over a month ago. That is appalling. It is an appalling
failure of governance by the Speaker. And disproportionately
Black and Brown communities like mine continue to bear the
brunt of our government's failure to tackle the crisis of toxic
waste and climate change.
That is what we mean when we talk about environmental
justice and the Green New Deal and investments in clean energy.
We are talking about doing everything we can to ensure every
single person has access to clean air, clean water, no matter
where they live, no matter their skin color or how much money
they have.
So, Administrator Regan, which communities are
disproportionately affected by environmental contamination, and
what are the tangible benefits when contamination is
successfully remediated?
Mr. Regan. Well, I like to say that first of all, thank you
for your leadership on this topic. And as I have traveled the
country, whether you are poor in Appalachia or Lawrence County,
Alabama, or St. Louis, the disproportionate impact on children
and on people is unacceptable.
And the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the Inflation
Reduction Act has offered lots of opportunities to begin to
correct these wrongs, whether it is looking at brownfields and
Superfund sites and partner with DOE to clean up that radiation
and that pollution, or whether it is ripping out these lead-
laced lines that are feeding water, drinking water to our
children. We have seen a profound effect across this country
for low-income, Black, Brown, Tribal community, thanks to the
partnership between Congress and the President and both BIL and
IRA, and we will continue to see that.
And let me just say that, whether you are in the South or
the North, when you see pipes protruding from homes and the
waste going into the very yards that the children are playing
in because there is not a wastewater treatment facility in
place, your heart really goes out.
And so, thank you for inviting me to your district to look
at improving that wastewater treatment facility, and we are
trying to do that all over the country.
Ms. Bush. Absolutely. Thank you.
And I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Comer. The Chair recognizes Mrs. McClain from
Michigan.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Regan, for being here today. I
appreciate it.
I want to shift our focus a little bit to our dependency on
China. Simply put, I have a concern that the EV mandates make
us more dependent on China, and that is what I would like to
talk about today is the dependency that we have on China.
So, I need to start with, do you believe that the EV
mandates make us more dependent on China?
Mr. Regan. You know, we do not have an EV mandate. We have
a rule that offers----
Mrs. McClain. Are you familiar with the Biden
Administration's mandate that 70 percent of all vehicles
produced by 2030 need to be EV?
Mr. Regan. When you look at the reg----
Mrs. McClain. Are you familiar with that or am I mistaken,
that is not----
Mr. Regan. It is not 70 percent. When you look at----
Mrs. McClain. What is it then?
Mr. Regan. When you look at the----
Mrs. McClain. What is it then?
Mr. Regan. When you look at the----
Mrs. McClain. What is it then?
Mr. Regan. When you look at----
Mrs. McClain. What is it?
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman, would the gentlelady allow him to
answer?
Mrs. McClain. Yes, if he will answer the question I would
ask, I would love an answer to the question.
Mr. Raskin. He is trying to answer it.
Chairman Comer. It is Mrs. McClain's time.
Mrs. McClain. It is----
Mr. Regan. Very quickly, there are a combination of
technologies that can meet an environmental standard, and the
regulation suggests that up to 60 percent could be met with
EVs, but that rule could also be met with plug-in hybrids,
hybrids----
Mrs. McClain. OK. So, we are--there is not a mandate----
Mr. Regan. No, there is not.
Mrs. McClain [continuing]. That 70 percent of vehicles need
to be----
Mr. Regan. No.
Mrs. McClain [continuing]. EV mandated by 2030.
Mr. Regan. No.
Mrs. McClain. OK. All right. That is great. I am really
going to be excited to go back and talk to our people in the
great state of Michigan talking about the EV mandates that
there really are no EV mandates.
So, we really--the auto industry does not need that. We
should not be giving incentives then because there is no
mandate.
Mr. Regan. Well, I do not think the auto industry or the
UAW would have stood with me when we announced the rule if it
was a mandate. So, I clearly----
Mrs. McClain. So, there is--I am excited to hear about
this, because from everything that I have heard from the UAW,
from the auto workers, is that we need to give a lot of
incentives. I mean, I think we give $7,500 of incentives for
people to buy EVs that do not work, by the way, that there are
no mandates.
So, just to make sure that I am clear--and I want to make
sure that I am clear--there are no mandates by the EPA as it
pertains to combustion engines by the year 2030?
Mr. Regan. No.
Mrs. McClain. Wonderful.
Mr. Regan. There are no mandates.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you. Thank you. That is fantastic.
With that, I am going to yield back.
Chairman Comer. Would you mind yielding the remainder of
your time?
Mrs. McClain. I yield the remainder of my time.
Chairman Comer. Thank you.
Mr. Regan, I am curious. When was the last time you met
with President Biden face-to-face?
Mr. Regan. I was with the President maybe less than 2
months ago.
Chairman Comer. Can you describe that meeting and who was
in attendance?
Mr. Regan. We flew from D.C. to Charlotte, North Carolina,
to meet with some law enforcement officers who had been gunned
down while they were trying to serve a search warrant. He met
with the individual families, spent time with them, talked to
them about his personal loss and how to move forward, and his
belief in God and Christ.
And he then left there, and we went to an event in
Wilmington, North Carolina, where we did an engagement on lead
pipes. And he gave a speech and met with hundreds of people in
North Carolina, if not thousands, to talk about the importance
of lead exposure.
Chairman Comer. I was just curious.
Back to what Mr. Burlison said about the wastewater
treatment issues and the poultry and meat packing industry, is
there ever any thought by the EPA when a rule is administered,
an executive order, whatever you want to call it, is
administered, as to what the cost will be not only to the
industry or the private business but to the consumer?
Because in my district, one poultry processing plant in
west Kentucky makes all--you know, all their chicken goes to
Chick-fil-A. Another goes to McDonald's for Chicken McNuggets.
The cost of these everyday food supplies for working-class
Americans, these food sources, has significantly increased in
the last 3 years. And one reason they have increased is because
of excessive regulations. One reason is because of inflation,
which I think is a result of excessive regulations.
So, just out of curiosity, does the EPA ever take into
consideration when they make a drastic rule change how that
will impact middle-class Americans?
Mr. Regan. We do. And in this situation, Chairman Comer, we
were petitioned to take a look at and begin to develop a
regulation for this specific industry. And that is the process
that we are going through.
We did not raise our hand and voluntarily say, let us go do
this. We were petitioned. By law, we have to respond to these
petitions. And now we are looking at the wastewater discharge
from some of these facilities.
I want to let you know that I have instructed my team to
engage with the industry, to engage with everyone who is
familiar with this industry, because if we do anything we want
to do it correctly.
Chairman Comer. Very good. Hopefully, you will take into
account what the impact will be to average middle-class
Americans who are struggling to pay their bills, struggling to
pay their food bills to put food on the tables for their
families.
Mr. Regan. Yes, sir.
Chairman Comer. The Chair now recognizes Ms. Tlaib from
Michigan.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, Chairman.
Thank you so much, Administrator Regan, for being here.
You have been to Detroit. You have been to Michigan several
times. I do not think I did get you to come out to meet some of
our residents living on Beniteau Street yet, but Beniteau
Street on the east side of Detroit is a predominantly Black,
very working class, low income, poor community, and they have a
massive Stellantis auto plant complex in their backyard. It has
been making them sick and ruining their quality of life for
years. Some cannot even have outings outside with their
families--barbecues, birthday parties. The odor is unbearable.
I have experienced it myself, Administrator.
And state regulators in Michigan had issued Stellantis air
permits. And they had the public meetings, they did the whole
process, but they failed to ensure that they complied with the
permit conditions. They were required, Stellantis was required
to install pollution controls, and they failed to install them
correctly.
I think they withheld that information for months. I do not
know if it was 6 months, 7 months. It was months, even though
the residents were saying, something is wrong here, the odor,
something is wrong here, there is something wrong. And, again,
they did not fix it for months.
This is--you know, our residents, one, they did not feel
believed by the state for a long time, but they also believe
like, wait, why are they always routinely, the state, approving
pollution permits that they know are poisoning predominantly
Black, Brown, immigrant, low-income communities across
Michigan?
So, they worked with a nonprofit organization called the
Great Lakes Environmental Law Center. And in November, I
believe--or, sorry, in 2021, they filed a Title VI civil rights
case, a complaint.
Are you familiar at all, with that at all?
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Ms. Tlaib. Oh, good. OK. So, Administrator Shore and some
of the members of the team at Region 5 talked to me about this.
You know this. I mean, the EPA was pursuing an informal
resolution agreement for more than a year with community
members at the table, Administrator, and, again, trying to get
toward a resolution with the state.
And all of a sudden, the state is like, nah, we do not want
to talk to them anymore. And EPA was like, OK. Do you know why?
Mr. Regan. Given that this is an active Title VI case, I
cannot----
Chairman Comer. Microphone. Make sure your microphone is
on.
Mr. Regan. Given that it is an active Title VI case, it is
improper for me to comment on or speculate.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes, but it sounds like you guys are letting
them off the hook.
The leverage that we have as--and I want you to know I want
them to feel like their lives are important under an
administration that says they care about clean air and water,
right?
And it is hard for me. And no matter who is the President,
Administrator, I am going to be very much always about holding
them accountable.
So, as I understand, the law is clear. When there is--an
informal resolution agreement cannot be reached, EPA must
investigate and issue findings that determine whether or not
discrimination occurred.
Why are we not doing that? Why are we not doing that?
Mr. Regan. Let me take this concern back to our Title VI
lawyers and team that is working on this.
Ms. Tlaib. Please.
Mr. Regan. And we will keep you apprised as much as we can.
Ms. Tlaib. And, Administrator Regan, this is out of love
and respect. I grew up in a neighborhood, honestly, I would
come into my house as a little child, Chairman, smelling like
rotten eggs. All my friends had asthma. I mean, it is awful.
So, I am asking the EPA to take this complaint seriously.
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Ms. Tlaib. Set a precedent that you care and watch. No
matter who is the Governor, no matter who is in charge, it is
important that we are consistent.
And, Mr. Regan, you know this, Administrator Regan, please
fight for them like you live on Beniteau. Fight for them like
you live there, because they have nobody else but us.
And I am--we are blessed that we have a nonprofit that took
the case, but we cannot allow, again, politics and all these
kinds of aspects come into play. We have to be consistent.
Again, no one told them to look away when months and months
and months with them not complying with their own air permits.
You know that. Companies put it in there. They sign it. They
should comply with their own air permits, right?
And, again, I say this on behalf of many of my residents.
We are doing good work in progress, but many of the young
people, I know them--I have an 18-year-old at home--we are not
moving with the urgency still that I think is needed.
And implementation matters, you know that. And a lot of
folks are not seeing the change they need immediately. So,
again, I am here as a partner.
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Ms. Tlaib. And I am here to bring those folks and those
residents at the table with you.
Thank you so much. I yield.
Mr. Regan. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. And I might add, we have gone on our side
over about a minute and 45 seconds, and I have agreed to yield
that much time to the ranking member to get caught up, and then
we will proceed with the majority.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you kindly, Mr. Chairman.
And I wanted to pose one question to Ms. Tlaib and then one
to the Administrator.
You just made a very eloquent and passionate brief on
behalf of the significance of enforcement, aggressive Agency
enforcement of the rules that we have under Federal
legislation.
The Project 2025 plan that everybody is talking about, and
our friend and colleague from North Carolina, Ms. Foxx, talked
about the importance of deregulation, that is, loosening up
regulation. And I wonder what you would say about that in
general.
And then also, specifically about deregulation of
corporations at a time that we are also hearing from our
friends about the importance of regulating women's bodies and
women's choices, with one-third of American women not being
able to get access to an abortion in America and also further
crack down on birth control and IVF and so on.
Ms. Tlaib. No, Ranking Member Raskin, it is bizarre. Even
today, you know, thinking about the fact that they consistently
want to regulate the bodies of women, but also even the fact
that our bodies are more regulated than even around the gun
crisis.
Around the fact that, right now, many of our constituents
and our families continue to say to me, we have a right to
breathe clean air, right? We have a right to access clean
water, right? Rashida, why is--why are we not working toward
that?
To allow corporations to have a free will of going ahead--
because let me tell you, I do not care if you are a red or blue
state, they will poison your residents if you let them. They
will. And so, you know, shame on those that continue to promote
this Project 2025. And, again, the sense that corporations have
all this free will, and they do not care about our public
health. They care about the bottom line. They care about
profiting off of the pollution they spew out to residents,
especially ones that are currently struggling to even access
healthcare right now.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you very much. I appreciate that.
I will have to question you later, Mr. Administrator.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman's time is expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, who I
have read is on the short list to be potentially the next Vice
President of the United States, Mr. Donalds, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Donalds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador Regan, thank you for being here.
Earlier this year, the D.C. circuits--the D.C. District
Court here actually invalidated EPA's designation that allowed
the state of Florida to process Clean Water Act permit
applications, a process that has been in place for the last 3
years.
Our concern, obviously, in the Sunshine State is that EPA
agreed to essentially give us primacy in going through that
permit process as opposed to having to go through the Army
Corps of Engineers.
In short, does the EPA still stand beside the decision to
give the state of Florida primacy with respect to proceeding
with 404 permits for the Clean Water Act and Endangered Species
Act?
Mr. Regan. I believe that is the case, but let me circle
back before I give you a definitive answer on where we are with
that process.
Mr. Donalds. You believe you are still with us or you are
not? I want to make sure I get it clear.
Mr. Regan. Yes. I believe we are still following what the
court has told us we should do, which I know there was a court
ruling and I know there was some consternation there. So, let
me circle back with you to see exactly where we are on that
case.
Mr. Donalds. OK. The reason why I bring it up, and it is
important for our state, since we have taken over that process
from the Army Corps, permit applications have--in terms of
time, have decreased from roughly around 2 years to 6 months.
Obviously, the Sunshine State is, if not the fastest
growing state in the country, one of the fastest growing states
in the country for a myriad of reasons.
So, our ability to process these permits where, yes, we do
have a lot of waterways that are critical to the ecosystem of
Florida--we take that very seriously in my state--but I think
it is important that, whether it is Florida or any other state
that has that flexibility, that you do have state
administrators and state personnel with respect to
environmental protection who do take this incredibly seriously
and being able to partner with EPA in order to be able to still
process these applications that are important for our economy
as well as our environment.
That is something critical for us going forward. I hope
that the EPA agrees with that.
Mr. Regan. Absolutely. And as a former state regulator, I
definitely understand the importance of the delegated
authority. And I believe how we got to this situation where
there were some concerns about the administration of the
program, and I do not know if we resolved those or not, but I
think the court has spoken on that. And so, I will circle back
with you to see where we are on that.
Mr. Donalds. OK. All right. Thank you for that.
I want to switch gears. Obviously, the EPA came out with
the Clean Power Plan 2.0. My concerns are with a couple of
things but, primarily, 60 percent of all electricity generation
in the United States comes from coal and natural gas. Under the
EPA's Clean Power Plan 2.0, essentially coal will be regulated
out of existence and there will be additional burdens put on
new natural gas plants that may or may not come online in the
United States.
Considering your previous statements about wanting to make
sure--in this hearing, that wanting to make sure that nobody
is--nobody in our country is left behind when it comes to
having a clean environment and clean water, clean air, et
cetera, for our citizens, is it not also a concern that if that
plan goes into effect and the power generation that we
typically use right now would go away, that electricity prices
would skyrocket on poor families, whether they may be Black
families, Hispanic families, White families, that their cost
would go up exorbitantly under that same plan? Would they not
be left behind by the Clean Power Plan?
Mr. Regan. Well, we spent a lot of time with the industry,
with the grid operators, and here are the facts from our
vantage point: (1) These control technologies do not have to be
put in until 2031, 2032, so we are talking about some time down
the road; (2) All of our cost estimates say that the actions we
are taking will only potentially increase price by less than
one percent; and (3) That the approach we are taking, because
of the diligence that we have done, will not have any impact on
reliability.
To the point we were just discussing, this national rule is
delegated to the states, and each state will design a state
implementation plan that gives it flexibility on how it reaches
these goals.
Mr. Donalds. Administrator, I got to cut you down, because
we got 20 seconds, congressional hearings.
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Donalds. I am going to respond with this: whenever we
get information from experts who say that costs will be
contained in a certain strata, that typically is not the case.
Even with the tax credits, with the Inflation Reduction Act,
CBO said it would cost around $260 billion. Wall Street is
saying the value of those credits is upwards of 1.3 trillion
and higher.
So, when you say that essentially regulating out coal and
some aspects of natural gas in the United States will only lead
to a one-percent increase in electricity cost, that simply does
not add up. And at the end of the day, whether it is 2024 or
2032, it is poor people in this country who are going to be
left behind by that type of proposal.
Chairman, I am over my time. I yield back.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Pressley from Massachusetts.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you, Administrator Regan.
You know, the kids say, it is 7 p.m. on Friday, 95 degrees,
and that is because the climate crisis is real and it is here.
Climate change is not an abstract problem for people of a far-
away future to solve. No one knows that better than our youth.
And I know you agree because, under your leadership, EPA
created the first of its kind National Environmental Youth
Advisory Council. And I am proud that Osasenaga Idahor, one of
my constituents from Hyde Park, is a member. Voices like his
are essential to addressing this crisis.
So, when my colleagues across the aisle use platforms like
this hearing to pretend that climate change is some hoax, I
cannot help but think about the stories I hear from our youth
when I am back home.
Administrator Regan, are you familiar with urban heat
islands?
Mr. Regan. Yes, I am.
Ms. Pressley. EPA reviewed several studies and found that
some communities in the United States, particularly those that
are low income and with higher populations of people of color,
have neighborhoods with higher temperatures compared to the
surrounding areas.
Take, for example, the district I represent, the
Massachusetts Seventh, where my constituents have been under
constant heat advisories and feeling the consequences of urban
heat islands on a daily basis this summer.
The city of Chelsea, a predominantly Hispanic community in
my district, can be 10 to 15 degrees hotter than neighboring
communities in the Boston area on a given day.
Administrator Regan, what are some of the primary causes of
urban heat islands?
Mr. Regan. Well, as we see a change in climate and
intensity in heat, obviously, when you lack natural spaces,
natural resources, trees, grass and the like, that heat just
concentrates in the concrete and in the buildings. You also
typically have these urban areas that may or may not be blocked
by downwinds because of a mountain.
So, in these isolated areas, all you have is a
concentration of heat disproportionately impacting people who
are already suffering. And you are exacerbating respiratory
illnesses, asthma, and other illnesses. And so, we have been
working hard, especially thanks to your leadership and the
President's leadership.
And you look in the Inflation Reduction Act, that provides
grant resources for cooling centers, for safe havens for our
elderly or for our children to go to if they are living in some
of these urban areas.
It is 10 to 15 degrees more in your state. It is 10 to 15
degrees more in Atlanta. We have got these situations going on
all across the country and, unfortunately, those who can afford
it the most are getting hit the hardest.
Ms. Pressley. Yes. And I will just add, that is exactly why
we knew anecdotally what communities would be hardest hit
during the pandemic. It was a perfect overlay of heat maps with
those communities that had the highest rate of COVID
infections, hospitalizations, and fatalities.
It is no accident that communities experiencing the worst
of these causes are the same ones that have been on the front
lines of historic inequities. Racist policies like redlining,
where lenders would literally draw a red line around
neighborhoods to deny services like mortgages and loans to
Black and Brown folks wanting to move in, have made it more
likely for communities of color to be situated in formerly
industrial areas that have more heat-trapping concrete and less
tree cover.
At the same time, folks living in these neighborhoods are
also more likely to struggle with asthma, cardiovascular
diseases, and other complex medical conditions that turn more
deadly in the heat. In 2023 alone, we saw a record 2,300 people
died due to excess heat, a figure that is considered an
undercount by experts.
So, yes, environmental justice and health equity go hand-
in-hand. The Biden-Harris Administration has recognized this by
delivering $2 billion in funding to Climate Justice Community
Change Grants.
Administrator Regan, how will these new grants help
communities like those that I represent in the MA-7 address the
health risk associated with heat islands?
Mr. Regan. There are significant opportunities. And the
good part about it is that these solutions do not have to come
top down. They are coming from the bottom up. These communities
have had these solutions. And if they have more access to solar
energy, they will not be afraid to run their air-conditioning.
The bills will be lower, and they will be healthier inside.
Like I said earlier, if they can invest in cooling centers
and have safe havens and safe places for their constituents--
your constituents to go, that is a game changer.
They have also--many cities have thought about creative
things, like painting the tops of buildings and--with
reflective light that push that heat back, or thinking about
what type of material they use for their sidewalks.
There are a lot of innovative ideas by young people, by
people who have been thinking about this for a long period of
time. They are competing for our grants. We are giving them the
resources, and they are creating solutions for their
communities.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you. I look forward to continuing to
work with you, Administrator Regan, and the Office of
Environmental Justice and External Civil Rights to protect
these investments and ensuring communities have the resources
they need to address these threats.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Regan. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Burchett from Tennessee.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Regan, some of these things have been asked before, but
as the 435th most powerful Member of Congress, sometimes they
get to me a little late, so I am going to ask them again. And I
would appreciate you giving good answers for my folks back in
Tennessee.
There have been some tests--you all have issued some rules
targeting numerous sectors, substantially increasing the cost.
For example, you all's rule on lime manufacturing plants
imposes costs of 2.5 billion on a small industry with a 2.3
billion in revenue.
Do you all think it is necessary, considering your own
scientists determined emissions from lime plants are acceptable
with ample margins of safety?
Mr. Regan. I think the rule that has been proposed is done
in a way that we believe maximizes protection from an
environmental health standpoint. But as I mentioned to a
colleague earlier, this is something that I would love for our
staffs to have a conversation about to be sure that we are all
on the same page in terms of the direction that we are going.
Mr. Burchett. I would like that a lot. A lot of folks in my
area, this could be very damning for them.
When you testified before the House Science Committee last
September, you said about the lime rule: I think what we want
to do is to ensure that we are meeting the letter of the law
with as much flexibility as possible.
Does that sound accurate to you?
Mr. Regan. Yes, that is the goal.
Mr. Burchett. OK. Well, let me ask you then, why did you
all disregard the Small Business Administration's
recommendations for more timely and flexibility when issuing
the lime rule?
Mr. Regan. Well, I am not quite sure if we ignored the
Small Business' regulation, but, again, that is something that
I would love to have a discussion about to see if we are on the
same page there.
Mr. Burchett. And I would appreciate you getting back to me
on that. If you do, I would appreciate that.
Mr. Regan. Absolutely.
Mr. Burchett. Can you explain how increases in compliance
costs impact businesses that are trying to stay afloat in
today's already challenging economic circumstances?
Mr. Regan. Well, compliance complexity can be looked at a
few ways. I think that what we try to do is evaluate and
analyze the administrative burden and the compliance burden of
any of our rules. And we weigh that against the opportunities
for these companies to invest in new technologies that might
provide efficiencies in some other areas while also lowering
the pollution burden on the environment and individuals. So, we
take a look at all of it and try to come out with a win-win-
win.
Mr. Burchett. Let me follow-up on that. Did your Agency
engage with stakeholders at all levels to determine exactly
what the impact of these regulations would be for businesses of
all sizes and for the folks that they serve?
Mr. Regan. We do. Typically, we engage with all of our
stakeholders numerous times, privately and in public venues.
Mr. Burchett. Is the public venues like a hearing type of
situation?
Mr. Regan.
[No verbal response.]
Mr. Burchett. OK. Witnesses warned us that--this
Committee--that if the Biden Administration continues at the
Obama Administration's regulatory pace for 8 more years, the
cost of these rulemakings could exceed $60,000 per household.
$60,000.
What impact do you think that would have on low-and middle-
class Americans?
Mr. Regan. I am not sure that I agree with the $60,000
number. It just does not comport with our analytics.
Listen, in many regards for some of the things that we
proposed that some have said increase cost, we actually will
see lower cost, lower prices, whether that is the entity that
we are regulating or the health benefits that surrounding
communities may pay.
One example is thinking about the HON rule and looking at--
for some of our chemical facilities for less than one percent--
--
Mr. Burchett. The what rule?
Mr. Regan. The HON rule. For less than 1 percent, they can
invest in a control technology that will lower cancer risk by
96 percent.
There is a lot of regulations that we have that we see
significant cost-benefit opportunities but seem to be distorted
when we have these conversations.
Mr. Burchett. Sure. I would warn you, though, you know, if
it was--if we wanted to save lives, we would just bring the
speed limit down to 15 miles an hour and tell everybody to, you
know, drive a moped or something because, I mean, there would
still be the cost associated with all that.
And the cost avoidance, of course, is always something to
take into consideration. But I think the taxpayers in this case
are going to be left holding the bag. And I am very much aware
of that situation, so--but thank you very much for being here.
And I yield, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Crockett from Texas for 5
minutes.
Ms. Crockett. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
And thank you so much, Mr. Administrator, for being here.
First, I just have to again send love to Dr. Nance, who is
my Regional Administrator. She and I love to go and give big
checks in my district. So, I appreciate her so very much.
I also want to make sure that I level set, because I
thought it was interesting that we were having an EPA hearing,
considering the fact that some people in this chamber do not
believe in this thing called climate change. So, I just wanted
to level set really quickly with you and find out from you if
you believe that climate change is real or a hoax.
Mr. Regan. Climate change is very real.
Ms. Crockett. OK. Thank you so much. I thought you may say
that.
And interestingly enough, you know, I am sure that there
are those in this country that are looking for those Nixon
Republicans, those Republicans that simply just wanted to do
the work of the people and were not about sending out
misinformation, disinformation, and continuously trying to
undermine our Federal Government agencies that are trying to do
everything that they can to protect the people.
When we look at the Supreme Court and their recent ruling,
again, they chose not to protect the American people. But
hopefully, we would get people in the legislature and maybe we
can get some legislation on the books to combat what the
Supreme Court did so that we can get back to the business of
protecting people.
The reason that I bring Nixon up is because it was
President Nixon, a Republican, who spearheaded the EPA's
creation at a time where our country and communities were
facing deteriorating air qualities in cities where there was
rampant pollution in our neighborhoods and when urban water
supplies were constantly being contaminated with dangerous
toxins. I just would imagine that President Nixon would never
stand for Project 2025, which wants to do the complete opposite
of that.
In addition, you know, there is a lot of conversation
around rolling back regulations. My colleagues continuously
talk about rolling back regulations and not really
understanding the importance of these guardrails. And so, I
just want you to listen to a situation that technically
impacted your agency.
In 2018, Trump made sure that he scrapped a 2015 Obama-era
rule requiring advanced braking technology on trains
transporting particularly hazardous materials. That rule would
have required compliance by certain trains by 2021 and others
by 2023, but as Fortune reported at the time, Trump's
Department of Transportation decided that the cost of
installing these more sophisticated brakes outweighed the
benefit.
While it has been noted that technically the rule would not
have required the Norfolk Southern train that derailed in Ohio
to have such brakes, some believe it would have if not for
Trump.
Norfolk Southern estimates that it will spend more than $1
billion to address the contamination caused by the East
Palestine derailment and improve rail safety and operations,
which includes the settlement with the United States valued at
over $310 million, as well as around $780 million in
environmental.
Regulations are made to protect people from potential
disasters such as this. And I can pretty much probably guess
that the people of East Palestine would have preferred that
there would have been some protections that would have kept
them from enduring that terrible situation. But I want to talk
about a few other things, and then I will let you go.
There has been all this talk about the money that you are
getting and all this talk about our debt. I just want to remind
my colleagues that it is factual, it can be looked up, under 4
years of the Trump Administration, unlike any other
administration in the history of this country, they somehow
managed to rack up $8 trillion in debt in 4 years.
But to be clear, in racking up that debt, it was not
because they were trying to take care of agencies such as yours
that are trying to protect people and make sure that they have
clean air, clean water, clean soil. It was so that the rich
one-percenters could have their tax cut.
And, again, Project 2025 is about making sure that those
tax cuts that will expire in 2025, that they will get those
back again. Again, they do not want to take care of the people,
and it is OK to have debt in this country so long as the one-
percenters get what they want. I just want to lay that out.
Finally, when we look at where this money is going from
this Administration, Rep. Jordan's district got 500,000. The
Chair's district got about 1.6 million in EPA grants. Rep.
Greene's district got 500,000, Rep. Luna's district got
300,000, and Rep. Perry's district got a million dollars.
So, for Republicans that may feel a way about EPA and it
allegedly pushing a woke agenda, I just want to know, can we
get the money back?
I will yield.
Chairman Comer. The Chair now recognizes Ms. Boebert from
Colorado for 5 minutes.
Ms. Boebert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Regan, is it true that the EPA has never
obtained formal authorization legislation from Congress?
Mr. Regan. I am sorry?
Ms. Boebert. Is it true that the EPA has never obtained
formal legislation--authoritation legislation from Congress? It
has never been authorized by Congress?
Mr. Regan. EPA is not authorized by Congress?
Ms. Boebert. I am asking you.
Mr. Regan. I thought EPA was authorized by Congress.
Ms. Boebert. Well, the EPA is not. The EPA has never been
formally authorized by Congress. However, this agency has
imposed over $1.3 trillion in regulatory costs since the Biden
regime took office.
We authorize Committees here in Congress to ensure that we
have proper oversight and accountability in the functioning of
the executive branch. And this process is extremely vital,
because often we see agencies abuse the separation of powers,
creating rules and laws, regulations without consent of
Congress.
And we appropriate funds to agencies like the EPA and
expect these tax dollars--this tax dollar funding to be used in
accordance with the legislative priorities and comply with the
oversight requirement.
So, Mr. Regan, last month, the Supreme Court rightly
overturned the Chevron doctrine which the EPA relied on to
support its very controversial and costly rulemakings.
Since your agency has never been authorized by Congress and
has since lost most legal standing, does your agency still plan
to enable rogue bureaucrats to enact unconstitutional
regulations?
Mr. Regan. I am not quite sure I follow you. You are saying
that----
Ms. Boebert. I am saying the Chevron doctrine was
overturned by the Supreme Court.
Mr. Regan. We have no authority?
Ms. Boebert. I am saying you have never been authorized--
wait. Hold on.
Mr. Regan. Congress does not delegate authority for us to
do the regulations and the business and the policy. So, since
1970----
Ms. Boebert. So, the Chevron doctrine, where you have
created all of these rules under that have been proven to be
unconstitutional by the Supreme Court has been overruled.
So, now I am asking, are your bureaucrats still going to
implement these rulemaking processes?
Mr. Regan. You do know Chevron is not just focused on EPA.
So----
Ms. Boebert. But you are. So, I am asking about the EPA,
and I am asking about your rogue bureaucrats that have enacted
these unconstitutional regulations. Are you going to repeal
them? Are you going to continue to implement them or are you
going to stop altogether, since it has been overturned?
Mr. Regan. Do you understand the ruling?
Ms. Boebert. Do you understand the ruling----
Mr. Regan. I do.
Ms. Boebert [continuing]. Of the Supreme Court?
Mr. Regan. I do. So, your question is ill-formed. No----
Ms. Boebert. Will you be repealing----
Mr. Regan [continuing]. We are not going to stop----
Ms. Boebert. So, you are going to unconstitutionally
continue with these rulemakings in the EPA.
Mr. Regan. We are going to adhere--we are going to adhere
to the Supreme Court and continue to do our----
Ms. Boebert. So, which rulemakings are you going to roll
back?
Mr. Regan. We are going to adhere to the Supreme Court and
continue to do our work in accordance to the Supreme Court. The
Supreme Court made a ruling.
Ms. Boebert. And which ones are you going to repeal?
Mr. Regan. The Supreme Court didn't tell us to repeal
anything.
Ms. Boebert. They have been deemed unconstitutional.
Mr. Regan. No.
Ms. Boebert. Absolutely, they have. This was a huge
victory. And, you know, I mean, even in our appropriations bill
in the House this year, the funding has been reduced by 20
percent. I would argue that it needs to be reduced by 100
percent.
But in this, it is because of these radical Green New Deal
policies that jeopardize domestic energy development and
overload America's power grid and raise costs on American
consumers and businesses.
So, with the EPA and these overreaching regulations, do you
have any intent on working with the House majority to lower
energy costs and produce more reliable and affordable energy?
Mr. Regan. If you look at our rule, we are producing
reliable, affordable, diverse----
Ms. Boebert. I think Americans' wallets would disagree with
that. I mean, the Biden Administration, if they continue under
Obama's administrative policies, this regulatory pace for a
full 8 years, the cumulative costs of this Administration's
rulemakings would exceed $60,000 per household. And as you
know, the Biden Administration reversed President Trump's
successful deregulation by executive order. So, the Biden
regime is on pace of increasing regulatory costs at a rate of
$617 billion per year in just rulemaking, rulemaking that we
are seeing is unconstitutional.
Mr. Regan. This is shocking. You spent so much time with
our regional staff and our regional administration at Region 8
and have such productive conversations about how we are doing
things for your district and your state, and then you take this
microphone and you pretend----
Ms. Boebert. I have also seen----
Mr. Regan [continuing]. And pretend that we should not
exist----
Ms. Boebert [continuing]. The coal plants that have been
decommissioned in my state.
Mr. Regan [continuing]. So, 100 percent we should not
exist?
Ms. Boebert. I have seen the energy regulations that have
regulated my district into poverty. So, sir----
Mr. Regan. You spent time with my staff in your district--
--
Ms. Boebert. Of course, I am. I have oversight over your
staff, and I want them to answer.
Mr. Regan [continuing]. Complimenting them----
Ms. Boebert. I want them to provide a service for the
American people.
Mr. Regan [continuing]. Complimenting them about their
partnerships.
Ms. Boebert. But there is so much--yes, there are some
things that have been done well, but not everything.
Mr. Regan. But we should be 100 percent removed?
Ms. Boebert. When we have $617 billion per year in
rulemaking, that is absolutely absurd. When you are taking our
affordable clean energy and regulating it out of existence and
killing these good-paying jobs in my district, yes, I have a
problem with that.
Mr. Regan. Sure, yes.
Ms. Boebert. My time has expired, and I yield.
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman, I think that was 46 seconds over,
so we will take that.
Chairman Comer. Mr. Raskin, if we are going to start timing
people over, then you are going to have to start editing your
comments on your opening statements and everything else, but I
will do that.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you kindly.
Chairman Comer. All right. The Chair recognizes Mr. Goldman
from New York.
Mr. Goldman. Wow. Mr. Regan, I do not want to spend too
much time on this, but I would just like to clarify a few
things for my colleague from Colorado.
The Loper Bright ruling, as you know, said that the courts
should not defer to agency rulemaking if a statute is ambiguous
and, instead, the courts get to determine whether or not what
the statute means.
Is that your understanding as well?
Mr. Regan. Absolutely.
Mr. Goldman. OK. So, that would not require any regulations
to be reversed or overturned, correct?
Mr. Regan. Correct.
Mr. Goldman. But I do want to talk about that case, because
it is an incredible power grab for the judiciary, and I want to
go through a couple of things with you.
I am going to take as one example a recent rule that the
EPA implemented and finalized in March, the greenhouse gas
emission standards for heavy-duty vehicles, which is--I think
you have put it as the strongest national greenhouse gas
standard for heavy-duty vehicles in history, and one that would
have a significant impact on my district, one of the most
densely populated districts in the country, where there is a
lot of last mile delivery facilities and operations that create
a tremendous amount of greenhouse gases.
Can you just very briefly, just for timing's sake, explain
the process that the EPA goes through to--and what kind of
expert analysis is used to final--and what kind of input is
implemented to finalize a rule like this?
Mr. Regan. Well, you know, we have some of the world's best
engineers and scientists who focus on these rules, and
typically, and especially in our Ann Arbor laboratory, our
world-renowned laboratory, we invite in all of our
stakeholders, all of the industry, the best manufacturers, the
best engineers and scientists, and we go through simulations
and really look at what would happen in the real world if we
were to pursue some of these regulations.
So, we take our scientists, match them with the world's
best scientists on the private sector side, and then we look at
how we can build on the regulations that preceded the one that
we are about to put in place.
But we also look at a cost-benefit analysis, and we look at
penetration rates. We look at the market, and we best determine
how can we put the best technology on the road that keeps this
country globally competitive and also reduce the pollution that
we are aiming for.
Mr. Goldman. That is--thank you for the explanation--quite
a in depth and detailed, lengthy process involving the world's
greatest experts.
In that room with the world's greatest experts and the EPA
experts, are there any Federal judges?
Mr. Regan. No.
Mr. Goldman. So, what the Supreme Court just did, am I
correct, is say that the experts should not get any deference
in how they implement the rulemaking process but that the
nonexperts in the judiciary are the ones who get to do that? Is
that your understanding?
Mr. Regan. Well, I will be careful in commenting on this
ruling, but what I can say is the experts that are in the room
and myself and the CEOs that are in the room that are making
these decisions, this new case seems to take that away from us
and gives it to the court.
Mr. Goldman. Exactly. A complete power grab that was led
for many years, decades, by the Koch brothers, who have spent
tens of millions of dollars in trying to overturn this Chevron
doctrine in order to benefit their oil and gas and other
industries that harm the environment.
And you know what is interesting about this case, this
Loper Bright case, is that Clarence Thomas did not recuse
himself. He ruled on it. And yet, Clarence Thomas took free
private flights, paid for by the Koch brothers, went to their
events, raised money for them. This is all documented.
And then after that, in 2020, Clarence Thomas just
completely reversed his view of this Chevron doctrine. Funny.
Convenient. And yet, he is ruling on this case.
And what is going to happen is that this Trump Project
2025, just like Ms. Boebert said, is going to try to eliminate
all environmental regulations. Donald Trump has offered to do
that for the oil and gas company if their industry leaders can
provide him with $1 billion to help in his campaign. But now
that he has absolute immunity, if he becomes President, he
cannot get charged for that obvious criminal public corruption
violation. And so, he is going to try to implement Project
2025, eliminate the EPA, eliminate climate change from all
regulations, eliminate the experts at the EPA and other
agencies and put in his political lackeys, and then get to go
to Clarence Thomas to determine whether or not what the
executive agencies decided makes any sense.
This is the destruction of our democracy.
And I yield back.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman yields back, ate up Mr.
Raskin's 45 seconds.
But the Chair now recognizes Ms. Greene from Georgia.
Ms. Greene. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Americans have been enslaved in $34.8 trillion in debt, and
one of the reasons is because of the reckless spending of the
Biden Administration, all due to climate cultist beliefs that
they have got to regulate and spend hard-earned tax dollars in
order to control the climate.
The Biden Administration's cumulative new regulatory costs
imposed surpass all of his predecessors. According to analysis
of the Administration's own published cost estimates, as of May
17, 2024, the Administration had already imposed 1.6 trillion
in new regulatory costs. That 1.6 trillion is almost the entire
budget for 1 year for the Federal Government. These costs are
several times higher than the costs imposed during the entire 8
years of the Obama Administration, and they are over 1.7
trillion greater than those imposed during the Trump
Administration.
As of May 2024, the EPA had on its own imposed 1.3 trillion
of the Biden Administration's total new regulatory costs, over
80 percent. An estimated 870 billion of these costs are
attributable to the EPA's light-and medium-duty EV rule. But
even the remaining 400-plus billion in new costs are
substantially equivalent to all new regulatory costs imposed
through the Obama Administration.
Mr. Regan, you unveiled a new rule this year, a climate
regulation. The rule is designed to ensure that the majority of
new passenger cars and light trucks sold in the United States
are all electric or hybrids by 2032. That is approximately 8
years from now. This is an absurd regulation on tailpipe
emissions limits imposed by the EPA.
Inflation is so high right now, so high. Many Americans are
not able to even buy a new car right now. They are not able to
buy a home. They can hardly afford their rent. I know many
senior citizens in my district are having to choose between
rent and being able to pay for their medications.
This is absolutely unreal that this would be a rule imposed
on Americans to the point where they would have--within 8
years, are they even going to be able to buy a car? Think about
that. Think about hardworking families, parents both working,
with their kids. They are just trying to get through life. And
this rule that you have imposed is going to force them to
have--because of the tailpipe emissions--have to buy an
electric vehicle.
I do not think many Americans are going to be able to do
that, and it is going to drastically, drastically crush
Americans who, by the way, pay your paycheck, pay my paycheck,
pay for this Federal Government. It is outrageous.
Right now, we have an ``EV euphoria is dead. Automakers are
scaling back or delaying their electric vehicle plans.'' 7.6 of
new cars and trucks sold are electric vehicles, because nobody
wants them.
And then let us add on the reality of electric vehicles.
Electric vehicles add 1,000 pounds or more per vehicle. That
causes damage to roads, bridges, and parking garages.
I want you all to imagine for just 1 minute a parking
garage that has been built to hold the weight of combustion
engine cars and trucks. And imagine a parking garage filled
with electric vehicles. It cannot sustain that weight, and
neither can many roads and bridges.
Electric vehicles are too heavy. There is 2,000 pounds in 1
ton. The Delaware Bridge, for example, has a weight limit of 3
tons. So, there is several EVs on the market right now that
already exceed that limit for that bridge, for that one bridge.
One of the electric vehicles exceeds the limit, the weight
limit for that bridge. Tesla Model X, Audi e-tron, BMW, e-
Hummer, and Rivian, some of these electric vehicles exceed
8,000-pound limits on some of these roads.
Because of the rules that you are imposing, this is going
to crush Americans' ability to even be able to afford a car and
send us back into the time before people could afford cars, and
I cannot even imagine that.
In Georgia alone, we had the electric vehicle car Rivian.
They are now delaying construction of a $5 billion factory in
Georgia.
This is a complete catastrophe, Mr. Regan. It is a complete
catastrophe, and it needs to be undone. The EPA regulations are
unsustainable for Americans. And believe me, Republicans want
clean air and water too, but the climate cult has got to end.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Comer. Thank you, lady from Georgia.
Now the Chair recognizes our energy expert, Mr. Fallon from
Texas.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Listen, I do not want to plow our fields that have already
been tilled, Mr. Regan, so I am going to keep things simple. I
want to start with just speaking with you, having an exchange
philosophically.
You would agree that we--and this is real basic stuff. You
would agree we live in a representative republic, correct?
Mr. Regan. I am sorry?
Mr. Fallon. We live in a representative republic----
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Fallon [continuing]. Philosophically?
I agree with you. So, which do you believe, given a binary
choice, should have more legal weight and be held in higher
regard, choices A and B? A, laws passed by Congress, the folks
that are elected by the people, and then signed by the
President. So, that is choice A. Or, B, a rule imposed by
unelected bureaucrats. What do you think should have more legal
weight and held in high regard, A or B?
Mr. Regan. I like the system that we have.
Mr. Fallon. So, do you want to answer, A or B?
Mr. Regan. Congress writes the laws, the President signs it
in, and we implement them.
Mr. Fallon. So, you agree then that a law should have more
weight than a rule?
Mr. Regan. I am sorry?
Mr. Fallon. You would agree then that a law should have
more weight than a rule, have more legal standing?
Mr. Regan. The rules are designed under the auspice of the
law.
Mr. Fallon. OK. So, we are not going to get an answer.
So, you know, I think it is obvious----
Mr. Regan. That is not binary.
Mr. Fallon. Well, I think it is obvious that we are a--if
we are not a rule of law Nation and if the rule of law does not
prevail and the laws of rules prevail, then our Republic is in
dire jeopardy.
Administrator, the EPA under your direction, would you
describe it as--do you think that you all have shown restraint
and balance or have you repeatedly seriously overreached?
Mr. Regan. No, I think we have shown balance and an
aggressive approach to tackling some of the biggest challenges
that our country faces.
Mr. Fallon. OK. So, you have shown--in your opinion, you
have shown restraint and balance.
What I find interesting about that is that under your
tutelage, the EPA has imposed $1.6 trillion of new Federal
regulatory costs, and those are estimates that your own
department has published. The prior Administration cut costs by
$160 billion. And this is what I find even more interesting. In
the EPA, these regulatory costs--there is one agency in less
than 4 years has imposed more costs than the entire Federal
Government did under the 8 years of, of all things, the Obama
Administration.
So, again, changing gears, keeping things simple, the
Environmental Protection Agency, which leads me, and I am sure
many others, to presume that your job is to protect the
environment.
Mr. Regan. And public health.
Mr. Fallon. OK. I looked up what environment--the
definition, and it says, complex of physical, chemical, and
biotic factors, such as climate, soil, living things--makes
sense--that act upon an organism or an ecological community.
OK. So, I am troubled when--and I did watch the exchange. I
was not here, but I was up in my office, and I watched the
exchange between you and, at the time, Chair Mace, where she
was talking to you about an outfit called the Climate Justice
Alliance.
And, of course, I think that $50 million is a lot of money,
and it does not have anything whatsoever to do with protecting
the environment, Free Palestine, Defund the Police, those
certain things. And you said, when she asked her--you said and
insisted under oath that they had not received a penny from the
EPA. Is that correct?
Mr. Regan. That is correct.
Mr. Fallon. OK. But when I heard you and when I heard her,
the exchange, it seemed to me you were saying they have not yet
received a penny. And then she asked you--and I would like to
give you the opportunity now to clarify because I was very
interested in the response. She asked you to commit right now
to guaranteeing that, while you are the EPA Administrator, that
they will never receive a penny.
Mr. Regan. And I appreciate you giving me the opportunity
to say, because of some of the things that were said that I
think we all agree are offensive, I have to legally go through
a process to ensure that they either are in or out of the
bounds. Because there is going to be litigation one way or
another. And so, what I said was--she did not give me the time,
so I am glad you are--they have not received any money yet.
They are going through a very thorough evaluation.
Mr. Fallon. Thorough, like the things--when administrators
say robust, I get scared.
Mr. Regan. And we have yet to make that decision.
Mr. Fallon. OK. So, you cannot guarantee us that that kind
of an outfit, the Climate Justice Alliance, which has nothing
to do with protecting the environment but everything to do with
protecting far leftist political fortunes, may actually get
that $50 million?
Mr. Regan. Well, listen, I do not want to get into the
hypotheticals, but----
Mr. Fallon. Can you answer--we only have 10 seconds left--
that you would agree that you would not like to see an outfit
like the Climate Justice Alliance get any money? Can you even
at least go that far?
Mr. Regan. I would not like to see any organization----
Mr. Fallon. Including Climate Justice Alliance?
Mr. Regan [continuing]. That expresses bigotry or any kind
of racist behavior or discrimination, I would not like to see
any organization get any money from the Federal Government. It
is abhorrent.
Mr. Fallon. So, can we work together in making sure they do
not get any money? You have got a whole line of people behind
you, like 14 I think is what I counted.
Mr. Regan. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Fallon. That would be awesome.
Mr. Regan. We have got a lot--I have got a lot of people
behind me. I have got my general counsel. I have got the
program looking into the options that I have----
Mr. Fallon. I hope we all work together as a team, because
it is a----
Mr. Regan [continuing]. To not give that grant.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, Mr. Administrator. I appreciate it.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Fry from South Carolina.
Mr. Fry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator, thank you for being here.
I want to begin with an item of great importance, at least
to the people of South Carolina in the Pee Dee region. As you
may know, Galey and Lord--about the Galey and Lord Plant site
which sits along the Cedar Creek and the Great Pee Dee River in
Society Hill, South Carolina. It was abandoned in 2016.
Mr. Administrator, Galey and Lord is a former textile plant
that began operations in 1966. PFOS, dyes, and heavy metals
have since contaminated the soils, the wetlands around the
site, the waterways around the plant. Hurricane Florence most
recently also caused a release of wastewater to nearby Cedar
Creek into the Great Pee Dee River in 2018, further posing
damage to my constituents.
After a voluntary cleanup contract was terminated in 2017,
it took the EPA 2 additional years to remove the site's 2,400
abandoned containers, including 100,000 gallons and 53,000
pounds of liquid waste. Galey and Lord was finally added to the
EPA's Superfund National Priorities List in March 2022.
Still, I have serious concerns about the timeliness of
EPA's actions in Society Hill. After visiting Society Hill just
last week, I have difficulty believing that tangible steps have
been taken to address the issue.
Administrator, I understand the site's remedial
investigation and feasibility study was made possible after
this priority listing in 2022. Can you describe this
investigation and any subsequent actions the EPA has taken
since that time?
Mr. Regan. Yes. I can say that we are working very
aggressively to--you know, it is on the Superfund priority
site. And the ultimate goal that we share is to make this
economically viable, a commercial industrial property in the
community again. Fuel sampling is anticipated to begin later
this year. I think that we have more resources due to the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, that $5 billion focused on
Superfund and brownfields. So, we have more resources. This is
a priority, and I think that you will see us moving much
quicker than we have in the past.
Mr. Fry. Thank you.
What is the timeline or estimated completion date that you
believe exists?
Mr. Regan. Let me get you that. I do not have that timeline
in front of me, but I do not mind being transparent and sharing
that with you.
Mr. Fry. Thank you. I do appreciate that.
How do you suggest the small town of Society Hill--they
have got about a thousand residents. How do you suggest that
they would deal with this over the course of such a long period
of time?
Mr. Regan. Listen, it is tough. We have seen this all
across the country. It is unfair. It is a burden. It lowers
morale. It lowers property values. And so, we understand the
sense of urgency that we need to take. And, you know, the hard
part is living with this before it is listed on the NPL list or
it is listed. Once it is listed, it moves much quicker. It is
going to move even quicker because we have the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law resources. So, it is a weight on the
community, and we are very sensitive to that.
Mr. Fry. Thank you for that.
And just curious. I mean, I had the opportunity last week
to visit it. I mean, it just looks like a war zone. I mean, the
plants have burned twice. I think it is twice. Maybe even more.
There are giant holes in the sides of the buildings. it is
completely overgrown. People come to peel off scrap metal and
steal from it.
Are there logistical concerns that pose a delay to the
timeframe of cleaning up this site and returning it back to its
natural state?
Mr. Regan. I do not think there are any logistical
concerns. I will say that I share the concerns that you have
just laid out, which is trespassing and theft and other things.
I think we are looking into some fencing and some other things
that we can do to prevent people from coming onsite, maybe even
some beautification while we are doing the work.
So, my folks have committed to me that they are focused on
this as a high priority, and, you know, I am hoping we can stay
in touch on this.
Mr. Fry. Well, and I appreciate that. Happy to be a willing
partner with you all. This is of great importance to that part
of the region in my state.
Do you--with respect to the security around it, the
fencing, other things that may occur, is that something that
the EPA would be funding, or is that something that the
property owner itself or other entities would be contributing
to?
Mr. Regan. That is something that, more than likely to
expedite the timeframe, EPA could fund and then get the funds
back from the polluter or the perpetrator.
Mr. Fry. What do you expect--just curious. Out of pure
curiosity, Administrator, what do you expect the cost of that
to be? What is the anticipated cost of cleanup of that site?
Mr. Regan. I have no idea. I mean, I would be purely
guessing if I threw out a number.
Mr. Fry. OK. What is it--what do you see in other sites
around the country, the cost range, if you will? Like between a
million and a hundred million, something like that, or what do
you----
Mr. Regan. I will tell you what, we will get those to you
really quickly.
Mr. Fry. OK. Looking forward to partnering with you.
Mr. Regan. And the reason that is is that they range. You
know, these sites, they range in size. They range in
contamination. They range in the depth of the contamination.
So, that is a pretty hard question to answer without exactly
knowing what your site looks like.
Mr. Fry. Would love to work with you on that. I think it is
of great importance. A lot of people are very frustrated, not
necessarily with the EPA, but just with the site itself out
there.
Mr. Regan. Sure.
Mr. Fry. So, to the extent that we could expedite it and we
can get that place cleaned up, it is a beautiful part of the
state. They have got tremendous natural resources and would
love to see it returned back to its natural state.
Mr. Regan. Absolutely.
Mr. Fry. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Langworthy from New York.
Mr. Langworthy. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate the Administrator being here with us here today.
And I would like to discuss the EPA's recent final rule
entitled, ``Standards of Performance for New, Reconstructed,
and Modified Sources and Emissions Guidelines for Existing
Sources: Oil and Natural Gas Sector Climate Review.''
It is no secret that the final rule will have a severe
impact on more than 700,000 marginal oil and gas wells
throughout the United States, including wells operated by small
scale operators in my own district in the southern tier of New
York.
Administrator, prior rules acknowledge the need for
accommodations for marginal wells. This rule should have done
the same. Did EPA consider the vast differences between a
marginal well operation and high-volume well operations when
crafting this rule?
Mr. Regan. Yes, we did.
Mr. Langworthy. OK. And now under this rule, the EPA is
providing no more than a 36-month regulatory compliance
timeline for the oil and gas operators.
Administrator Regan, you know as well as I do that the
small scale, family owned marginal well operators will be
seriously stretched in their ability to meet the new tranche of
requirements that your agency is meting out for them under this
requirement. Have you considered extending the timeline to at
least accommodate the smaller well operators who, as you know,
operate with fewer resources at their disposal?
Mr. Regan. I believe that has been up for discussion, and
we will circle with you to see where that conversation lands.
Mr. Langworthy. OK. That would be very helpful.
Look, I have had some very frank conversations with the oil
and gas operators in my district, and these are all on the
smaller scale, often family owned operations, and they provide
crucial employment and economic activity in the southern tier,
as well as contribute to our Nation's energy needs.
Twenty years ago, the Federal and state regulatory burden
facing these operators could fit in a small packet of paper.
Today, it is practically a phone book. Much of what the EPA has
done under this and former administrators to hamstring our
energy producers, this rulemaking is unacceptable.
But I want to shift topics and briefly discuss EPA's recent
greenhouse gas emissions standards for heavy-duty vehicles, the
phase 3 final rule. Heavy vehicles included in this rule serve
dual purposes through the winter season in the Northeast. Many
snowplows fall under this. In fact, it was the New York City
Department of Sanitation who purchased several electric trucks
to serve double duty as garbage trucks and snow removal plows,
and the result is that they were removed from the street very
quickly.
The Commissioner of the New York City Department of
Sanitation said during a city council hearing in November 2022
that we need them to go 12 hours a day, so I do not see today,
given the current state of technology, a path forward to fully
electrifying the rear loader portion of the fleet by 2040.
Administrator, New York City's electric snowplow experiment
failed, yet the EPA has continued to enforce several rules for
vehicles that serve as snowplows in the winter. How do you
expect plow operators in a place like Buffalo, New York, to
remove 8 feet of snow during our next major disaster if
electric snowplows cannot last more than 3 hours with a foot of
snow?
Mr. Regan. Well, I think that we have taken into
consideration when and where and how these vehicles perform the
best. And I think as these technologies continue to evolve, we
will see these technologies expand in areas that, quite
frankly, they are seeing some challenges now.
When we looked at this rule nationally and we looked at the
opportunities and talked with the OEMs, they gave us assurances
that these vehicles could perform for their customers, which is
why many of them stood with us when we issued the rule.
Mr. Langworthy. You are using a technological wish list
that does not exist. And severe weather places like what I
represent in Buffalo, New York, and surrounding areas have much
higher snowfalls than others. And to meet these guidelines is
just completely unrealistic given today's technology.
I am running out of time, so I am going to finish by saying
this: the EPA has claimed over and over that its policies are
in line with the original bipartisan mission of the Agency;
however, I do not believe that could be further from the truth.
Under the direction of your department, Administrator, you
have cost the American people trillions of dollars, you have
hurt small businesses, and you have put the lives of millions
of Americans in jeopardy all in the name of climate virtue
signaling. And we see it with the onslaught of regulations that
have been handed down, affecting everyone from oil and gas
operators to, you know, small-and medium-size communities just
looking to remove snow from their streets to keep their public
safe.
I look forward to working with my colleagues on this
Committee to continue to push for greater accountability for
these absurd policy priorities of your agency.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman yields back.
And I will recognize myself for 5 minutes. I have not asked
my questions yet.
Administrator, every sector of our economy relies on access
to affordable and reliable power supplies, and electricity
demand is expected to only increase over time. You agree with
that. Electricity demand is going to increase.
Unfortunately, recent actions taken by the Biden
Administration cast doubt on the future of electricity supplies
that we often take for granted. EPA's Clean Power 2.0 would set
even more stringent emission standards for existing coal and
NGCC, natural gas-fired power plants. However, the final rule
hinges on the rapid adoption of carbon capture and storage
technology, or CCS, and hydrogen co-firing.
Many believe the EPA's plan and deadlines are simply
unachievable. I think everyone on our side has made reference
to that. It is fair to ask whether EPA's true aim is simply to
kill off coal-fired generation without regard to utilities'
ability to replace its baseload resource. It is also fair to
ask whether EPA is acting without regard to state environmental
regulators while developing compliance plans and permitting
programs.
On June 21, 2023, this Committee launched an investigation
into Clean Power Plant 2.0. In documents provided to the
Committee and subsequently made available to the public, we
discovered Agency comments suggesting that--the Administration,
you--CCS and hydrogen co-firing have not been adequately
demonstrated and, therefore, the proposed rule would violate
the Clean Air Act.
Despite this knowledge, the Biden Administration issued a
rule that it not only knew had serious legal flaws but would
also impose nearly impossible-to-meet standards on 60 percent
of our Nation's electricity generation.
Now I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record a Wall
Street Journal editorial detailing the findings of this
Committee's investigation and the Agency comments on the rule.
Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman Comer. While the majority of the Nation's overall
electricity is produced via coal and natural gas, this
percentage is even higher for states like Kentucky, my home
state, where over 90 percent of our electricity comes from
fossil fuel-fired power generation.
Administrator Regan, if over 90 percent of Kentucky's power
producers are forced to adopt technologies like CCS or hydrogen
co-firing, how would this impact the price and reliability of
electricities for consumers in states like Kentucky?
Mr. Regan. Well, Chairman, first of all, I would like to
say that as a former state regulator who had to design these
state implementation plans, we have definitely kept that at top
of mind. There is flexibility in this program that the states
and we will take advantage of to make sure that the states can
meet this goal.
I have spent time in states like Wyoming with Governor
Gordon or North Dakota----
Chairman Comer. Let me finish with my questions.
Estimates have shown that the compliance costs associated
with this rule would be upwards of $10 billion. Now, this is a
significant amount considering the pressures already facing the
power structure.
So, my question, sir, is why is EPA pushing a costly rule
that will reduce the amount of additional power generation when
more power generation needs to be brought online to meet
increasing needs across the country?
I mean, you said that electricity demand is going to
increase. If the country adopts you all's goal of more electric
vehicles, that is going to require more electricity, a growing
population. I mean, we have got a border that is wide open.
People are coming in every day. There is going to be more
demands for electricity. So, why would EPA push this rule if--
take away the costs, but the demand for more energy, and I do
not believe that is going to achieve that.
Mr. Regan. We think it can. And with that demand, we think
we will get more cleaner energy. And listen----
Chairman Comer. Where is it going to come from?
Mr. Regan. I have been to Wyoming. I have been to North
Dakota, spent time with Governor Burgum. I have been to Wyoming
and spent time with Governor Gordon. They are doing it. There
is a facility in Texas, Petra Nova, that is doing it. So, the--
--
Chairman Comer. Are you concerned with the blackouts in
California, states that are growing? Or I do not know if
California is growing. There is a lot of people in California,
a lot more people in California than Wyoming and North Dakota.
Seems like the states like California are the ones that are
most at risk. And then with your new rules, it puts states like
Kentucky at risk.
Mr. Regan. We have thoroughly--along with DOE and FERC and
others, we have thoroughly evaluated the reliability. We are
talking about between now and 2031, 2032. We believe that we
can make this transition, get it done, even with the new
demands that are on the system.
By the way, DOE is investing tons of money into our grid to
make it smarter and more resilient. We have got an infusion of
dollars from BIL and IRA that would make our energy system much
stronger.
Chairman Comer. And I appreciate that, but I have been
asked by all my electric cooperatives in Kentucky--these are
not privately owned. These are cooperatives. Every single
cooperative in Kentucky is screaming at the top of their lungs
about your new proposals. They fear Kentucky is not going to be
able to comply. They fear that Kentucky--the energy rates, if
we eliminate fossil fuels, which is--90 percent of the
electricity in Kentucky is generated by fossil fuels. The cost
to consumers is going to be outrageous, and people who are
struggling now because of inflation are only going to have to
pay more for their utility bills.
So, I want to express that concern to you on behalf of all
my electric cooperatives in Kentucky.
My time has expired.
Mr. Regan. Chairman, can I offer----
Chairman Comer. Yes. Go ahead, please.
Mr. Regan [continuing]. For the electric co-ops? I have a
great respect for electric co-ops. I would love to have the
leadership of that co-op in Kentucky come in and----
Chairman Comer. They would love to talk to you. We will
make that happen.
Mr. Regan. OK. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. It does not appear we have any more
questioners.
So, in closing, I want to thank you, Administrator Regan,
for appearing here today and for your testimony.
I now yield to Ranking Member Raskin for closing remarks.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to make three points in closing. The first is
that Americans want the EPA to be doing more to stop climate
change, not less. And yet we heard from a number of our
colleagues on the GOP side today, as well as from Project 2025,
that EPA's rules are hurting Americans. But that is not the
perspective most Americans have. Most Americans want the EPA to
be doing more.
We have a philosophical difference or a scientific
difference. We believe that climate change is real and is a
dagger pointed at the throat of humanity. And too many of our
colleagues agree with the erudite gentlelady from Georgia who
calls climate scientists, and most Americans by extension,
climate cultists. We heard it twice from her today.
Well, if there are brainwashed cultists on the issue, it is
the people who are following the conspiracy theories of QAnon
and assert that scientists like Dr. Fauci are trying to invent
diseases. That is where the cultists come in.
Secondly, a number of our colleagues wanted to lecture you,
Administrator Regan, about the role of agencies which are, of
course, indispensable in implementing the will of Congress.
That is why Congress set up the EPA. That is why Congress set
up the National Labor Relations Board. That is why Congress set
up the Department of Justice. And our colleagues have no
problem using those agencies to get the things done they want
to do. If you read their Project 2025, they want the President
of the United States to be able to use the Department of
Justice for the first time in American history to go after his
political opponent----
Chairman Comer. Oh.
Mr. Raskin [continuing]. And to--well, if you disagree with
that, then I am delighted to hear it, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Comer. Which Department of Justice is going after
political opponents? The Merrick Garland Department of Justice
or the----
Mr. Raskin. Well, let us see, there is a case right now
against a Democratic Senator from New Jersey, Mr. Menendez.
There is a case right now against a Democratic Congressman from
Texas.
Chairman Comer. I see a pattern with Democrats.
Mr. Raskin. And--well, wait a second. Do not be too clever.
You are a smart man. But try to follow a principled argument.
You just claimed that the Department of Justice was somehow
biased against Republicans, and I am naming you cases where the
DOJ is going after Democrats. Your problem is the jury system
in New York which found unanimously that Donald Trump was
guilty of 34 criminal felonies. That has got nothing to do with
the Department of Justice.
Chairman Comer. Well, when the Department of Justice sends
the No. 3 guy down there to prosecute the case on behalf of
the----
Mr. Raskin. Which case are you referring to?
Chairman Comer. The Trump case that you just referred to.
Mr. Raskin. You are talking about the one, the district
attorney--District Attorney Bragg's case in New York?
Chairman Comer. The No. 3 guy went down to New York.
Mr. Raskin. OK. All right. We will have to take that up at
another point, but I am talking to you about what President
Trump--former President Trump says he wants to do. And if you
think it is outrageous, then I am delighted to hear it, that he
would use the Department of Justice----
Chairman Comer. No. I just thought it was--the part that
was outrageous, you say the Department of Justice under Trump
was going to be weaponized, when we believe that this
Department of Justice has been pretty darn weaponized.
Mr. Raskin. Well, what is the proof of that? I just named
you three cases where the Department of Justice is going after
Democrats. And, I mean, that is a very serious slur against the
Department of Justice and the Attorney General.
Chairman Comer. I stand by that.
Mr. Raskin. You stand by your slur then. Well, I would love
us to have a complete hearing then on whether or not it is
true, because I think it is wrong. And, in fact, really, it is
just setting the stage for Donald Trump to try to use the
Department of Justice as an instrument of persecution against
his political opponents, real or imagined.
Chairman Comer. We do not know if Donald Trump is going to
be President or not. Are you throwing in the towel, Mr. Raskin?
Mr. Raskin. No, no. I--well, I certainly hope he does not
try to steal the election the way he did last time, and I
hope----
Chairman Comer. So, you are in denial, Mr. Raskin?
Mr. Raskin. Oh, no, no. I do not deny it. I affirmed it.
Joe Biden beat him by more than 7 million votes, 306 to 232 in
the electoral college. We know that happened. And yet I hope
you are not an insurrection denier, because you were there with
me that day when they came in chanting, ``Hang Mike Pence.'' Do
you remember that?
Chairman Comer. I remember September--January the 6.
Mr. Raskin. Do you remember them chanting ``Hang Mike
Pence''----
Chairman Comer. I voted to certify.
Mr. Raskin [continuing]. Them trying to overthrow the
election?
Chairman Comer. Unlike you, I have never not voted to
certify an election.
Mr. Raskin. I am sorry?
Chairman Comer. Did you not vote to not certify the 2016
election?
Mr. Raskin. The 2016 election? I simply spoke against
irregularities.
Chairman Comer. Ah.
Mr. Raskin. I did not try to overthrow the Government of
the United States. I did not try to get the Vice President not
to do his job, and I did not even go to a Senator.
But in any case----
Chairman Comer. I have always voted to certify elections. I
just want to state that for the record.
Mr. Raskin. OK. So, then you would agree then that Donald
Trump lost the 2020 election?
Chairman Comer. I voted to certify the election. I have
said that a million times. When the 50 states----
Mr. Raskin. Did you say once that Donald Trump lost the
election?
Chairman Comer. I have said that. When the 50 states
certified the election, the election was over. Now, we have
gone over----
Mr. Raskin. No, I do not mind the diversion, Mr. Chairman.
But let me just say this. On the question of the agencies
in America, let us be clear about what the Supreme Court did.
What the Supreme Court said was, of course the agencies can
adopt rules and regulations. My friend from Colorado was really
mistaken about that. The agencies, even under their terrible
ruling, can continue to adopt and promulgate regulations and
rules under the notice and comment process we have.
But the Supreme Court then in this amazing power grab
irrigated to itself the power to determine whether or not an
ambiguous or silent statute should be interpreted this way or
that. So, it was a political power grab by the Court. That is
all that they did.
But Mr. Regan is doing his job. The EPA is doing its job.
The NLRB is doing its job. The Department of Justice is doing
the job. They have got to adopt rules that Congress told them
to. So, that was a power grab by the Court against the Congress
of the United States.
Now, what is interesting about Chevron is that that was a
6-0 decision that the conservatives supported because it was
giving Reagan Administration-era agency bureaucrats the right
to revisit the way that statutes were being interpreted from
the 1970's. They pushed for it then. Now they are saying they
do not want the agencies to have that power.
In any event, the people of America want you to have the
power to have muscular enforcement of our rules for clean air,
clean water, and clean climate.
I yield back to you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman yields back.
I will agree that the American people want clean air and
clean water, and I think that is why we have an EPA. That is
the role of the EPA, to ensure that we have clean air and clean
water. And the role of the EPA is to ensure that if there are
bad actors, people who pollute the water or pollute the air,
then they are to be held accountable.
The problem that we have with the EPA, on our side of the
aisle, and the problem that many industries in America have
with the EPA is we believe the EPA has overstepped its bounds.
We believe that many of the people in the EPA, career-type
people in the EPA, are interpreting the laws that Congress
passes in the way they want to interpret the law as opposed to
the way Congress intends for the law to be interpreted.
We fear that maybe the heart--your heart is in the right
place on a lot of things, but you do not take into
consideration the costs. We have a problem in this country. And
the No. 1 issue in this election--I think prior to the debate,
the No. 1 issue in this election is inflation. And a lot of the
laws and a lot of the rules that we believe EPA is
misinterpreting are having a significant cost on everyday
average working Americans.
If you look at what Mr. Burlison and I mentioned with
respect to wastewater with meat processing plants, our
processors, and our farmers. So, it is going to have a
significant impact on the cost of food. And we are talking
about Chicken McNuggets at McDonald's. We are talking about
chicken at Chick-Fil-A, and things like that, that average
working-class Americans go through the drive-thru after work
and----
Mr. Raskin. Chairman, forgive me. Do you know what the cost
of 10-piece Chicken McNuggets is today?
Chairman Comer. Well, I buy a lot of Chicken McNugget
meals.
Mr. Raskin. It is under $5. It is $4.49 at the closest one
you can get here. I mean, and Impossible Nuggets are even less.
Chairman Comer. So, there is no inflation at McDonald's,
Mr. Raskin. And I would say I spend more money at McDonald's
than any person in Congress, and I will stand by that. I will
testify under oath. My three kids----
Mr. Raskin. Well, we certainly do not mean to bankrupt you
with our environmental regulations when you go to McDonald's.
Chairman Comer. I want to share a story, Mr. Regan. Before
I came to Congress--I have been in Congress 8 years--I was
Commissioner of Agriculture in Kentucky. I am a farmer by
trade. And one of the first meetings I had, Federal-type
meetings I had when I was Commissioner of Agriculture, Gary
Black was Commissioner of Agriculture in Georgia. He was a
Commissioner at the same time I was Commissioner. Obviously, a
good buddy of mine.
He convened a meeting with all the ag commissioners that
were in District 4, in Atlanta. We went to Atlanta. And I
brought a farmer with me, a leader in agriculture in Kentucky.
His name was Wayne Hunt. And we were talking about some of the
new proposed rules on water nutrient testing. And we went into
this meeting--and I am a farmer by trade, and, you know, I had
no idea what to expect. We went in, and the Administrator at
that time--and this was under the Obama Administration--for
District 4 was there. And her, I guess, experts--you mentioned
world-class experts. There was a room full of people. And we
were talking about the costs of implementing this.
We were talking about the fact that if you test water and
you find nitrogen--you know, excessive levels of nitrogen, let
us say, that may not be from fertilizer. That could be from
sewage treatment plants. That could be from fertilizer from
golf courses that were on. You know, it did not necessarily
have to assume it was fertilizer from farmers, because it was,
you know, talk and suggestions to limit the amount of
fertilizer per acre and things like that which would--you know,
there is a direct correlation with the fertilizer and crop
yields and things like that. So, we were trying to explain
that.
There was not a single person in that room--and it was a
room of probably a dozen EPA employees, full-time employees.
Not a single one of those had ever had any type of agriculture
background. Not a single one of them had any type of
environmental science background. In fact, if memory serves me
right, the Administrator at that time for District 4 was a
career child prosecutor for the Atlanta DA before she was named
EPA Administrator. And we asked her, you know, how she got to
be EPA Administrator, and she said, well, I care about the
environment. Well, we all care about the environment.
But we fear on this side of the aisle that there are rules
being made by people who may not have any idea how that rule
would affect food production or how that would affect
inflation, how that would affect the taxpayers. We all want
clean air and clean water, but we want some common sense used
in trying to achieve this.
So, I just want to remind you, Mr. Regan, that your rules
and regulations impact a lot of people. We support efforts to
preserve and protect the environment.
The Ranking Member and many of his colleagues mentioned
climate change. I do not think a single one of our members
mentioned climate change until I just said it now.
We want the EPA to abide by the rules of Congress and not
take orders from left-wing climate extremists, because that is
what we fear is happening now.
So, we want to continue to communicate. We want to work
with you. We share the same overall objective, a clean
environment and holding bad actors accountable for polluting
our streams and our air, but we also have to take into effect
the costs and the practicality. I mean, we have to have more
electricity production. We do not believe your rule and your
objectives are going to achieve that.
So, thank you for being here today, sir. We appreciate your
testimony.
And with that and without objection, all members have 5
legislative days within which to submit materials and
additional written questions for the witness which will be
forwarded to the witness.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:48 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[all]
