- OVERSEEING THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES' COMPLIANCE WITH CONGRESS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSEEING THE DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES'
COMPLIANCE WITH CONGRESS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SELECT SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CORONAVIRUS
PANDEMIC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND
ACCOUNTABILITY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JANUARY 31, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-88

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-769 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Michael Cloud, Texas                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Ro Khanna, California
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Katie Porter, California
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Cori Bush, Missouri
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Jimmy Gomez, California
Byron Donalds, Florida               Shontel Brown, Ohio
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
William Timmons, South Carolina      Robert Garcia, California
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Maxwell Frost, Florida
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Greg Casar, Texas
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Dan Goldman, New York
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Nick Langworthy, New York            Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
Eric Burlison, Missouri
Mike Waltz, Florida

Mark Marin, Staff Director
Mitchell Benzine, Subcommittee Staff Director
Marie Policastro, Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5074

Miles Lichtman, Minority Staff Director

Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Select Subcommittee On The Coronavirus Pandemic

Brad Wenstrup, Ohio, Chairman
Nicole Malliotakis, New York         Raul Ruiz, California, Ranking
Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa           Minority Member
Debbie Lesko, Arizona                Debbie Dingell, Michigan
Michael Cloud, Texas                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
John Joyce, Pennsylvania             Deborah Ross, North Carolina
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Robert Garcia, California
Ronny Jackson, Texas                 Ami Bera, California
Rich Mccormick, Georgia              Jill Tokuda, Hawaii

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on January 31, 2024.................................     1

Witnesses

----------

Hon. Melanie Egorin, Assistant Secretary for Legislation, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services
Oral Statement...................................................     6

Written opening statements and the written statements of the
witnesses are available on the U.S. House of Representatives
Document Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

* Article, The Wall Street Journal, ``Chinese Lab Mapped Deadly
Coronavirus''; submitted by Rep. Miller-Meeks.

* Letter, to the SSCP from HHS; submitted by Rep. Ross.

* Letter Response, to SSCP from HHS; submitted by Rep. Ross.

* Letter, from the SSCP to Centers for Disease Control;
submitted by Rep. Jackson.

Documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

OVERSEEING THE DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES'
COMPLIANCE WITH CONGRESS

----------

Wednesday, January 31, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Oversight and Accountability

Select Subcommittee on the Coronavirus Pandemic

Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Brad Wenstrup
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Wenstrup, Miller-Meeks, Lesko,
Joyce, Jackson, McCormick, Ruiz, Dingell, Mfume, Ross, Garcia,
and Tokuda.
Dr. Wenstrup. Good morning. The Select Subcommittee on the
Coronavirus Pandemic will come to order. Welcome everyone, and
without objection the Chair may declare a recess at any time.
I now recognize myself for the purpose of making an opening
statement.
We are here today to examine the Department of Health and
Human Services' compliance with the Select Subcommittee's
oversight requests.
I am sorry we are even having this hearing today. It is
unexpected because of the expectations that agencies will work
with Congress openly and transparently on behalf of the
American people.
It is time the Department answered some questions. We tried
once before. As you know we issued a subpoena for your
deposition, but the Department assured us things would improve
and your testimony was unnecessary.
The Department's compliance has not improved. To this day,
your Department continues to stonewall this Subcommittee. The
Department has produced documents with unnecessary and some
illegitimate redactions. As you can see on the screen, the
Department redacted every name in this document, even foreign
nationals. When asked why, we were told it was because of
security concerns. When asked how the Department knew these
individuals had security concerns, the Department was unable to
provide an answer.
The Department has produced documents that are simply
unrelated to our requests. You have produced documents that are
not relevant to our requests or hundreds of pages of news
articles. This is unacceptable and simply seems to be a tactic
to inflate your production page count, which I am sure you will
tell us about today.
And maybe most shockingly, the Department's failure to
produce documents we know are in your possession. Again, on the
screen is a document that the Oversight Committee made public 2
years ago. The email has yet to be produced to this
Subcommittee. I can't understand why. You know it exists. You
know how to find it. The fact this hasn't been produced raises
serious questions and implies the Department is intentionally
trying to withhold something or hide something.
Regarding interviews, we do appreciate that Department
employees have chosen to voluntarily comply with our requests.
I will state that the Subcommittee accepted every single date
that the Department proposed. Despite this compliance, the
Department and all your lawyers have routinely attempted to
hinder witness testimony. The night before each interview, you
personally issue a memo to the Subcommittee and the witness,
instructing the witness as to what they can and cannot testify
to.
HHS has blocked witnesses from discussing the EcoHealth
Alliance grant reinstatement. We wonder why.
HHS has blocked witnesses from discussing EcoHealth's
current grant status. We wonder why.
HHS has blocked witnesses from discussing COVID mitigation
measures. We wonder why.
HHS has blocked witnesses from discussing internal
communications. Why?
And HHS has blocked a witness from discussing anything he
did through his official capacity at NIAID. Again, why?
This Select Subcommittee was formed with the intent of
performing an after-action review of everything that happened
during the pandemic, where 1.2 million American lives were
lost. We want to know what we did well, what we could do better
in the future, and how to prepare for the future. Hiding what
was done does not help.
Is HHS funded by someone other than the American people's
taxpayer dollars? No. I hope not. This is acting in bad faith
at best and a violation of law at worst.
I have read your opening statement, and frankly it is
somewhat insulting. There are no significantly relevant facts
or data in there. There are no explanations for the questions
you know we have. In fact, it raises more questions than it
does answers.
In it, you boast about producing more than 30,000 pages to
Congress during the 118th Congress. Curiously, during the 117th
Congress, in a similar amount of time, the Department produced
more than 43,000 pages to one Oversight subcommittee alone.
What changed? What changed besides who is in the majority in
the House? Was it no longer in the Department's interest to be
overly compliant? And if not, why?
You say the Department has been ``exceptionally
responsive'' to the Subcommittee. I think we could contest that
assertion and perhaps we have a different definition of
exceptional. That could be.
On February 13, 2023, we sent a letter regarding the
origins of COVID-19. It has taken two follow-up letters, two
staff meetings, subpoena threats, and scheduling interviews to
begin receiving unique documents, documents that belong to the
American people, and documents that Congress should have easy
access to.
Out of the 10,000 pages produced, of which I would note
more than 1,000 were produced last night, just last night, the
majority of the documents are previously publicly available,
some are more redacted than FOIA productions, others are non-
responsive to the questions, or copies of press articles.
On March 10, 2023, we sent a letter regarding the process
of approving the COVID-19 vaccine. We received fewer than 300
pages more than a month later and have not received any
documents since. Common sense, in reviewing them, would suggest
that there are more that we have not received.
On March 28, 2023, we sent a letter regarding the Biden
Administration's school opening guidance. It took two follow-
ups, a subpoena threat, and scheduling transcribed interviews
before the Department was compliant.
On August 1, 2023, we sent a letter regarding the
implementation of COVID-19 vaccine mandates. You have not
produced a single document on that.
On August 2, 2023, we sent a letter regarding CDC Director
Cohen's statement about annual COVID-19 boosters. Again, you
have not produced a single document.
On August 23, 2023, we sent a letter regarding the illegal
Chinese lab in California. You produced fewer than 100 pages
that were all previously publicly available. Did you have no
internal documents concerning this issue?
On September 6, 2023, we sent a letter regarding former CDC
Director Walensky's override of booster recommendations. You
have produced about 100 pages that are all already available on
the CDC's website. You may as well just have sent us the link,
as to the number of pages you sent us.
And on October 13, 2023, we were forced to subpoena records
regarding a NIAID employee's use of personal email. You said
you were prevented from producing documents because it was an
internal investigation--an excuse that is not founded in fact.
We are conducting an investigation. We have oversight over
HHS. Our investigation overrides your internal investigation.
Understand that going forward.
This is not a track record of exceptionalism, in my mind.
This is not a track record of competence. And this is certainly
not a track record of compliance or transparency.
Dr. Egorin, compliance with Congress is not voluntary. Time
and time again we hear the Department is providing witnesses or
documents ``voluntarily.'' And while that may be legally
accurate, and appreciated when they do it, it provides the
perception that you believe that you have a choice. You do not.
Congress created your agency. Congress funds your agency
through the generosity of the American taxpayer, and that is
who you serve. And Congress has the absolute right to oversee
your agency on behalf of the American people, and they know
that.
Barry Goldwater said, ``The Constitution is not an
instrument for the government to restrain the people. It is an
instrument for the people to restrain the government.'' I think
that is where we are.
I hope we can get answers today and get back to the work on
behalf of the American people, the same American people who
lost 1.2 million loved ones because of COVID.
This is an after-action review of the government response
to the COVID-19 pandemic. It should not be partisan. It should
not be controversial. But it needs to be based on facts, facts
that you have that we are not getting. And the Department's
honesty and cooperation is non-negotiable.
I would now like to recognize Ranking Member Ruiz for the
purpose of making an opening statement.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I respectfully disagree
with the Chairman's implied accusations and sentiment here.
I would like to begin by thanking Assistant Secretary
Egorin for her participation in today's hearing. I have had the
pleasure of working with Assistant Secretary Egorin on numerous
fronts, and she has been nothing but forthcoming and
cooperative in all aspects of our work together.
Select Subcommittee Democrats are appreciative of your
willingness to voluntarily appear today, which no doubt has
required a significant dedication of time and resources, and
for your continued engagement with the Committee.
It is evident to me that today's hearing is not about
enhancing our understanding of COVID-19's origins, advancing
our Nation's pandemic preparedness, or addressing the public
health challenges our Nation currently faces. It is not even
about meaningfully resolving any of the issues that the
Majority has alleged when it comes to the Department's
responsiveness to their requests. It is about political
theater. It is about painting the Biden Administration as,
quote/unquote, ``stonewalling'' the Committee in a venue that
is better suited for soundbites than identifying a path forward
and negotiations regarding document productions.
So, let's just be clear about why we are here today,
because the fact of the matter is over the last year the
Department has operated in good faith with the Select
Subcommittee, consistently providing documents responsive to
the majority's requests, and making Department officials
available for more than 80 hours of voluntary transcribed
interviews. In total, the Department has made more than 30
productions of internal documents, communications, and
information responsive to the majority's requests, including
two dozen productions as part of the majority's probe into Dr.
Fauci alone. These productions have been made voluntarily,
consistently, and with a demonstrated effort to satisfy the
majority's identified priorities.
For example, every week for 5 consecutive weeks the
Department has made productions responsive to priorities
identified by my colleagues on the other side of the aisle,
with each production meeting an interim deadline set by the
Majority. And over the course of the Congress the Department
has also made significant accommodations for the Select
Subcommittee, including providing copious details about its
document collection process and arranging in-camera review of
the information underneath the redactions.
Furthermore, all while constantly churning out productions,
the Department has made 12 current and former officials
available for voluntary transcribed interviews, totaling more
than 80 hours of testimony. So, this doesn't exactly sound like
stonewalling to me.
Look, I understand that in the oversight process there are
disagreements between Congress and the executive branch, two
co-equal branches of government, may arise. However, to
characterize the Department's behavior as intentional
obstruction when it has, time and time again, been responsive
to this Committee's requests is a gross politically calculated
mischaracterization.
Furthermore, by holding this hearing today the majority has
made it clear that they are more interested in these political
accusation soundbites than they are in reaching resolution on
the issues they allege have taken place. Simply put, this
hearing is little more than a distraction from the fact that
the majority has failed to accomplish anything to improve the
lives of the American people and has chosen politically
motivated probes over advancing constructive policies that
promote our Nation's public health and pandemic preparedness.
Under the guise of determining COVID-19's origins, the
majority has pursued a politically motivated probe, vilifying
our Nation's public health officials, and politicizing the
intelligence community in the process. And at the end of the
day our Nation is no better for it. In no way has this probe
enhanced our understanding of how COVID-19 actually came to be,
and in no way has it made our country better prepared for the
next pandemic, and in no way has it promoted our Nation's
public health.
I have repeatedly and earnestly called for this Select
Subcommittee to change course because I am deeply concerned
that we are wasting critical hours, days, months, years,
failing to adequately protect our Nation from the next public
health crisis. Six months ago, I wrote a letter expressing my
concern about the directions we were heading in, and now, as we
sit here today, we have pandemic prevention and preparedness
programs expiring under PAHPA. We have a debilitating distrust
in our Nation's public health systems as manufactured, and we
have childhood vaccination rates at an all-time low. And at the
very same time we have a majority in the House trying to make
extreme cuts to vital public health programs at the very time
we need them most.
So, I hope that going forward the Majority will set aside
their efforts to distort the facts and create a false narrative
for partisan gain. Only then will we be able to get to work
that really matters, putting people over politics to save lives
and reduce harm, both now and in the future.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. Our witness today is Dr. Melanie Egorin. Did
I pronounce that correctly?
Dr. Egorin. You did, sir.
Dr. Wenstrup. I did. OK. It is E-GOR-in.
Dr. Egorin is the Assistant Secretary for Legislation at
the Department of Health and Human Services.
Pursuant to the Committee on Oversight and Accountability
Rule 9(g), the witness will please stand and raise her right
hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony that you
are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
Dr. Egorin. I do.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Let the record show that the
witness answered in the affirmative.
The Select Subcommittee certainly appreciates you for being
here today, and we look forward to your testimony.
Let me remind the witness that we have read your written
statement, and that will appear in full in the hearing record.
But please limit your oral statement to 5 minutes.
As a reminder, please press the button on the microphone in
front of you so that it is on, and the Members can hear you.
When you begin to speak the light in front of you will turn
green. After 4 minutes the light will turn yellow. When the red
light comes on your 5 minutes has expired, and we would ask
that you please wrap up.
I now recognize Dr. Egorin to give an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MELANIE EGORIN

ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR LEGISLATION

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

Dr. Egorin. Chair Wenstrup, Ranking Member Ruiz, and
Members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to
testify on behalf of the Department of Health and Human
Services. I am Melanie Anne Egorin, the Assistant Secretary for
Legislation at HHS. Prior to coming to HHS, I spent more than
15 years working in Congress and at the Government
Accountability Office, including almost a decade as
professional staff for the Committee on Ways and Means.
I have a deep appreciation for the important work of
Congress and the critical role that oversight plays in the
effective functioning of our government. I believe it is vital
for Congress to ask questions about current policies and
programs to improve their integrity, our health care system,
and the overall health of the Nation.
HHS's mission is to enhance the health and well-being of
all Americans. We accomplish this mission every day by
providing effective health and human services and by fostering
sound, sustained advances in the sciences underlying health,
medicine, and the social services.
HHS provides access to health care coverage for more than
100 million Americans through Medicare, Medicaid, the
Children's Health Insurance Program, and the Health Insurance
Marketplaces. We also provide vital services through Indian
Health Service, federally qualified health centers, and the
U.S. Public Health Service. We protect Americans from health,
safety, and security threats, both foreign and domestic, and we
oversee the safety, effectiveness, and quality of foods, drugs,
vaccines, and medical devices.
I also appreciate the opportunity to highlight the hard
work of the Department, health care professionals, essential
workers, and everyone involved in the whole-of-government
approach to combatting COVID-19. We are using everything that
we have learned during the emergency to strengthen our public
health infrastructure, to be better prepared for future
emergencies.
HHS will continue to work to ensure Americans are safe and
have access to care and support they need. Under the Biden-
Harris Administration, we have administered more than 7 million
COVID vaccines, launched the 9-8-8 lifeline, and a record-
breaking 21.3 million Americans enrolled in affordable health
care through the ACA's Marketplace just this year. As you can
see, the HHS programs touch the lives of all Americans.
HHS regularly interacts with Congress and responds to
congressional requests. This includes a wide array of work in
support of Congress' legislative agenda. The Office of the ASL
provides technical assistance to support policy and legislative
developments, facilitates thousands of grants, assists Members
of Congress and their staff with constituent services. And to
that end, my office serves as the primary link between the
Department and Congress, which includes facilitating responses
to congressional oversight.
HHS recognizes and appreciates the importance of
congressional oversight, and we are committed to continuing to
work with Congress in good faith. Given the breadth of the
programs we administer, HHS receives inquiries from virtually
every Member and regularly receives a variety of oversight
requests from multiple committees in both the House and Senate.
Since the 118th Congress began, the Department has sent
more than 100 letters responding specifically to oversight
inquiries, produced more than 30,000 pages of documents in
response to oversight requests, and responded to a number of
other congressional requests for information and assistance.
Department officials have testified at multiple oversight
hearings and provided briefings in connection with a wide range
of oversight inquiries. We are also actively responding to over
140 ongoing GAO engagements, and committed to improving by
closing 120 GAO recommendations this Congress alone.
In responding to the substantial volume of congressional
oversight requests we engage in the constitutionally mandated
process of accommodation, seeking to balance Congress'
interests consistent with executive branch interests, while
working within and being very mindful of the inevitable
resource constraints facing the Department.
As you know, we have been actively engaging with this
Subcommittee regarding multiple oversight requests. We have
worked to identify and produce documents and information
prioritized by the Subcommittee as effectively as we are able.
In all instances, the Department has worked to understand
Subcommittee's priorities and target our efforts effectively.
To date we have produced 35 productions totaling more than
10,000 pages, including a production just this week, as you
noted, Dr. Wenstrup. We have facilitated participation of more
than a dozen current and former employees, and produced nearly
100 hours of briefings, interviews, and testimoneys before the
Subcommittee, all touching on a wide variety of topics.
I believe my testimony today reflects that HHS has a
demonstrated record of working diligently across a broad range
of oversight requests from Congress, including this
Subcommittee, and is committing to continuing to engage in good
faith.
I would be happy to answer your questions.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. I now recognize myself for
questions, and I want to start with some overarching questions
regarding your office and your procedures. I have a number of
questions. Just a yes or no will suffice.
But during the 118th Congress have there been any
discussions, written or verbal, about not responding to
congressional oversight?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, we have been responsive to
congressional----
Dr. Wenstrup. Just yes or no. Have there been discussions,
written or verbal, about not responding to congressional
oversight? I know what we have received from you, but have----
Dr. Egorin. So, Congressman----
Dr. Wenstrup [continuing]. There been discussions.
Dr. Egorin. There have been discussions on how to respond
and how to meet the priorities of the Subcommittee.
Dr. Wenstrup. Have there been any discussions about
providing only previously public documents?
Dr. Egorin. There have been conversations about how to
respond to the Committee in an effective manner and what we can
do to be----
Dr. Wenstrup. Well, obviously you are not going to answer
my question specifically, and let that be seen for the record
that you are really not answering.
I hope you have had conversations. I really do.
Dr. Egorin. We----
Dr. Wenstrup. But I am asking specifically, have there been
any discussions about providing only previously public
documents?
Dr. Egorin. There have been conversations about how to be
responsive to----
Dr. Wenstrup. Previously public documents.
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, it is about what documents----
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. I am going to move on because
clearly you are not going to answer the question.
Have there been any discussions about delaying production
to run out the clock of this Congress?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, we continue to produce documents
every 10 days, on average.
Dr. Wenstrup. Still not answering my questions. Thank you.
I want to run through a few of our letters and attempts to
get a better understanding of your process in action. And let
me explain something to you. I consider this the most important
thing I have done in my now 12th year in Congress--1.2 million
American people died. The process of our government is very,
very important. I will tell you that Dr. Fauci, when he came in
for his transcribed interview, gave us some information about
the process concerning grants, for example. It was very
revealing, and I appreciate his openness and honesty in that,
because we are going to recommend a better process for the next
time. That is how important this is. So, if you don't want to
answer my questions about process, that is fine, but I am going
to continue to ask them, and the record will show that you are
not answering.
But let's go to this. On February 13, 2023, we sent the
Department our first letter regarding COVID-19's origins. We
then sent follow-ups in October and November. When did the
Department first identify responsive custodians?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, we produced our first set of
documents to your request in February, within 2 weeks.
Dr. Wenstrup. When did the Department first identify
responsive custodians?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, we produced documents responsive
to your request within 2 weeks.
Dr. Wenstrup. OK. I am sure I will get this same answer in
my next question. When did the Department first conduct
custodial interviews?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, we produced documents that have
been ongoing and responsive to your request.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thus far, in 12 months, the Department has
produced about 10,000 pages, of which a significant portion are
simply unresponsive to the questions, previously publicly
available, or just news articles. Is this the entirety of
responsive documents in the Department's possession?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, we have worked to continue to
produce, as you noted, producing documents even within the past
24 hours, to make sure we are being responsive, and we continue
to work with your staff to prioritize documents, to make sure
we are being responsive to the priorities of the Subcommittee.
Dr. Wenstrup. Pursuant to the Subcommittee's letter, how
many potentially responsive documents has the Department
identified?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, we continue to produce documents
in a timely manner, and as you noted, being mindful of the
taxpayer, and making sure we are producing documents based on
the priorities, effectively and----
Dr. Wenstrup. OK. Well, how about this, Doctor. Would you
like to take that question for the record and get back to us?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, I am happy to take that question.
Dr. Wenstrup. OK. Let me repeat it. Pursuant to the
Subcommittee's letter, how many potentially responsive
documents has the Department identified?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, I do not have that number in front
of me. I am happy to continue that conversation.
Dr. Wenstrup. OK. And maybe the next one can be for the
record. Let's just go down this, rather than you giving us the
same answer that doesn't answer the question.
How many have gone through review?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, I do not have that----
Dr. Wenstrup. Do you want to take that for the record?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, I am happy to continue to answer
your questions.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Would you take that for the
record? Yes or no.
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, if it is submitted as a question
for the record, we are happy to be responsive.
Dr. Wenstrup. It will be. Do you commit to produce every
responsive document in the Department's possession?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, what I commit to you is to
continue to work with the Department--to work with the staff's
priorities, and to continue to do productions as long as the
Committee is----
Dr. Wenstrup. So, you don't commit to produce every
responsive document in the Department's possession, because
that is not an answer.
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, I commit to continue to work with
you to make sure that we are producing documents based on the
priorities of the Committee, of the Subcommittee, and that we
will continue to produce documents and continue to have this
conversation.
Dr. Wenstrup. But you don't guarantee that every responsive
document in your possession will be produced.
Dr. Egorin. Cong----
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. No, you have answered it. You can
say it over and over again. The record is going to reflect your
answer. That is fine.
On March 10, 2023, we sent the FDA a letter regarding the
approval of the Pfizer COVID vaccine. To date, we have received
only 274 pages. Is this the entirety of responsive documents in
the Department's possession?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, as you noted we did produce
documents, and we are happy, if that is a priority for the
Subcommittee, to go back and continue to work with your
Committee to respond to that request.
Dr. Wenstrup. So, there may be more documents that you
could produce.
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, with the limited resources that we
have, and being mindful of the taxpayer dollars and priorities
of the Subcommittee, we can come back and reevaluate the
priorities.
Dr. Wenstrup. Well, so pursuant to that letter from March
10, 2023, how many potentially responsive documents has the
Department identified and maybe you would like to take that one
for the record, as well.
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, I am happy to take that back.
Dr. Wenstrup. OK. And how many have gone through review? I
would imagine that would have to be something that you will get
back to us on.
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, I am here to speak about our
responsiveness across the Department, consistent with my role,
and----
Dr. Wenstrup. I am here to ask you about process and where
you are in the process. If you can't answer it, that is fine.
If you have to take it for the record, then please do so.
Dr. Egorin. Congressman----
Dr. Wenstrup. But you should be able to do that because it
should be documented, filed, et cetera.
Do you commit to produce every responsive document in the
Department's possession?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, what I can commit to you is to
produce documents based on the prioritization. And I do want to
set the record straight, that some of the requests that we got
were incredibly broad and included search terms such as
``lab,'' ``nature,'' ``teleconference.'' If you think about the
breadth and depth of an organization that has 90,000 employees,
that is boiling the ocean. So, that is why we worked with your
staff to prioritize and understand----
Dr. Wenstrup. Doctor, we limited it to 12 employees, so
that makes a huge difference from what you were just telling
the American people. And you should know that, and I think you
do know that.
On October 13, 2023, we issued a subpoena to the Department
after it failed to produce requested documents relating to Dr.
David Morens' potentially illegal deposition--disposition,
excuse me--illegal disposition of Federal records and evasion
of transparency laws. You sent a letter in response. In your
letter you state that the release of documents pertaining to
this internal investigation would jeopardize the Department's
investigation.
What is the current status of the Department's
investigation of Dr. Morens?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, I cannot speak to internal
investigations and timelines, but I am happy to get back to you
with that----
Dr. Wenstrup. Who can speak to the internal investigation?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, internal personnel investigations,
or investigations, are not something I can speak to in this
forum.
Dr. Wenstrup. Who can?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, I am happy to get back to you.
Dr. Wenstrup. Please do, because we are conducting an
investigation as well, and we override your investigation.
Does Congress have the authority to investigate potential
Federal records violations?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, Congress has a right to
investigate and oversee Federal law.
Dr. Wenstrup. Yes, thank you. You just answered my next
question. Congress has jurisdiction over this.
Can you produce the Department policy that says you are
unable to produce these records while there is an internal
investigation?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, I can take that back and see what
materials will be responding to that request.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Final topic I want to ask about is regarding the
Department's authorization memos prior to transcribed
interviews. When did this practice begin, that the Department
had to authorize?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, it is a longstanding practice of
the Department, going back multiple administrations, to provide
authorization memos to current and former employees, reflecting
the conversations and accommodation process between the
Committee and the Department.
Dr. Wenstrup. Do you approve each memo?
Dr. Egorin. I review and sign each memo.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Prior to issuance, does this
Subcommittee have the opportunity to agree with the memo?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, the memos reflect the
communications between the Committee and the Department, and
the authorization memos reflect the accommodations and serve as
guidance, and that is why they are shared with both the
employee as well as with the Committee.
Dr. Wenstrup. OK. The screen shows the memo prior to the
interview with Dr. Morens. In it you instruct Dr. Morens not to
provide any information regarding his official work at NIAID.
You signed this memo. Did you personally approve it?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, anything coming out with my
signature reflects the Department's position, and I read
everything I sign.
Dr. Wenstrup. According to Section 7211 of Title 5 of the
U.S. Code, the rights of employees, individually or
collectively, to petition Congress or a Member of Congress, or
to furnish information to either House of Congress or to a
Committee or Member thereof may not be interfered with or
denied.
Are the instructions in these memos advisory or are they
mandatory for the witnesses to follow?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, these memos reflect the guidance
based on the scope that is agreed to between the Subcommittee
or Committee and the Department. So, they are advisory,
reflecting the conversations, so that the employee understands
the conversations that happened between the Department and the
Committee regarding the scope of the conversation.
Dr. Wenstrup. Well, I would tell you that regardless, it
seems the Department counsel treats these memos as mandatory,
and I think there is an argument to be made that even by
issuing them the Department is intimidating witnesses and
interfering with their testimony, in violation of the law. And
I hope this practice, regardless of administration, no matter
which administration, no matter which party, I hope that that
comes to an end.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Dr. Ruiz, from
California, for questions.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you. Once again, I respectfully disagree
with the implied accusations through these assumptions.
Assistant Secretary Egorin, to ensure that it is abundantly
clear for the record, I would like to quickly walk through the
efforts you and your colleagues at the Department have made to
work cooperatively and constructively with the Select
Subcommittee this Congress.
Could you briefly explain how many productions of internal
documents and communications you have made to the Select
Subcommittee during the 118th Congress?
Dr. Egorin. Yes. During the 118th Congress we have made 35
productions. That is 1 approximately every 10 days, for a total
of over 10,000 pages.
Dr. Ruiz. So, 1 out of 10 days you have been working with
this Committee and producing these productions, and that is a
total of how many pages?
Dr. Egorin. Ten thousand pages.
Dr. Ruiz. Ten thousand pages. And you made these
productions on a wide range of topics, spanning from federally
funded research to the process of reopening schools to the
authorization of COVID-19 boosters. Isn't that right?
Dr. Egorin. That is correct.
Dr. Ruiz. The Department has also worked to make a dozen
current and former Federal officials available for more than 80
hours of testimony. Correct?
Dr. Egorin. That is correct.
Dr. Ruiz. And in this Select Subcommittee your staff has
worked to facilitate the testimony of former CDC Director
Rochelle Walensky, Assistant Secretary for Global Affairs Loyce
Pace, and your testimony here today. Isn't that correct?
Dr. Egorin. That is correct.
Dr. Ruiz. OK. And just to confirm, you made all these
efforts on a voluntary basis. Correct?
Dr. Egorin. Yes. All of these have been voluntary.
Dr. Ruiz. As Ranking Member of the Select Subcommittee I
have called for a focus on the forward-looking work of
preventing and preparing for future pandemics since the outset
of the Congress. But instead of doing this work our first
hearing of the new year is focused on creating a false
narrative, the implied accusations based on these assumptions
that we hear of obstruction for Republicans' partisan gain.
So, let me be clear. This is not putting people over
politics. This is putting politics over people and the
critically important work of preparing for future pandemics.
So, Assistant Secretary Egorin, while we have you, I would
like to discuss this work, including the Department's ongoing
efforts to implement provisions Democrats passed in the 2023
Consolidated Appropriations Act. What steps has HHS taken to
strengthen biosafety and address national security threats in
biomedical research?
Dr. Egorin. Thank you for that question because we are
working diligently across the Department and across the
government to implement those provisions. That includes making
sure we are looking at education, we are looking at
coordination, and we are focusing on the investments that
Congress gave the Department, and we are greatly appreciative
of.
Dr. Ruiz. And what steps has HHS taken to prevent, control,
and respond to the emergency of zoonotic diseases?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, we have followed similar steps,
and one of the things coming out of the COVID pandemic and
other lessons learned is really looking at how we do better at
data collection and coordination across the Department.
Dr. Ruiz. You know, I think that is very important to
really emphasize here, because again, right now the truth of
the matter is, is that there is no consensus as to whether this
leaked from a lab or whether it was a zoonotic origin. And the
point is that we should be focusing on what the Administration
is doing to help prevent a future pandemic, whether it is a lab
leak or whether it is zoonotic, and that we should really
systematically bolster our efforts to really prevent the spread
of emerging viruses that can cause devastation like COVID-19.
So, let me ask you, are there additional ways, thinking
forward looking, concrete, pragmatic, solutions-oriented ways
that Congress could support the Department's ongoing efforts to
prevent and prepare for future pandemics?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, thank you for that question, and I
think one of the best things Congress could do is reauthorize
PAHPA and the support that that provides to states and local
governments for response, as well as the investments that it
makes and lessons that are learned from COVID and other
pandemics on how we can be better prepared in the future.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you. I hope that in the remaining time,
which is actually less than half of the time we have left this
Congress, the Select Subcommittee can change course and focus
on the constructive, bipartisan work of fortifying our Nation
from future public health threats.
And with that I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Dr. Miller-Meeks, from Iowa,
for 5 minutes of questions.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for
this very important Committee. Thank you, Ms. Egorin, for
testifying today.
I am going to echo the Chairman's frustrations with HHS's
lack of compliance in requests from this Committee. To
reiterate, you and the Department are accountable to the
Oversight Committee, period. As a side note, I sent you a
letter pertaining to colorectal cancer screening tests, I would
say something very important, on September 1st of last year,
and have yet to receive confirmation of my letter, let alone a
response. It is both unfortunate and unacceptable that you and
HHS do not take your accountability to Congress, and by the
extension, to the American people, seriously.
As I am sure you know, during the early days of the
pandemic there was a massive shortage of personal protective
equipment, which highlighted the need to bolster our capability
to produce PPE domestically rather than relying on foreign
countries, especially China. In response, the Federal
Government committed almost $600 million to bring production
back to the United States.
I have heard concerns, however, that HHS is dragging its
feet on these contracts and is being unresponsive to grantees.
Oversight Committee staff reached out to your office on January
2d of this year to ask for a briefing on this issue,
specifically regarding one surgical glove manufacturer whose
contract may be in jeopardy and has been stonewalled by HHS. If
just one contract falls through, tens or even hundreds of
millions of dollars in taxpayer funds already spent on
onshoring efforts will have been wasted. While I am not
advocating for one company's products over another, I believe
that HHS has a responsibility to be responsive and
communicative with grantees for all initiatives.
Are you aware of this request on January 2 of this year,
and do you know why this seemingly simple request has not been
granted?
Dr. Egorin. Dr. Miller-Meeks, I am aware of that request,
and it is my understanding that there was a conversation even
yesterday between the staff about making sure we have that
briefing and that we find the right subject matter experts to
provide that briefing and work with them to make sure we are
not pulling them away from mission critical work but also being
responsive.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. So, then you are committing to this
Committee that you will have a briefing on the topic.
Dr. Egorin. Yes. We are working on coordinating a briefing
on the topic.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. To follow up where my colleague on the
other side of the aisle just mentioned, and you had mentioned
in response to Dr. Wenstrup, that this Committee had asked for
very broad topics--lab, nature, teleconference--are you aware
of this article in the Wall Street Journal from January 15,
2024, ``Chinese Lab Mapped Deadly Coronavirus Two Weeks Before
Beijing Told the World, Documents Show.'' In it you are quoted.
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, I am aware of that article, and
I believe the quote comes from a letter of response that we
sent back as part of an oversight inquiry.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. And you are aware that this Committee has
been meeting now, this is the second term that this Committee
has been meeting, and that we are researching origins of COVID-
19 and trying to prepare for the next pandemic, is it not
important if a genetic sequence was released on December 28th,
that that would be important to developing vaccines, important
to developing testing, and why was that information shared?
When did you know about the sequence, when did HHS know, and
why wasn't the Committee informed or Congress informed?
Dr. Egorin. So, Congresswoman, the documents related to
this and the letter that you quoted was when we informed
Congress, when we came across a responsive document. I believe,
and I need to double-check, that that was provided, hence the
letter with that. And as we continue to look at documents that
are responsive, we do come across new information, and that is
part of the reason we continue to do rolling production.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. So, you mentioned in this article that
you wrote last month to the Committee's Chair, Cathy McMorris
Rodgers, that Ren submitted--Dr. Ren of Chinese--the virus
sequence on December 28, 2019, to a genetic data base, GenBank,
run by the U.S. National Institutes of Health.
NIAID, as we know, funded EcoHealth, who is mentioned in
this article. Are you covering for EcoHealth and for NIAID?
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, I am not covering for EcoHealth
or NIAID. As I said when we came across a responsive document,
we provided it to, as you know, the Chairwoman of the Energy
and Commerce Committee, and we----
Dr. Miller-Meeks. But you have yet to say when you had
access to the document, when HHS knew of this, and why it was
not reported. I would say this is extraordinarily important to
preparing for the next pandemic. We know that there is
immediate disclosure of viruses that can lead to a worldwide
pandemic. This affected worldwide nature, 2 weeks before the
Chinese Communist Party released information, and they had
already alerted their own CDC. So, I find your response to be
lacking, and I think it, in fact, creates impediments to us,
going forward, to prepare for the next pandemic.
With that I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Mrs. Dingell, from Michigan,
for 5 minutes of questions.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am just going to
start by commenting on the Chairman's opening statement, where
you said that the Department has blocked testimony about the
reinstatement of the EcoHealth Alliance grant. I really want to
correct the record on that matter.
The facts are that we have heard nearly 80 hours of
voluntary testimony from 11 current or former HHS officials,
all who testified about the EcoHealth Alliance grant
reinstatement to the extent that they had knowledge about it.
We have interviewed the program officer responsible for
overseeing the grant, interviewed the two senior-level
officials responsible for reinstating the grant, and we were
briefed by two senior-level officials about the grant's
reinstatement months before conducting the transcribed
interviews.
So, I have got to say to you, I love my colleagues and I
want to work with my colleagues, but I am disappointed that we
are even having this hearing today because I keep repeatedly
hearing, over the course of this hearing how responsive the
Administration has been to the Select Committee, rather they
are not, and rather than working on real issues that could
improve the health and lives of the American people some on
this Select Subcommittee just want to score political points
rather than strengthening our Nation's health and safety. And I
really want to work with my colleagues on strengthening our
Nation's health and safety. We are going to get another
pandemic, and we need to be ready for it.
The reality is the COVID-19 pandemic upended our entire
nation and exemplified the importance of Americans having
access to quality health care. These are real, serious issues
we should be entirely focused on.
So, I am going to use my time today to discuss how we can
meaningfully lower health care costs for families across the
country. Just last week, President Biden announced that a
record-breaking 21.3 million Americans have enrolled in health
care coverage through the Affordable Care Marketplaces. This
has resulted in our Nation's uninsured rate reaching a historic
low. Thanks to lowered premiums under the American Rescue Plan
and renewed under the Inflation Reduction Act, more families
than ever before will be able to access the care that they
need, when they need it.
So, Assistant Secretary Egorin, how does expanded access to
health insurance coverage make for an overall healthier
population?
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, thank you for that question, and
those numbers last week were a really wonderful set of news,
especially as I think back toward my tenure when I worked as a
staffer and the threats that were place before the Affordable
Care Act.
Having health insurance, having the knowledge that people
could access care, is essential, and it is important. One of
the things that we worked bipartisanly on at the beginning of
the COVID pandemic--Dr. Wenstrup, as you mentioned, 1.2 million
people lost their lives--but one of the things we really
focused on during that period of time, and Congress
bipartisanly came together on, was how to make sure people
continued their health insurance during those days of
uncertainty, and it is nice to see us continue to build on
those accomplishments that we had.
Mrs. Dingell. So, if Congress were to make these lower
costs permanent, as my Democratic colleagues and I are pushing
for, how would that impact overall health outcomes in the
United States?
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, anything that can be done to
help people access care, to not delay care, to make sure that
they have the care that they need, when they need it, will lead
to better health outcomes.
Mrs. Dingell. I am going to--well, I am going to ask you
one more question. What would the consequences be if Congress
were to repeal this policy that was enacted under the Inflation
Reduction Act?
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, the ability to make health care
more affordable, to make people that are entrepreneurs and
working in jobs where the marketplace is the best source of
health care coverage for them, affordable in a similar way that
many of us benefit from job-connected health insurance, really
does show our commitment to making sure that people have health
care. And if it is not there, people will make the choice about
where their dollars go, and we might see uninsured numbers
increase.
Mrs. Dingell. Well, I thank you. Unfortunately, we know
that there are some who are all too eager to repeal these
health care plans without a plan to keep costs low and coverage
high for millions of people who rely on the marketplace for
coverage. I am very concerned that the negative consequences
could become a reality if some were to get their way in rolling
back these programs. We should be looking to build on this
progress, not turn back the clock, because at the end of the
day more expensive and less accessible health care would put us
at risk if we have another public health crisis like COVID.
People will not go to the doctor. It will spread.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Mrs. Lesko, from Arizona, for
5 minutes of questions.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Assistant Secretary
Egorin, Chairman Wenstrup is a very respected, rational
legislator, and he is not one to exaggerate. So, I have seen
him probably the most upset that I have seen him in this
Committee hearing. And when he says to me and the public, that
your Department of Health and Human Services has not been
responsive, I believe him, and I think everybody should believe
him because he is not somebody that just says things for
exaggeration. He is a very serious person.
My question to you, ma'am, is on August 23, 2023, this
Committee sent the Department of Health and Human Services a
letter regarding an illegal biolab in California. However, the
Committee received less than 50 documents after sending this
letter, all of which were already publicly available.
Were you aware that the Committee was seeking documents
responsive to biosafety, in particular labs in California?
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, I am aware that the Committee
sent a letter on August 23d, and then a subsequent letter in
September, and we produced documents in response to both of
those letters.
Mrs. Lesko. Did you ever identify responsive custodians,
and if so, when?
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, we produced responsive documents
to that request.
Mrs. Lesko. Can you answer the question?
Dr. Egorin. I am happy to take that question back.
Mrs. Lesko. How come you don't know anything? Aren't you in
charge of this? I mean, when the Chairman asked you questions
you don't know. You just say you will take it back. You don't
have a whole staff behind you that can give you the answers?
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, I am here in my role as the
Assistant Secretary for Legislation to talk about the
responsiveness, overall, of our----
Mrs. Lesko. Right, so you would think you would be
prepared. I would think you would be prepared. Obviously not.
When did the Department first conduct custodial interviews?
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, the documents were produced
within 2 weeks of the--I will double-check my math. I am sorry.
We produced within a month of receiving the first letter,
within 2 weeks of receiving the second letter.
Mrs. Lesko. Is that an answer to the when did the
Department first conduct custodial interviews?
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, what I am saying is we have been
responsive to this request and this information.
Mrs. Lesko. So, you don't know when you first did custodial
interviews?
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, I do not know the specific date.
I am here to talk about how we have been responsive and how we
have made sure that we have met the----
Mrs. Lesko. How many documents have you identified as
responsive?
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, I do not have that number before
me, but again, we have been responsive.
Mrs. Lesko. How many have gone through the review?
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, again we have produced
responsive documents.
Mrs. Lesko. I find it very hard to believe that somebody
that is in charge of this, that knows that they are coming in
front of the Committee that has, for a year, requested
information, knows nothing and will just get back to us, even
though you probably won't get back to us because you haven't
for a year.
And with that I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Mr. Mfume, from Maryland, for
5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Mfume. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Egorin, I
hope we don't have you yearning for the days of the Ways and
Means Committee and the kind of bipartisanship that you saw and
worked with through the pandemic. Sometimes, as you know,
having worked here on the Hill and having worked specifically
for a major committee, our balance is usually found in the
middle. It is not on either side, either extreme. So, I would
ask you to take today's questioning with a grain of salt, even
as my colleagues have barraged the Department of Health and
Human Services with inquiry after inquiry after inquiry.
In fact, this ongoing probe, which is a probe also of Dr.
Fauci, has provided more than 10,000 relevant documents, which
is an enormous amount of information, literature, and
documentation. And yet it does not ever seem to be enough. And
I understand your role, particularly on the legislative side,
but maybe we are better served by just having the Secretary in
and not putting you through this.
These questions are important. You know, the interests here
are very important. But it is not and should not be the role of
this Committee to berate witnesses, particularly after we have
received 10,000 documents of information, and I might add, of
which none of us have read all of them.
So, I am going to argue that we try to find a way to put
politics aside, that we prioritize supporting agencies, and
allow you a moment to talk to all of us about what you have
tried to do, over and over again, in response to the requests
and the admonitions of the Committee that you provide more and
more and more and more. I think there is another side to this,
and I would like to hear yours.
Dr. Egorin. Thank you very much, Congressman, and I want to
start by saying I loved my time on the Hill and being a
congressional staffer and working with Members. I love being
the Assistant Secretary for Legislation. It is a unique place
where I really get to serve both the executive branch and the
legislative branch. It is a unique intersection in
policymaking, and it is a chance to further the policy and
legislative goals of Congress.
One of the essential functions that the Office of the ASL
does is provide technical assistance for Members of Congress,
as they develop policy. So, in addition to the oversight
requests and in addition to the hearings that we take a lot of
time and consideration in preparing for, we also talk daily
with Members of Congress and their staff about how to make
legislation better, about how to make sure policymakers' intent
become those words that are passed into law, that then we are
implementing. And think about the bipartisan Safer Communities
Act. You can think about the Infrastructure and Jobs Act.
I am still very excited that we are implementing laws that
were passed when I was a congressional staffer, and doing it in
a way that is thoughtful, and receives the feedback not just of
Congress but of the stakeholders and partners that really are
impacted by the legislation that Congress passes and the
President signs into law, regardless of party.
In terms of our oversight responsiveness--and I want to
sort of draw back that this Subcommittee is part of a larger
body of oversight--we have 150 oversight letters that we have
been responsive to in just the 118th Congress. We have done
over 100 productions across both the House and the Senate. We
have done innumerable briefings and conversations with staff to
make sure that in response to oversight inquiries that Members
have the information they need to make policy better. And I
want to go back to that.
I started my career in D.C. at GAO, working on behalf of
Congress, getting to spend the time to really dig into how to
make health care programs work better for all Americans. It is
what brought me to the Hill and now brought me to the
Administration. So, I really hope nobody questions my
commitment to serving the American people and to serving this
body.
Mr. Mfume. Well, thank you. No, I don't think it is your
commitment that is being questioned. I do question, however,
the commitment of some Members of this body, the U.S. Congress,
that have proposed a $7.6 billion decrease in funding for the
Centers for Disease Control in the upcoming appropriations
package, and $3.6 billion cut in strategic preparedness, even
though we are talking about being prepared strategically for
another pandemic. So, sometimes we have to kind of make sure
that we are in line, our actions, with many of the questions
and the criticisms that we raise.
Thank you very much. I have exceeded my time. I yield back,
sir.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Just a point of order,
respectfully, Mr. Mfume. You said no one has read the 10,000
pages. Actually, our staff director has read all 10,000 pages,
except for maybe the records we got last night, and you have
read those as well.
I now recognize Dr. Joyce, from Pennsylvania, for 5 minutes
of questions.
Mr. Mfume. Mr. Chairman, point of clarification. I meant no
one on this Committee, those of us who are asking the questions
and hurling the accusations, has read all 10,000 documents.
Dr. Wenstrup. I appreciate that, and that is very factual,
I am sure, but our questions are coming from, in many ways, the
staff director who has read them all.
Dr. Joyce, you are recognized.
Dr. Joyce. Thank you, Chairman Wenstrup and Ranking Member
Ruiz, for holding today's hearing.
First and foremost, let's make it clear that Congress does,
in fact, have the authority over and oversight of executive
agencies. HHS exists because Congress created it, and continues
to fund it. Therefore, investigating this agency, and others,
and analyzing the manner in which they carry out United States
policy, during a pandemic, is paramount to the mission of this
Select Subcommittee.
The establishment of this Select Subcommittee is in direct
response to pandemic-era policies and the gross mishandlings of
them by unelected bureaucrats across those various agencies.
When those policies had adverse or harmful repercussions on the
American public it became the responsibility of this body to
seek accountability. When agencies like HHS refuse to cooperate
with request from Congress you are not only insulting this
institution, you are insulting and disrespecting the American
people. When agencies like HHS continuously express a wanton
disregard for the authority of this Congress it further
degrades what it means to have an open and a transparent
government. We cannot begin to move forward for the American
people until we have a clear place to start.
As the elected public servants, we are beholden to the
American people. It is the responsibility of this Select
Subcommittee to investigate, to learn, and to further establish
a path forward when agencies refuse to comply. By doing this
you have set an unacceptable standard for what might follow.
The American people want, and the American people deserve
answers from this Subcommittee and from executive agencies, and
they deserve to know what we intend to do to safeguard our
Nation and protect our citizens from the next global and public
health emergency.
And it is not just this COVID Select Subcommittee that HHS
has been stonewalling. I have the unique obligation and
responsibility of serving on this Select Subcommittee, but I
also serve on the Committee of Energy and Commerce. Both this
Select Subcommittee on the origins of COVID and Energy and
Commerce have been ignored repeatedly by requests to HHS. The
American people want that transparency. So, my questions are
going to be straightforward and very simple.
Assistant Secretary Egorin, yes or no, do you believe that
the Department of Health and Human Services is immune to any
requests for information by this conference?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, we have shown a good faith
accommodation to work with this Subcommittee and the Committee
on Energy and Commerce.
Dr. Joyce. A simple yes or no. Do you feel that we have the
answers to the requests for information that for the last 13
months we have been reaching out to you? Yes or no. Have those
been provided?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, we have provided documents to all
of the requests.
Dr. Joyce. We, on this side, do not see that
responsiveness. We have repeated requests, we have repeated
outstanding questions, and we look forward to a productive
relationship, but to date we have not seen that.
Assistant Secretary Egorin, are you aware that
congressional oversight is backed by the full force of the U.S.
Constitution?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, I am aware of----
Dr. Joyce. Thank you. I will take that to be a yes.
On August 1, 2023, we sent the Department a letter
concerning the development in implementation of vaccination
policies and mandates. However, this Select Subcommittee
received no responsive documents after sending this letter
--no response, and yet you told me that you had been
responsive. Is there a reason why this information has not yet
been produced to this Select Subcommittee on the origins of the
COVID virus?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, the August 1st letter, I believe
on vaccine mandates, went to the Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Services. We did provide a response, and if it is a
priority for the Subcommittee, I am happy to continue to work
with you and work with the staff.
Dr. Joyce. I look for the ability for that work to be
initiated. I look for that ability for that work to be
developed. Because to date we feel that that stonewalling has
occurred on the Select Subcommittee, and from my position on
Energy and Commerce I feel that as well. I feel that there
needs to be an open dialog, but HHS has not provided us with
that. We look for that stonewalling to end.
With that my time has expired. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I would like to submit for the record, on
behalf of Dr. Miller-Meeks, since she made the request, that
this article by Warren Strobel, January 17, 2024, entitled,
``Chinese Lab Mapped Deadly Coronavirus Two Weeks Before
Beijing Told the World, Documents Show,'' that this article be
submitted for the record, and without objection.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Ms. Ross, from North
Carolina, for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and also thank you for
the additional time. It is much appreciated. I want to thank
the witness for both her patience and her commitment to the
health care of the American people. It is not easy being a
public servant. It is not easy testifying before Congress, and
you have done it with grace.
We have heard allegations throughout today's hearing that
the Department has slow-walked documents of informational
interest to the Committee, and I would like to set the record
straight. The Department has consistently worked to address the
majority's requests and expedite their stated priorities.
However, whether intentionally done or not, Select
Subcommittee Republicans have repeatedly moved the goalposts on
their requests to the Department. For example, in a letter from
the Majority to the Department, dated June 1, 2023, regarding
the COVID origins probe, Select Subcommittee Republicans
alleged that the Department refused to provide certain
documents to the Select Subcommittee.
The truth is that the Department, in fact, had already
provided the documents to the Committee at that point and was
simply working to first produce documents that the Majority
identified as priority requests. Select Subcommittee
Republicans at that point had not even identified the documents
in question as being a priority.
Mr. Chairman, I would like permission to enter into the
record a letter from the Department to the Majority dated June
8, 2023, which provides these details as well as a commitment
from the Department to produce the requested documents to the
Select Subcommittee Republicans that same day.
Dr. Wenstrup. Without objection.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Now I would like to turn my attention to how things have
been provided. My colleagues on the other side of the aisle
have misleadingly suggested that HHS has not cooperated in good
faith with the Select Subcommittee's probes, including, as we
saw at the beginning of this hearing, using redactions as a
tactic to stonewall congressional oversight. I would like to
correct the record on this point.
First, to be clear, a number of the redactions have been to
protect personally identifiable information so that individuals
are not subject to threats if and when documents have been
released. I serve on the Judiciary Committee. We have not just
seen that in HHS. We have seen that throughout government.
Threats on government officials are on the rise, and we have
seen it repeatedly, and it is a huge concern.
Assistant Secretary Egorin--is that how we say it?--
Egorin----
Dr. Egorin. Yes.
Ms. Ross [continuing]. Why is it important that the
Department take steps to protect the personal information of
individuals that it employs?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, thank you for acknowledging the
risks and the increased threats to government officials and to
public servants. Part of the reason that we are so diligent
about protecting personal information is we actually want to
prevent having to do threat assessments, having to prevent
asking people to shut down their Facebook accounts, which they
use to communicate with friends and family, asking people to do
other actions for their personal safety because they chose to
serve the American people.
Ms. Ross. Thank you for that answer. As in the case in any
congressional investigation there is a process for
congressional attorneys and agency counsel to negotiate
redactions, and it is my understanding that these negotiations
actually have been productive, with HHS making opportunities
available for Subcommittee staff to review material underneath
redactions in camera, to satisfy Congress' informational
interests as well as protect employees. Is that correct?
Dr. Egorin. That is correct.
Ms. Ross. And, as I understand it, information from these
in-camera reviews has been used in staff questioning at
transcribed interviews of HHS officials, which suggests that
the Department's accommodation on redactions have, in fact,
advanced the Select Subcommittee's informational interests and
facilitated its oversight work. Do you agree with this
assessment?
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, we have worked with Subcommittee
staff to produce underneath the redactions through in-camera
review, yes.
Ms. Ross. And regarding accommodations HHS has made to work
cooperatively with the Select Subcommittee, I would also like
to discuss efforts to provide transparency into the
Department's document collection process. As you know, specific
details regarding the internal processes and search parameters
for document collections generally implicates separation of
powers concerns. You have worked both in the executive and in
the legislative branch. As such, they are not typically
provided to Congress in order to prevent a chilling effect on
executive branch internal deliberations. However, on November
9th, HHS sent a letter to the Select Subcommittee containing
comprehensive information about the collection process for
nearly 20 of its prior productions, including search terms and
custodians.
I would like to enter this November 9th letter into the
record, outlining what I have just shared.
Dr. Wenstrup. Without objection.
Ms. Ross. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And at a staff-level meeting 1 week later, representatives
of the Office of General Counsel and the Office of Legislative
Affairs answered detailed questions from the majority staff
about aspects of the document collection process, including the
prioritization of custodians, the mechanics of search terms,
and the targeted date ranges.
Assistant Secretary Egorin, is it the case that far from
stonewalling, the Department has taken each of these
significant steps and is continuing to take steps voluntarily
to be responsive to the Select Subcommittee's oversight
interests?
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, the Department continues to work
with Subcommittee staff to be responsive to the requests.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, it is clear that the Department has made a
robust effort to engage in good faith with the Select
Subcommittee and accommodate its oversight interests. To claim
that HHS is simply stonewalling is a distortion of the facts,
and I am confident that today's record will show precisely
that.
Thank you very much, and I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Dr. Jackson from Texas for 5
minutes of questions.
Dr. Jackson. Thank you, Chairman Wenstrup.
Assistant Secretary Egorin, we have heard a lot of excuses
as to why HHS has not provided documents repeatedly requested
by this Subcommittee, and we have heard lots of empty claims
that you and your team are doing everything you can to
cooperate with our requests.
In your testimony, you state that HHS has produced more
than 10,000 pages of documents in response to this
Subcommittee's oversight requests. However, that is not
entirely true. The documents that your Department has provided
this Subcommittee included hundreds of publicly available news
articles, not even authored by HHS officials. To make matters
worse, the documents that are actually from HHS are heavily
redacted or do not have anything to do with the topic at hand.
It is evident that you and/or your team are simply trying
to wait out the existence of this Subcommittee and are using
every possible tactic to seem prompt and responsive when in
reality you are stonewalling and interfering with this
investigation. Your inability to provide the pertinent
information is either deliberate or it is complete
incompetence, and you have mentioned that you have 90,000
employees available to you, and I would suspect that you have a
cadre of people that could get together and provide us
pertinent information related to these questions.
My first question is on August 2, 2023, this Subcommittee
sent the Department a letter regarding a potential new
guideline on COVID-19 booster shots. Mr. Chairman, I would ask
unanimous consent that this August 2d letter from last year be
entered into the record for the purposes of this hearing.
Dr. Wenstrup. Without objection.
Dr. Jackson. Assistant Secretary Egorin, the Committee
simply wanted to review the science in the supported statements
made by the CDC Director to the media regarding the boosters.
However, no response and no documents have been received after
sending this letter. Were you aware that this letter was sent
to Dr. Mandy Cohen, the director of the CDC?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, I am aware that letter was sent to
Director Cohen. I am also aware that there was a briefing based
on that letter providing information to staff within a month of
us receiving that letter.
Dr. Jackson. Did you identify points of contact in the CDC
to get us a written response to this?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, we provided a briefing to the
staff, and based on the prioritization we have continued to
work on other priorities of the Subcommittee.
Dr. Jackson. Did you ever intend to send any documents that
we have requested regarding the CDC booster guidance?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, we continue to work on productions
across all of the inquiries----
Dr. Jackson. How many documents have you provided so far
regarding this topic?
Dr. Egorin. Concerning that topic, we have provided a
briefing. We have provided----
Dr. Jackson. How many documents have you provided? This was
a request for documents.
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, we have provided a briefing with
the information. If there was follow-up----
Dr. Jackson. How many documents?
Dr. Egorin [continuing]. We are happy to work with you.
Dr. Jackson. This is not a follow-up. This is something we
have already requested. We have already requested documents. We
didn't request a briefing to explain why we can't have the
documents.
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, it was not a briefing to explain
why you could not have the documents. It was a briefing to
provide the information and to help----
Dr. Jackson. But were the documents provided?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, we are happy to work with the
staff----
Dr. Jackson. So, the answer is no, you did not provide the
documents that we requested. You still have not provided those
documents.
Over the course of this hearing, it is apparent that HHS
has willfully ignored direct requests from this Subcommittee
and deliberately sent documents that are intended to obscure
the truth rather than uncover it. You know, I just hope that we
get ourselves in a situation pretty soon here, as Members of
Congress, where we can do something to make you take the
oversight of Congress seriously. I hope that we can find a way
to restrict your travel funds, to restrict your pay, to fence
off some money to your organization, something. We are going to
have to do something drastic. It is apparent that you have
thumbed your nose, your organization has thumbed your nose at
this Committee with regard to the oversight responsibility that
we have, and you have done everything you can to make a joke of
our oversight.
So, I hope that your attitude will change. I hope that we
can get more response from your organization when we ask for
stuff that we need for oversight, as a bipartisan committee, to
answer the questions. We cannot even get to the point where we
answer the questions or we have a debate between the two sides
here, between the Democrats and the Republicans, on the issues
that are the topics of these Committee hearings that we are
having if we can't get the information in order to support
that. And this is just an obvious attempt to stop that process.
With that I yield back my time.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Mr. Garcia, from California,
for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Garcia. Well thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to
thank the Assistant Secretary for being here as well, and thank
you for your service.
I think this hearing, obviously, I am sure, tells you, and
it certainly tells us here how pointless these House Republican
investigations are that happen in this Committee over and over
again. These investigations into the Biden Administration and
our public health officials are really quite shameful. We have
been at this now for almost an entire year of these hearings,
and with very little to show for it, which is why we are
sitting here arguing back and forth about whether or not HHS
has been responsive enough to requests for information.
And Mr. Chairman, I would like to note that this is the
epitome of a hearing that could have been an email. And there
is no reason that we need to sit here and participate in this
hit job on our Nation's health officials. It seems to be the
case every time we have one of these hearings.
If House Republicans were not so desperate to find a shred
of evidence for their Members' unhinged conspiracies, they
could be using this time and resources to actually save lives
and prevent the next pandemic. But the majority is not
interested in any of that. They are only interested in forcing
their extreme ideology on the American people, whether it is
kicking low-income families off their health insurance or
gutting the right to abortion care across the country.
And let's also be really clear. These policies have been
proposed not by the Republican majority but also by their
supreme leader, Donald Trump. We know that Donald Trump has
already vowed to roll back health care in this country. He has
vowed to roll back women's rights to reproductive health. He
has vowed to appeal Obamacare. He has vowed to kick people off
their health care. He has vowed to eliminate and actually
destroy the way we actually have Medicare in this country. And
let's also remind ourselves that many of the Committee folks on
this Committee have also spent a large part of the last decade
trying to actually dismantle Obamacare and kick millions of
Americans off their health insurance plans. And again, we know
Donald Trump, just last week, said he would like to repeal
Obamacare.
So, the point of many of my colleagues on the other side of
the aisle is essentially to kick people off health care, roll
back Obamacare, attack our health care officials across this
country, and do whatever they can to elect Donald Trump
President again. And by the way, if you have a preexisting
condition your health coverage could be gone under some of
these Republicans' plans.
And to that extent, before I was in Congress and certainly
before I was in elected office, I was a faculty member at a
university, and the attack, of course, on students and
preexisting conditions and young people having access to their
parents' plan is also a consistent theme with the Majority.
Now on top of this we all know that Obamacare was critical
to people's access to care during the pandemic and during the
horrific period of loss of life that we had in this country.
The pandemic has cost us more than 1.3 million Americans and
certainly had a huge impact on my city.
Can you share for my colleagues what the COVID would have
looked like for the American health care system and the
American people if Obamacare had actually been repealed as most
of the majority wanted to, back when they made that last
attempt?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, I actually want to be forward
thinking, and what I will say is I am very glad that the ACA
was available, and the marketplaces were available, for as
people had job loss there was coverage options, whether that
was Medicaid, COBRA, or the ACA for coverage. And the support
for individuals allowed us to recover from the pandemic and the
economic impact at a much more rapid pace than probably what
would have happened had there not been that coverage.
Mr. Garcia. Great. Thank you very much, and I think you are
absolutely right. We should be thinking about ways to expand
health care coverage across this country, not take health
coverage away.
Also, I just want to note that one thing that is really
discouraging is this consistent attack on public health
officials, on you, on all of our witnesses that come forward.
This is the same majority that encourages skepticism, as we
know, not just attacks on our health care system but even our
COVID vaccination process and vaccines in general. They have
encouraged, as you know, followers on social media to ignore
recommendations of doctors, to ignore vaccinations for
children, comparing getting vaccines to essentially causing
mass harm to the American public, which we all know is both
shocking and incredibly irresponsible.
During my time as mayor, getting supplies, getting
vaccines, getting masks, getting PPE to the public was
incredibly important. Last year I introduced the FLASH Act,
which helps HHS cut through red tape and get critical medical
supplies like PPE, tests, and vaccines during emergencies.
Last, how do you think the FLASH Act would affect HHS's
ability to get these supplies?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, I do not want to speak to a
specific piece of legislation but what I can say is investments
in PPE, investments in supplies, the ability to make sure
people have the health care they need and the protection they
need when they need it is critically important. And we are
happy to work with you or any Member of Congress on legislation
to meet those goals.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you very much, and with that I yield
back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Dr. McCormick, from Georgia,
for 5 minutes of questions.
Dr. McCormick. Thank you, Chairman, for holding this
hearing, and thank you for this opportunity to talk about this
very important topic.
I think it was somewhat hilarious that our colleague on the
side of the aisle talk about how we have politicized this and
used this to dupe the American public that you are not doing
your job, and then spend most of their time on their points
talking about anything but COVID, as if they are not
politicizing this very topic.
Today's hearing not only highlights the Department of
Health and Human Services' blatant noncompliance but also
brings to attention something much larger, and that is that we
believe that bureaucracies now have more power than the people
themselves.
In our Doctors Caucus we had the Secretary come before us,
and could not answer questions because he was in legal
hearings. Now, I want to point out the fact that he actually
lost those legal hearings on the Surprise Act, which he has
stonewalled a lot of people on it and taken sides on it, in my
opinion. And I think it is probably an insult to the people
that we have picked a lawyer who loses his law cases, as the
head of Health and Human Services. That is just my opinion. But
I think we have an overgrown, unacceptable, and unaccountable
bureaucracy right now.
You mentioned that we are overtaxed in this Department, but
you also, in the same breath, mentioned you have 90,000
employees. Ninety thousand employees. There are 435 Congressmen
who ask questions, and we have 90,000 employees that don't put
priorities on giving the questions that we are asking
specifically from this Department. If that is not your
priority, I do not know what is.
When we have a congressional investigation it is not merely
a burdensome task when we ask a bureaucracy a question. It is
your priority. Ninety thousand employees getting a question
back to--I would assume less than half of Congress ask
questions, specifically--90,000 employees, with a very large
budget for one reason, to be accountable to people. We are the
people.
Dr. Egorin. So, Congressman----
Dr. McCormick. So wait. I haven't asked a question yet.
Thank you. I think Congress needs to kind of take our power
back.
I will ask you a question here in a second. When I believe
that you haven't answered these specific questions--you have
answered questions--You have given us a ton of information,
just not specific to what the Chairman has asked specifically.
I have seen the Chairman get more upset today than I have seen
in a very long time. He is a pretty mellow-mannered guy. But I
feel like there has been this slow rolling of information and
avoiding, so I will ask you a couple of questions and I will
allow you to answer.
The first one, yes or no if you please, has anyone in the
Department of Health and Human Services ever told you or
implied that you should not comply with our specific
investigation questions?
Dr. Egorin. No. We have always worked to----
Dr. McCormick. OK, good.
Dr. Egorin [continuing]. Accommodate----
Dr. McCormick. OK. Then how do you explain when the agency
doesn't comply with a specific request on a specific question,
with those 90,000 employees working in compliance with our
specific requests for information?
Dr. Egorin. So Congressman, I want to speak to the 90,000
employees, and I will answer your question. Those 90,000
employees serve all of the functions of HHS.
Dr. McCormick. I understand.
Dr. Egorin. So, that makes sure that 64 million Americans
have Medicare coverage, that we are partnering with 50 states,
D.C., and territories for Medicaid, that we are making sure we
are training medical students and paying for graduate medical--
--
Dr. McCormick. How many people are on your staff?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, the Assistant Secretary for
Legislation has a staff of approximately 27 that serve all of
the functions, including letting you know about the grants----
Dr. McCormick. So, 27 employees that specifically answer to
you, and you specifically answer to the Secretary, and the
Secretary specifically answers to us. OK. Thank you. And I am
sure they are very qualified individuals. I am sure the people
sitting behind you have lots of answers to our specific
questions, and that is our frustration right now.
Congress and Federal agencies are supposed to serve the
American people, and this is what frustrates us when we don't
get answers. I am running short on time, but do you believe you
have upheld the duties and provided the answers specifically
that we have asked? The specific questions we have asked that
the Chair pointed out at the beginning of this, do you think
you have answered those?
Dr. Egorin. Congressman, we have responded to the
priorities----
Dr. McCormick. OK, I disagree. I think you have responded
but not to the specific questions.
So, this is the noncompliance that we are frustrated with,
all of us here. I think it sends a message, not only about HHS
but also about the Biden Administration in general, that we
don't have the accountability we want. I don't think we can
ignore Congress' direct questioning. If you can't provide these
answers to Congress, with your staff, which I think is very
well funded, specifically to answer questions for us, then that
kind of leads me to believe that either you can't justify your
budget or because you are either duplicitous because you are
supplying stuff that we can get anywhere else besides your
Department, or you are just not being honest. And that is what
disturbs us, and that is what I wanted to address with our
time.
I think you guys need to answer some very specific
questions very quickly or there is going to be a bigger
problem.
With that I yield.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Ms. Tokuda, from Hawaii, for
5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before I get started, I
would like to take a moment to clear some things up for the
record. We have heard accusations that the Department has
intentionally devoted minimal resources toward handling
congressional oversight and inquiries, but let's also remind
people that every day your primary responsibility is the health
and wellness of 340 million Americans, keeping them alive and
well.
Assistant Secretary Egorin, would you like to clarify
anything briefly regarding this claim?
Dr. Egorin. I want to just acknowledge the mission of the
Department is to make sure we are taking care of the welfare of
the American people and that that is a very broad set of
activities.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you and mahalo also. You have done much
of that for my community personally on the island of Maui, in
Lahaina. I have seen your men and women on the ground every day
since the fires.
You know, over the last year Select Subcommittee
Republicans have leveraged their majority to advance
politically motivated probes that do nothing to improve the
lives of everyday Americans, do nothing to ensure that we are
better prepared for the next pandemic, and do nothing to
protect our constituents from future public health threats. And
under the guise of investigating COVID-19's origin this Select
Subcommittee has squandered valuable time and taxpayer dollars
to probe simply for the purpose of scoring political points.
And despite all of that time and resources they have wasted on
their inquiry, the question for me is what do they have to show
for it? In fact, the only thing they have achieved is further
politicization of the greatest crisis of our time by pointing
fingers at public health officials like yourself and sowing
distrust in our Nation's intelligence community.
Before they took the majority last Congress, Republicans
were already plotting their probe against Dr. Fauci, and tens
of thousands of documents, more than a dozen transcribed
interviews, three congressional hearings later, we have not
seen or heard so much as a shred of evidence substantiating
their claims of a coverup of the pandemic's origins or
suppression of the lab leak theory on the part of Dr. Fauci.
Instead, we have witnessed the Majority repeatedly rely on
speculation and distortion of the facts to fit their narrative.
For example, they have baselessly accused Dr. Fauci of playing
semantics with the regulatory definition of ``gain of function
research,'' despite all documents and testimony, including his
14-hour closed-door interview, plainly demonstrating otherwise.
And they have alleged that Dr. Fauci visited the CIA's
headquarters to skew its inquiry into COVID-19's origins on the
basis of whistleblower testimony that they refused to make
available to the Minority for months. Without a single shred of
evidence substantiating this claim, the Majority released these
allegations publicly. And yet 3 weeks after Dr. Fauci told us
that he hasn't been to the CIA's headquarters in decades, they
have neither issued a correction.
And now they are trying to accuse the Biden Administration
of stonewalling because their probe into Dr. Fauci is not
getting them anywhere. It is all just theater.
As we have seen today, the majority's desperate fishing
expedition to seek a scapegoat rather than the facts does not
put us on a path forward to meet the supposed mission of this
Subcommittee. The fact is the Majority's oversight and
investigations have in no way enhanced our understandings of
how COVID-19 came to be.
So, Assistant Secretary, I would like to discuss with you
the ways in which this Administration has constructively worked
toward garnering a better understanding of the COVID origins
pandemic. Can you please speak to the steps the Biden
Administration has taken on this front?
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, as the President and many other
officials have noted, understanding the origins of COVID and
understanding the science and how to make sure we are looking
forward to better response to future pandemics is essential.
And that has included work by the intelligence community but
also, as this Subcommittee has heard, conversations among our
own scientists about understanding what lessons we have learned
and how to move forward.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you. And in their efforts to construct
this extreme narrative, Select Subcommittee Republicans have
actually undermined the intelligence community, individuals
that would be critical, really, to taking on the next potential
pandemic and its origins assessment. These hard-working men and
women who serve our country, they have insinuated that they and
the Biden Administration have been withholding information due
to a classified annex of the report. And let me just say that
they have done so in spite of witnesses coming before our very
Committee, warning about the dangers of politicizing
intelligence.
Assistant Secretary, yes or no, is there any reason for the
American people to doubt the validity of the intelligence
community's origin assessment?
Dr. Egorin. Congresswoman, I have not read the report
myself, but we are taking this seriously and there is no reason
people should doubt the validity of the hard work of the
intelligence community.
Ms. Tokuda. Given the individuals on the Intelligence
Committee, the process in which they go through, would there be
any reason why they should doubt an assessment brought forward
by them?
Dr. Egorin. No, I would not see why.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you. I bring this up today because a
purposeful undermining of public trust in the IC puts our very
national security at risk. It prevents all of us from getting
the objective information. We need to make sound policy, and it
is a gift to our adversaries, quite frankly, who want nothing
less than our Republicans to continue tearing apart the
national security institutions that keep our very country safe
and free.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am out of time, and I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I would now like to yield to Ranking Member
Ruiz for a closing statement if he would like one.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before we close today's
hearing I would just like to again reiterate for the record the
ways in which the Department has engaged with the Select
Subcommittee, in good faith, by consistently producing
documents responsive to the Majority's requests on a rolling
basis, including more than 30 productions comprising more than
10,000 documents, making Department officials available for
more than 80 hours of voluntary transcribed interviews, and
offering accommodation to the Select Subcommittee on several
matters such as meeting with staff to prioritize the Majority's
informational interests and offering in-camera review of
redacted material in several documents. These actions in no way
amount to stonewalling nor do they necessitate threats of
compulsory action.
So, now that we have spent hours debating the mechanics of
document production and redactions and custodians and search
terms, I hope that we can all move on and get to the actual
work that matters for the American people, work like enhancing
our Nation's pandemic preparedness or strengthening our public
health systems or getting state and local governments the tools
they need to care for their patients. Because at the end of the
day we, as a Nation, are facing real challenges that cannot and
will not be solved by political prose or backward-facing
policies.
So, with that I hope that we can focus on advancing
constructive policies that improve people's lives, promote our
public health, and enhance our Nation's pandemic preparedness.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I will now seek time to myself to make a
closing statement.
Look, this is not a hearing I was excited to hold. Not at
all. The Ranking Member discussed the desire to spend his time
talking about other issues associated with the pandemic, and I
agree with him. I am disappointed too, that this is necessary.
See, I would have the same reaction here today, regardless
of any political affiliation an agency may have, regardless of
who was in the White House. The risk of a pandemic and the
lives lost going forward is not a Republican of Democrat issue.
None of this ever has been or should be. And I have never
approached it that way, in spite of the accusations that you
have heard today and that we hear throughout the press. It is
simply not true, and it is not how I have conducted this
process during the pandemic.
I am not the one that talks about political affiliations.
Republican or Democrat, this is an American concern of the
American people, and whose government it actually is as we are
here today.
So yes, we are a little off when it comes to specifically
focusing on the pandemic, but this is a government process that
is really inhibiting us from coming forward, as best we can,
with a future process that will benefit all of the American
people. And if we don't know how our government acted and the
decisions they made, good or bad, we have to own up to them, or
be grateful for the good decisions that have been made.
There was so much we didn't know. It is understandable. At
the beginning, this virus, it is called novel for a reason. We
didn't know what to do. We didn't know what was even happening
to people at the very beginning, physiologically.
So, you respond on hypotheticals or based on the evidence
that you have. We want to see that process. We want to see how
it was conducted. It is not necessarily an extreme guilt of
anything, but if there is, then we need to know that too. And
when we are not being transparent there is an assumption that
something must be wrong. Something must be wrong within that
agency, that agency that belongs to we, the people of the
United States of America.
We should not have needed this hearing today. This time
could have been better spent. But the Department's efforts seem
to be less than adequate. I didn't say run out the clock or
stonewall, per se. I asked if there was any conversation about
that. That is all I asked.
The Department's goal is to improve the health of all
Americans. I am with you, 100 percent. The primary
responsibility is the welfare of the American people. We need
that. That is why the agency was created. We need that. But the
welfare of the American people is jeopardized, and their
anxiety is produced, is increased when it is proven that there
is a lack of transparency taking place.
The facts speak for themselves. Helping people is one of
the reasons I became a physician. If I can't help all people,
let me help some. It is one of the reasons I joined the
military, as a surgeon. It is one of the reasons I left private
practice to run for Congress and to come here, with the hope
that I could serve more people and benefit the welfare of the
American people. I am with you. But there are different ways of
going about it.
You know, I see there seems to be this, ``Hey look, we did
things voluntarily, producing documents, responding to
requests.'' As though there is another choice. It should be
matter-of-fact business, not a pat on the back because you did
what you are supposed to do.
You argue that they have been responses. You know,
responses are not the same as answers. If I asked my child,
``Did you take that cookie?'' and the child says, ``Well, I
know there used to be a cookie there,'' that does not answer my
question. That is how this felt today.
So, you argue there have been responses, evidence of 10,000
pages you produced to the Select Subcommittee. That does not
necessarily mean that answered a question. And you continue to
argue that despite the fact that vast quantities of documents
is either irrelevant, useless, previously publicly available.
You could just as soon hand us a physiology book or something
and say, ``This is my response.''
And despite the fact that the predecessor of this Committee
received more than 40,000 pages, you claimed that you produced
documents for every single request from the Select
Subcommittee, and plainly that is not true. You argue that our
search terms are too broad, despite the fact that you have
continually negotiated with your staff to scope these requests.
And we have.
You mentioned to Dr. Miller-Meeks a response you sent to my
staff last night. So, you know, if you believe your efforts to
scramble together responses to weeks-or months-old requests 1
day before this hearing are reflective of your compliance, that
is a little hard to swallow.
On the eve of his interview, the Department directed Dr.
Morens, who served as Dr. Fauci's senior scientific advisor
before and during the pandemic, to not testify regarding
matters within the scope of his duties. And when Dr. Morens
presented to testify, HHS lawyers blocked it, much to the
inconvenience of all of those working in this effort to know
what happened, why it happened, and what can we do better. That
is blocking.
I am sorry but it does not appear you were prepared to
answer our questions today. We got responses but not answers,
and those non-answers are concerning. They are concerning to a
government that wants to function efficiently and on behalf of
the American people. So, those responses are simply not good
enough. We put some things forward for the record today, which
I had hoped you would be prepared to answer today, but now they
are a take-back. That happens. We want those answers.
This Committee has not been provided with a substantive
explanation regarding the document explanation, and I think you
know that. And if you do not have these answers, that is fair
enough. It is a big organization. But somebody does, and we are
relying on you to find that somebody and give us those answers
to our questions.
So, in that regard the buck does stop with you. And at this
point, if we do not receive explicit answers for the record,
unfortunately we will be forced to evaluate a subpoena to
receive the outstanding documents and further testimony. We
should not have to be subpoenaing the agency that we have
oversight over and that we fund. We are responsible for the
American taxpayer dollars and how they are spent, and when you
are doing good things on behalf of the American people Congress
is more than willing to spend those dollars. But you have to be
able to answer to the American people.
I will say one of the things I heard today is this could
have all been done in an email. We've sent hundreds of emails.
It could have been done by email. It could have, but it wasn't.
And we sent emails without complete answers.
I am not doing this to embarrass any individual or to put
threats on any individual, but I want to know the process that
took place within our government agencies so that we can
continue to do better. In America the beautiful we ask God to
mend our every flaw. We have to admit to our flaws and work to
mend them.
With that, and without objection, all Members will have 5
legislative days within which to submit materials and to submit
additional written questions for the witnesses, which will be
forwarded to the witnesses for their response.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Select Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:51 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
