- OVERSIGHT OF FEDERAL AGENCIES' POST-PANDEMIC TELEWORK POLICIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF FEDERAL AGENCIES'
POST-PANDEMIC TELEWORK POLICIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS
AND THE FEDERAL WORKFORCE

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND ACCOUNTABILITY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 14, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-62

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-380 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Ro Khanna, California
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Katie Porter, California
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Cori Bush, Missouri
Byron Donalds, Florida               Shontel Brown, Ohio
Kelly Armstrong, North Dakota        Jimmy Gomez, California
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
William Timmons, South Carolina      Robert Garcia, California
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Maxwell Frost, Florida
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Greg Casar, Texas
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Dan Goldman, New York
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Chuck Edwards, North Carolina        Vacancy
Nick Langworthy, New York
Eric Burlison, Missouri

------

Mark Marin, Staff Director
Jessica Donlon, Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel
Bill Womack, Senior Advisor
Alex Rankin, Professional Staff Member
Mallory Cogar, Deputy Director of Operations and Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5074

Julie Tagen, Minority Staff Director
Contact Number: 202-225-5051

------

Subcommittee on Government Operations and the Federal Workforce

Pete Sessions, Texas, Chairman

Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland Ranking
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Minority Member
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Byron Donalds, Florida                   Columbia
William Timmons, South Carolina      Maxwell Frost, Florida
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Greg Casar, Texas
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Robert Garcia, California
Chuck Edwards, North Carolina        Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Eric Burlison, Missouri              Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Vacancy

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on September 14, 2023...............................     1

Witnesses

----------

Mr. Randolph ``Tex'' Alles, Deputy Under Secretary for Management
& Senior Official Performing the Duties of the Under Secretary
for Management, Department of Homeland Security
Oral Statement...................................................     6
Dr. Karen Marrongelle, Chief Operating Officer, National Science
Foundation
Oral Statement...................................................     8
Mr. Robert Gibbs, Associate Administrator for the Mission Support
Directorate, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Oral Statement...................................................     9
Mr. Dan Dorman, Executive Director for Operation, Nuclear
Regulatory Commission
Oral Statement...................................................    11

Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are
available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

* Statement for the Record; submitted by Rep. Connolly.
* Report, OPM, December 2022, ``Status of Telework in the
Federal Government''; submitted by Rep. Mfume.
* Statement for the Record, from the Parallel Professionals,
EFM, MOH, and the U.S. Department of State employee
organizations; submitted by Rep. Crockett.
* Statement for the Record, from military spouses; submitted by
Rep. Mfume.
* Article, Space Magazine, ``Elon Musk Tells SpaceX, Tesla
Workers They Must Be in the Office at Least 40 Hours a Week:
Report''; submitted by Rep. Biggs.
* Report, GAO, ``Federal Real Property: Preliminary Results
Show Federal Buildings Remain Underutilized Due to Longstanding
Challenges and Increased Telework''; submitted by Rep. Biggs.
* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Alles; submitted by Rep.
Palmer.
* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Alles; submitted by Rep.
Biggs.
* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Alles; submitted by Rep.
Burchett.
* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Dorman; submitted by Rep.
Donalds.
* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Dorman; submitted by Rep.
Sessions.
* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Dorman; submitted by Rep.
Palmer.
* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Dorman; submitted by Rep.
Boebert.
* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Gibbs; submitted by Rep.
Palmer.
* Questions for the Record: to Dr. Marrongelle; submitted by
Rep. Palmer.
* Questions for the Record: to Dr. Marrongelle; submitted by
Rep. Biggs.

Documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

OVERSIGHT OF FEDERAL AGENCIES'
POST-PANDEMIC TELEWORK POLICIES

----------

Thursday, September 14, 2023

House of Representatives

Committee on Oversight and Accountability

Subcommittee on Government Operations and the Federal Workforce

Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Pete Sessions
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Sessions, Palmer, Higgins, Biggs,
Burchett, Boebert, Edwards, Mfume, Norton, Frost, Connolly, Lee
of Pennsylvania, and Crockett.
Mr. Sessions. Good morning.
This is a hearing of the Subcommittee on Government
Operations and the Federal Workforce, and we will come to
order.
We want to welcome each and every one of you who are taking
time to be here today on what we believe is an important issue
for the American people and for Congress, to learn a highlight
about what we are doing with conversation with the Federal
Government.
Without objection, the Chair may declare a recess at any
time. And I would recognize myself for the purpose of an
opening statement.
I want to welcome everybody today and thank you for taking
time.
Today, we are reviewing telework policies to select Federal
agencies.
In May, this Committee sent letters to 25 agencies asking
for information around their telework policies. It took a
while, but ultimately we received at least some of the
responses. Some of the responses did show up. But we moved
forward.
The witnesses here today were invited because their
responses reflected a good faith effort to answer our
questions. And we believe that where you offer a good faith of
trying to respond, you also become a part of their plight and
problems. And so, we are allowing those people to be in our
first round.
Mr. Mfume knows we are going to try and come after a second
round, and that might be those who chose not to respond or
responded in what we felt like a less than adequate way.
It does not mean that in their responses there were no gaps
or information that we should not have understood, and it does
not mean that it did not conjure up questions that we would
have for you.
But I do appreciate their responses and want to highlight
the agencies that are here today did respond. And I hope today
will be a positive discussion and conversation about their
needs, how they are doing, and what we need to do as Members of
Congress to help out.
The north star for any policy impacting Federal agencies
should be to put the needs of the American people first. And
while you and I recognize that means, to you, your agency
putting your employees first to make sure the American people
can be helped, it is our view that we hear from people that are
called the American public, and they have vast needs also. And
we may hear from them perhaps before you do.
When Federal agencies pivoted to maximum telework when they
did, at the onset of COVID, it was really a matter of
necessity, and I think the American people understood that,
because they too were living that in their lives. And telework
did and can play a vital role in continuing operations like
those that you have.
In this Subcommittee's June hearing, we heard about the
problems experienced by those agencies who have continued to
stay ill-prepared during this period of time. But what we are
talking about today is a different matter. It is the day-to-day
operations of Federal agencies that are not in an emergency
circumstance.
As this Nation emerges from COVID--and it did a long time
ago--it appeared to me and to many of my colleagues that the
Biden Administration was attempting to portray the experience
during COVID as those that would still be necessary and could
be undertaken today.
And I think it has caused unmitigated stress on the
American people, a misunderstanding about the role of working
for the Federal Government, and the role of Congress as we hear
back from people.
But there was never really any evidence, other than
references to a survey of Federal employees about what the
impact was and about how the American public felt like they
were doing business with agencies across the government. And
that is why we undertook what we did in June. That is why we
are here in September and why we will be back.
We believe and I believe that telework can be helpful to
agencies to help them carry out their mission. It does not mean
every single agency would necessarily have that same success.
And that is why, when I see a Federal Government across-the-
board answer, it seems simplistic. It seems like it is OK for
us just to do this because we can.
Private industry does not have that same latitude,
necessarily. And yet they have found ways to adapt themself to
the issues to meet public needs and demands. They, not unlike
the government, have day-to-day demands, whether you are in
telecommunications, whether you are in the hospital, whether
you are in an airline industry.
So, the White House Chief of Staff sent an email expressing
some of the points that I have talked about. But we, on this
side, the Committee, want to vet and understand the
effectiveness of what you are doing and, to the maximum
possible extent, the reliability of data that you may present
today, which will be important to us. In the absence of that
that we had, we have asked for you to be here.
So, when the House passed the SHOW UP Act in January, this
was portrayed as an effort to end all teleworking. It is not.
We recognize the difference between necessarily staying at
home, 5-day workweek, absence, whatever you might want to call
it, with going to work and doing telework. And we want to
recognize the difference, and we think it is up to you to come
and tell that story today.
You may find that there are some Members of Congress that
are here present today that need to know more about your story,
but I hope you will take the time to listen to us and hear from
us, because we think we have a story to tell also today.
So, I want to thank you for being here.
And at this time I would like to yield to the distinguished
Ranking Member, the gentleman, Mr. Mfume. The gentleman is
recognized for the purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. Mfume. Thank you very, very much, Mr. Chair. I want to
thank you also for the personal courtesy you extended earlier
prior to this hearing today.
I want to thank the witnesses, obviously, for being here
with us to be a part of this discussion.
Mr. Connolly. Was the Ranking Member caught in traffic?
Mr. Mfume. The Ranking Member was caught in traffic.
Mr. Connolly. Telework can help.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Sessions. Good luck.
Mr. Mfume. Members of this Subcommittee, we feel, perform a
very important oversight role on behalf of not only Federal
workers, but the American public in general. And with this
coveted role in many respects comes immense responsibility as
we are all positioned in a way that impacts our constituents in
the most relevant of ways.
As Members of Congress, we have all heard our own fair
share of complaints, as well as appraisals, surrounding
casework by different agencies. In the time that is mine, I
want to take this moment to focus on a real story from a real
person that my office interacted with during the height of the
pandemic. And, for the sake of anonymity, I will simply refer
to her as Jane.
Jane contacted our office during the pandemic regarding
FEMA's COVID-19 Funeral Assistance Program when she filed for
her brother. Unfortunately, he passed away from COVID and
COVID-related symptoms in December 2021.
Shortly after my office connected with FEMA regarding
Jane's application, it only took FEMA a few days to approve the
family's reimbursement, exceeding $3,000.
Now, keep in mind, our office obtained this favorable
outcome for Jane in a matter of days during a time when more
than half of FEMA's workforce was telework eligible.
So, as I have said time and time again--and I would just
like to be deliberately redundant here--the last four letters
in the word telework are w-o-r-k. People who are teleworking
work.
I consider constituent services to be some of my most
important and rewarding work in this Congress, and I am sure
many of the Members of this Committee feel the same way. We are
all proud to serve as a resource and an advocate for our
respective communities.
But I also expect each agency to ensure its employees
possess the ability to deliver timely responses to Americans,
whether they are working remotely, teleworking, or in person.
Over the summer, some of you will recall that this
Subcommittee hosted a hearing on addressing post-pandemic
backlogs at the agency level. And I asked a significant witness
from the Social Security Administration, Deputy Commissioner
Chad Poist, whether or not telework contributed to the agency's
backlog.
Mr. Poist stated on the record, quote, ``I do not believe
that there are any contributions to that backlog due to
telework,'' end of quote. He went on to say that, ``Telework
has allowed us to continue our agency's mission.''
The Office of Personnel Management surveyed over 40
agencies that have achieved cost savings resulting from the
increase in telework. And as more workers transitioned to at-
home work outside of the District, some agencies also outside
of the District found savings by reducing office space leases
and transitioning into smaller offices.
As less workers were obligated to commute, some agencies
found savings due to the decrease in workers' utilization of
the transit subsidy program and a decrease also in cost savings
for travel that so many Federal workers in positions from
headquarters are required to do. That ranged from thousands to
millions of dollars.
Mr. Chair, I would ask unanimous consent to submit for the
record the OPM's December 2022 ``Status of Telework in the
Federal Government'' report which further details the agency's
cost savings resulting from telework during that period.
I, like the Chairman, believe that telework is important.
It is also important to guard, as best we can, the assumptions,
the accusations, and to guard against many of the things that
are not right that get thrown into that basket as people
develop, as we all have the right to, our own opinions. And
while there are obviously advantages to telework, I believe
that agencies must prioritize in-depth examinations and reviews
periodically of their work postures on telework and their
remote work policies.
Prioritizing data collection on performance is absolutely
critical to ensure that their policies lead to mission
achievements. I know how valuable face-to-face interactions are
in order to strengthen interpersonal relationships, and I also
recognize that flexible work environments are one of the many
tools to help fill a governmentwide skills shortage.
As we are all aware, just last month President Biden
mandated a return to work for most Federal employees. To that
extent, I encourage certain agencies who can increase in-person
work as necessary that they do so for the successful delivery
of the agencies' mission and in support of the President's
mandate.
And so, I would like to, again, thank all of the witnesses
who represent different agencies today for testifying and being
here before us to provide invaluable insight on the outcomes
and implications of their current policies for work
flexibility.
The workforce is the lifeblood of our Federal Government,
without a doubt, and we must provide an environment that
attracts and retains the best and the brightest in Federal
service.
So, I look forward to hearing directly from all of you
today as we discuss this. These are unique circumstances which
require unique approaches.
And, again, I want to thank Chairman Sessions for calling
this hearing so that we might continue to followup with
examination, review, and support where necessary, the efforts
that so many of you have undertaken.
So, Mr. Chair, with that, I would yield back the balance of
my time. And I thank you again for being a part of this effort
to hear from these witnesses about this very important topic.
Mr. Sessions. The gentleman yields back his time. I thank
you very much.
So that the panel understands, and I have spoken to several
of you to let you know that Mr. Mfume and I, along with his
colleagues and my colleagues, intend to make sure that we work
closely together, ask the questions that are necessary, and
then see what answers result from that.
And I have always agreed to work with him and believe that
today is another example that I hope will be a successful
viewpoint that people who are engaged in this, as well as the
Members, receive the benefits of that.
I am now pleased to introduce the witnesses.
A gentleman that I spoke to yesterday on the phone, I
learned why he goes by Randolph ``Tex'' Alles. And that is
because he is from San Antonio, Texas, went to a competing high
school--not fellow high school, but competing high school in
San Antonio, where I went. And we had a delightful discussion
about how important education is.
Mr. Tex Alles serves as Deputy Under Secretary for
Management at the Department of Homeland Security. In his role,
Mr. Alles oversees Department-wide management and oversight of
all support functions, such as information technology, budget,
financial management, procurement, human capital, security, and
asset management.
He previously spent time serving this Nation at the Secret
Service, and I believe has spent time as a United States Marine
for our Nation.
Thank you. We are delighted to have you, sir.
Our next witness will be Dr. Karen Marrongelle, who serves
as Chief Operating Officer at the National Science Foundation,
known as NSF, where, among other duties, she oversees the
Foundation's human capital policies. Prior to this role, she
served as assistant director of the NSF Education and Human
Resources Directorate, and, before that, worked for decades in
academia.
Welcome, Doctor.
Mr. Robert Gibbs is an Associate Administrator for the
Mission Support Directorate for NASA headquarters in
Washington, DC. Throughout his time at NASA, Mr. Gibbs has
served in senior human capital management roles where he has
had stewardship responsibilities for the agency's workforce.
Prior to joining NASA, Mr. Gibbs held senior human capital
management and administrative roles at the Department of Energy
while serving in the United States Navy.
Sir, welcome very much, and thank you for your service.
Mr. Dan Dorman, who I also spoke with yesterday, serves as
Executive Director for Operations of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, the highest-ranking career position in the agency,
with responsibility for overseeing NRC's administrative
functions. In this capacity, Mr. Dorman also serves as the
chief operating officer.
So, I want to welcome each of you and ask that you all
stand and raise your right hand for the oath that is always
given to our witnesses that we have before Congress.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 9(g), the witnesses will stand,
as they are doing, and raise their hand and answer.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you God?
Let the record reflect that each of the witnesses answered
in the affirmative, and I would now ask that they would take
their seat.
And we do appreciate you being here and look forward to
your testimony. I spoke to several of you yesterday and have
encouraged you, by giving you an idea about what we were
looking for, the story about the success, how you use telework,
the output of that, and the necessary response to how Congress
should look at your agency.
Please know that I am asking that you be around 5 minutes.
And, as a reminder, please press the button on your microphone
in front of you so that Members can hear you. And, when you
begin to speak, the light in front of you will turn green.
After 4 minutes, the light will turn yellow. When the red light
comes on, I ask that you begin to wind up that question--
opportunity that you have.
So, I now want to represent Mr. Tex Alles for his opening
statement.
The gentleman is recognized for 5 minutes.
Thank you very much, sir.

STATEMENT OF RANDOLPH ``TEX'' ALLES

DEPUTY UNDER-SECRETARY FOR MANAGEMENT

SENIOR OFFICIAL PERFORMING THE DUTIES OF

THE UNDER-SECRETARY FOR MANAGEMENT

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Alles. Thank you, Chairman Sessions, Ranking Member
Mfume, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. It is a
privilege to appear before you this morning.
My name is Tex Alles, as already mentioned, and I represent
the Department of Homeland Security and Management Directorate.
Throughout my 35 years, in my prior career as a U.S.
Marine, I learned that, no matter the work, we must take care
of the people who are called upon to execute the mission and
also execute the mission itself.
At DHS, each of our 260,000 employees is called upon to
execute this mission in different ways. Many work on the front
lines. Some serve from a customer-facing counter. Others
operate in a hybrid environment.
From the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, approximately 64
percent of the workforce, myself included, continued to work
in-person every day.
Since 2021, we have seen a steady increase of onsite work
across DHS. As of July 2023, our payroll data indicates 73
percent of our employees nationwide report in person every day.
Approximately 85 percent of the nationwide workforce and 61
percent in the national capital region report onsite more than
50 percent of the time, and often actually more than that.
In a workforce as large as ours, you measure performance on
an enterprise level. My written testimony provides examples of
how we are meeting the mission.
But just to name a few, CBP was processing a significant
volume of imported goods even before the pandemic ended. In
Fiscal Year 2022 alone, they processed 39 million entries,
valued at over $3.5 trillion, a 19.5 increase over Fiscal Year
2021.
Air travel has rebounded. Of the ten busiest travel days on
record, TSA has experienced six this fiscal year.
In DHS headquarters, by prepopulating forms and building
mobile-friendly experiences, we reduced the time the public
spends accessing our services by 20 million hours a year.
Offering workplace flexibilities allows DHS to remain
competitive in a labor market where applicants overwhelmingly
apply to remote or telework jobs. It enhances both our
recruitment and retention efforts, which strengthens our
mission effectiveness.
DHS also uses a range of quantitative data to monitor
organizational health and performance. By leveraging data, we
can determine if workplace flexibilities are having the
intended effect on employee recruitment and the DHS mission.
We see positive impact through an 11 percent increase in
mission-critical operation staffing when we compare data from
just prior to the pandemic to data from early 2023.
The Department has historically been unable to fully staff
occupations such as human capital, procurement, and IT
specialists. These types of positions are vital to ensuring
those on the front lines can execute their mission. The recent
increase represents 950 additional staff supporting them.
Workplace flexibilities also increase DHS mission
resilience in the face of severe weather or emergencies. The
concept of a snow day does not apply to teleworkers. They
continue to get the job done safely from alternate locations.
Likewise, having a partially dispersed workforce enhances the
Department's continuity of operations posture in unforeseen
emergencies.
Lessons learned from elevated telework during the pandemic
accelerated plans we already had on consolidating and creating
more collaborative space. Considerable progress has been made
on capturing enterprise-level data that supports resource
decisionmaking focused on cost, utilization, and workforce
location metrics.
We recognized our buildings were not fully utilized, so we
acted. In Fiscal Year 2023 alone, we reduced our NCR footprint
by 450,000 rentable square feet, achieving a cost avoidance of
almost $16 million annually.
Since 2018, we have consolidated the NCR footprint by 1.6
million rentable square feet. The 30-year cost avoidance to the
Department for these reductions is roughly $1.4 billion.
While this strategy started with the NCR, we are
implementing nationwide. Our goal of ``fewer buildings/better
buildings'' is good for our workforce, good for the DHS
mission, and good for the taxpayer.
We will continuously assess the impacts of workplace
flexibilities on our effectiveness to serve and protect the
American people, our priority. The Department is committed to
executing our mission and taking care of our people. We can and
must do both.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to your questions.
Mr. Sessions. Thank you very much.
Doctor.

STATEMENT OF KAREN MARRONGELLE

CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION

Ms. Marrongelle. Thank you, Chairman Sessions, Ranking
Member Mfume, and Members of the Subcommittee. It is a
privilege to appear before you today.
My name is Dr. Karen Marrongelle, and I am the Chief
Operating Officer at the National Science Foundation.
NSF is an independent Federal agency that invests in
exploratory, discovery-driven research and use-inspired
innovations across all fields of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics, and at all levels of STEM
education.
These investments contribute significantly to the economic
and national security interests of the Nation and development
of a future-focused science and engineering workforce that
draws on the talents of all Americans.
We are currently witnessing intense global competition for
leadership in technologies, such as artificial intelligence and
quantum information science. NSF is committed to ensuring that
the United States remains the global leader in innovation into
the future.
Our ability to do so is rooted in sustained support from
Congress, the ingenuity and perseverance of the research
enterprise, and the dedicated employees who serve throughout
NSF.
Almost the entire NSF workforce of approximately 1,600
employees is located in Alexandria, Virginia. Of this number,
more than 1,300 are in telework-eligible positions, and more
than a thousand are utilizing telework flexibilities.
NSF has shown that we can embrace telework and flexibility
while continuing to excel at meeting our mission. NSF has had a
strong telework policy and practice in place since 2004, with
over 90 percent of staff utilizing telework prior to the
pandemic.
It was NSF's investments in telework over time, both in
technology that underpins it and the training of staff and
supervisors to ensure its productivity, that allowed the agency
to pivot quickly to a virtual environment during the pandemic.
We were able to do so without seeing a reduction in
productivity.
NSF reviews nearly 40,000 proposals each year, of which
approximately 11,000 are funded. Those funding decisions are
rooted in NSF's world-renowned merit review process.
The total number of proposals evaluated peaked during the
pandemic while we were at maximum telework posture. The NSF
workforce did not buckle under that pressure. We did not see
backlogs or delays. The NSF workforce met the demand.
In addition, during this time NSF stood up the new
Directorate for Technology, Innovation, and Partnership, we
unveiled the first-ever image of the black hole at the center
of the Milky Way Galaxy, and launched new artificial
intelligence research institutes across the country.
As COVID restrictions eased, NSF began returning to the
office. Last year, we updated our telework policy and added
remote work options for a small number of positions. In
addition, the agency extended a temporary full-time telework
option in 90-day increments to help transition to a hybrid
environment.
With the declared end of the public health emergency in May
2023, NSF has continued to reimagine a collaborative work
posture in a hybrid environment. Over the past year, our
dedicated professionals across our human resources, information
technology, and legal teams have put in tremendous effort to
shape our future work approach while carefully listening to our
staff.
Recently, NSF announced that, effective October 23, 2023,
all NSF employees in telework-eligible positions are expected
to report onsite for a minimum of 4 days per pay period. Doing
so allows the agency to meet the expectations of our
stakeholders, preserve our culture of collaboration, and meet
our business needs, while maintaining flexibility.
We will continue to assess our organizational health and
performance metrics to guide and help our policies into the
future.
The entire NSF leadership team is incredibly proud of the
agency's workforce and the dedication they show to the NSF
mission. We are honored that, for the past 2 years, NSF has
ranked second in midsize agencies in the Best Places to Work in
Government.
At NSF, we take great pride in being innovators, both in
how we drive the frontiers of science and engineering and how
we get our work done to meet the needs of the Nation. I am
confident we will remain a leader in both.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before you
today.
Mr. Sessions. Thank you very much, Doctor.
Mr. Gibbs, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT GIBBS

ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR

FOR THE MISSION SUPPORT DIRECTORATE

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Gibbs. Chairman Sessions, Ranking Member Mfume, and
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you today about NASA's telework practices and
policies and how they enable mission success.
My name is Bob Gibbs. I am the Associate Administrator for
Mission Support at NASA. My office provides the tools,
infrastructure, people, and capabilities to ensure NASA's
leadership in aerospace, science, and exploration.
Today, I am pleased to discuss NASA's longstanding telework
and remote work policies and practices and how they enable
mission success at NASA.
Since 2014, NASA has supported various types of telework
for agency civil service employees based on telework agreements
that every employee has to establish with their supervisor and
then subject to senior-level review.
Before the pandemic, it was not unusual for employees to
telework 1 or 2 days a week or for employees to have their
laptops at home in case of a weather emergency to continue
working from home.
With only minor changes, our policies are today as they
were in 2014. In March 2020, NASA was able to quickly move its
workforce to mandatory telework status by utilizing
longstanding practices and by capitalizing previous investments
in information technology infrastructure.
NASA was never closed.
Our employees, our civil servants and contractors,
continued to execute the diverse and challenging missions from
onsite and remote locations.
We launched spacecraft and landed another rover on Mars.
We launched the next-generation space telescope and
observatory.
We continued to develop the next-generation human space
flight system.
We advanced new technologies in science and aeronautics.
We interacted virtually with students around the globe.
We continued in job fairs and small business events.
We continued to hire and onboard employees.
We also created special remote opportunities for interns
across the country.
Most importantly, NASA has continued to inspire the
American public with our missions, our spirit of ingenuity, and
perseverance.
Within our telework practices and policy, NASA leadership
has empowered agency organizations and supervisors to determine
the appropriate workforce flexibilities to accomplish
individual missions efficiently and effectively. Within the
boundaries of Federal law, regulation, OPM guidance, NASA
policy, currently, 98 percent of NASA civil servants are
telework ready.
We believe that workforce flexibilities, such as telework
and remote work, when managed appropriately, provide a
tremendous opportunity for NASA to remain competitive in the
modern job market.
Our highly skilled, sought-after technical workforce is
increasingly asking for benefits from these collaborative tools
and other opportunities to work more seamlessly to accomplish
the mission regardless of location.
A hybrid work environment increases talent sharing among
our nine geographically dispersed centers and maximizes cross-
center opportunities without employees having to relocate.
Having a telework-ready workforce also will help us maintain
continuity of operations during emergencies.
To help our supervisors and employees support telework and
remote work, NASA has developed a variety of resources,
expanded the available training, and hosted virtual sessions.
Supervisors are also advised to consider the agency's core
values--safety, integrity, teamwork, excellence, and
inclusion--when making decisions about how the telework program
can impact their teams.
If employee performance issues exist with any employee, no
matter where they work, managers are expected to utilize
performance tools and counseling to address those issues as
they arise.
In conclusion, let me assure you that NASA's future work
environment plans are not written in stone. We recognize we
will need to make periodic adjustments as we work within this
new hybrid environment. NASA's senior leaders remain committed
to developing new ways to measure and evaluate agency
performance in concert with the new hybrid environment.
I look forward to discussing this important matter with you
and your Committee and other stakeholders in Congress. I am
pleased to answer any questions you might have.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Gibbs, thank you very much.
Gentleman yields back.
At this time, the gentleman, Mr. Dorman, you are
recognized.

STATEMENT OF DAN DORMAN

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR FOR OPERATIONS

NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION

Mr. Dorman. Thank you, Chairman Sessions, Ranking Member
Mfume, distinguished Members of the Subcommittee.
As the Chair indicated, I am Dan Dorman, Executive Director
of the NRC, and in that role, I serve as the agency's Chief
Operating Officer.
The NRC is an independent Federal agency with a mission to
license and regulate the civilian use of radioactive materials,
to provide adequate protection of public health and safety, to
promote the common defense and security, and to protect the
environment.
I welcome the opportunity to discuss the telework policies
and practices of our agency and their potential impact on our
mission accomplishment and operations.
Following the declaration of the public health emergency on
March 17, 2020, the Office of Management and Budget issued
specific guidance for agencies to immediately adjust operations
and services to minimize face-to-face interactions and possibly
postpone or significantly curtail non-mission-critical
functions that required onsite or in-person interactions.
In response to this guidance, on March 19 the NRC swiftly
implemented mandatory telework for all non-mission-critical
functions effective immediately, with the NRC's headquarters
office, our four regional offices, and our Technical Training
Center remaining open and operational, enabling critical
functions performed in an NRC facility to continue.
More than a year later, on November 7, 2021, the NRC
reentered the workplace and transitioned from a maximum
telework status to a hybrid work environment.
After the NRC's reentry, first-line supervisors were
delegated authority to approve up to 6 days telework per pay
period, requiring 4 in-person days per pay period.
Due to changes with the COVID environment, in December 2021
we had additional flexibilities extended for approximately 3
months of the first omicron variant.
Following reentry, I tasked staff and senior leadership to
study various telework options through what we called our
Hybrid Environment Assessment and Review Team and a Telework
Policy and Implementation Working Group. These two groups
issued reports that contained in-depth assessments and
benchmarking into the practical and effective use of telework.
These reports have helped us assess how we achieve our
mission in a hybrid work environment, including the impacts of
telework on our organizational health. We have metrics to
monitor our mission effectiveness, our organizational health,
and stakeholder confidence. We also evaluated and continue to
evaluate the impact that our hybrid work environment has on
space planning and allocation.
These insights are playing a large role as we pursue new
office space arrangements, what we call hoteling, working with
our employees' union. Regardless, the NRC's strategic space
plans consistently seek to reduce our footprint as appropriate.
Since Fiscal Year 2019, which includes efforts undertaken
prior to the public health emergency, the NRC has reduced its
Washington, DC, area headquarters office footprint by
approximately 28 percent. This reduction is a result of
following Federal Government-wide directives to reduce office
space and to reflect the reduced size of our agency over that
period.
In addition, the footprint in three of our four regional
offices is expected to decrease by approximately 50 percent by
the end of Fiscal Year 2025. This decrease is also the result
of staff size reductions, as well as changing workspace design
to use efficiencies supported by telework.
Furthermore, the NRC has implemented various network and
communication enhancements to enable its staff to productively
engage as a hybrid workforce effectively and securely.
NRC teleworking employees have been provided a standard
image agency laptop with multiple security tools, including
full-disk encryption, multifactor authentication for secure
authenticated access, a full-time virtual private network tool
which activates at initial access and encrypts network traffic.
These solutions enable secure network access for our staff-
to-agency technology and information assets and Federal record
systems and repositories.
The NRC has provided its staff with other information
technology tools and resources, such as Microsoft 365, to
facilitate close collaboration and communication, whether an
individual is working in the office or in another location.
The NRC has met its safety and security objectives, even as
the agency expanded telework and remote work during the public
health emergency. The agency continues to meet its mission in
the current hybrid work environment, focusing in-office time on
those activities that benefit from an in-person presence.
As we continue to adapt to our hybrid work environment, the
NRC continues to focus on our important safety and security
mission and demonstrate our principles of good regulation
through effective, responsive, and timely regulatory actions,
consistent with our organizational values and our open,
collaborative work environment.
I appreciate the Subcommittee's interest in the NRC's
mission and the work of our dedicated staff, who have continued
to show resilience, agility, and dedication over the last few
years as we navigated the changes to our workplace and how we
accomplish our work.
I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Dorman, thank you very much.
And, to the panel, thank you very much.
I am going to yield what would be my time and place myself
at the back side and yield to the distinguished gentleman, the
Chairman of the Republican Policy Committee, the gentleman from
Alabama, Mr. Palmer.
The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Palmer. Thank the Chairman. Thank the Chairman for
holding the hearing and for the witnesses being willing to
appear today.
There was a recent survey from the Office of Personnel
Management that said that only one in three Federal employees
are fully back in the office. And I am just wondering, in your
agencies, what--Mr. Dorman, you just said that you have reduced
office space by 28 percent, and then you said it will be
reduced by 50 percent by what date?
Mr. Dorman. Sir, for our regional offices, 2025. That is
based on the lease turnover, so the opportunity to make those
reductions.
Mr. Palmer. So, this is nationwide, not just here in D.C.?
Mr. Dorman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Palmer. What are your space reductions in D.C.?
Mr. Dorman. Twenty-eight percent, sir.
Mr. Palmer. Twenty-eight percent in D.C.? Are those
employees still living in the D.C. area or are they allowed to
relocate to other cities?
Mr. Dorman. Those employees are still in the D.C. area,
sir.
Mr. Palmer. OK.
I would like to know from each of you, just a very quick
answer. It is a percentage. What percentage of the D.C.-based
Federal employees in your agency relocated out of state during
the COVID-19 pandemic?
Mr. Alles? If you do not know the answer, just say you do
not know the answer, sir.
Mr. Alles. I would have to get the answer back to you.
Mr. Palmer. I would appreciate if you would respond to the
Committee.
Mr. Alles. Yes, sir.
Mr. Palmer. Dr. Marrongelle?
Ms. Marrongelle. We currently have 175 employees located
outside of the DMV, but I would have to get back to you on the
amount of who relocated from who was here prior to the
pandemic.
Mr. Palmer. Please do so.
Mr. Gibbs?
Mr. Gibbs. A similar answer. I would have to get back to
you with the statistics. But I will tell you that we have
restructured, and so, while some of our employees are not in
D.C., they are working at other NASA centers.
Mr. Palmer. OK.
And Mr. Dorman?
Mr. Dorman. Similarly, we will have to get back to you with
specific details, but we did have--we, like NASA, we have
employees who worked in----
Mr. Palmer. I need to move on.
And what I want to know is--and this is a yes or no--have
any of your employees relocated outside of D.C. during the
pandemic or after the pandemic? Have any of your employees
relocated outside of D.C.?
Mr. Alles. Yes, sir. For DHS, they have. And they were
required to----
Mr. Palmer. That is good. Just----
Mr. Alles. OK.
Mr. Palmer. Dr. Marrongelle?
Ms. Marrongelle. Yes, sir.
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Gibbs?
Mr. Gibbs. Yes.
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Dorman?
Mr. Dorman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Palmer. OK.
What I would like to know is, D.C. employees get locality
pay. Has their pay been adjusted to reflect the change in
locality?
Mr. Alles. It has for DHS.
Ms. Marrongelle. Yes, sir, for NSF.
Mr. Gibbs. Yes, it has for NASA.
Mr. Dorman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Dorman?
One of the things that concerns me, Mr. Chairman, about
where we are on this issue is President Biden issued a
declaration saying that the Federal workforce would return to
office. And shortly after that, though, there were--the
locations of Federal--of 281,656 Federal employees were
redacted.
In addition to that, the names of 350,861 employees were
also redacted, which I think causes a serious problem in terms
of oversight. That is about $36 billion in salaries and bonuses
that are not subject to oversight. It will be very difficult
for us to exercise oversight.
And in the last year of the Obama Administration, the names
of only 2,300 Federal employees were redacted. And there are
some Federal employees whose names need to be redacted, because
they serve in sensitive positions.
But I am concerned about where we are heading in terms of
the Federal workforce actually showing up for work. And not in
regard to your agencies, this is a statement about a couple of
other agencies. One, in particular, is the EPA, where a recent
survey found that 80 percent of the EPA employees said that
they would experience personal hardship if the agency changes
its work policies and requires them to show up for work. That
is unconscionable.
In addition--apparently somebody thought that was funny.
But, in addition, the EPA is now trying to hire another 2,000
people. And I just--I know the EPA is not here. Hopefully they
will show up later, Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Sessions. Yes, sir.
Mr. Palmer [continuing]. To answer some questions about
this.
This is a problem. We have heard reports of VA employees
who are doing their work from a bubble bath, or people going
out and playing golf and playing pool and going to happy hour.
I do not think we can have the productivity that we need to
have if you do not show up for work. And if we do not need you
here, then we do not need all these Federal buildings.
And, Mr. Mfume, I think, if you have got several hundred
thousand Federal employees who are not showing up for work, we
should not have the traffic problems.
And so, I do think this should be a bipartisan issue, by
the way, of what we expect of the Federal workforce in terms of
showing up for work.
Mr. Connolly. Would my friend yield, real quickly?
Mr. Palmer. I yield to my friend.
Mr. Connolly. The fact that we have congestion means
Federal workers are going to work. That is the largest source
of employment in this area. And I can tell you, as someone who
commutes every day, the difference between now and the depth of
the pandemic is night and day. It takes me now an hour and a
half to get to work. In the depth of the pandemic, it took me
25 minutes.
So, I mean, the congestion Mr. Mfume faced is a reflection
of the fact that Federal workers, in fact, are showing up to
work.
Thank you for yielding.
Mr. Palmer. Well, with all due respect to my friend--and
you are my friend--that is not necessarily a reflection of the
Federal workforce showing up. It may be a reflection of the
infrastructure issues that the city has and has had for many
years. And not necessarily everybody in those cars are Federal
workers. They are people working for--in other businesses. But
I do respect your opinion on that.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I am happy to yield back.
Mr. Sessions. The gentleman yields back his time. Thank you
very much.
The distinguished gentleman from Maryland is recognized.
Mr. Mfume. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank Mr. Palmer for his observation and the
observation of my friend from Virginia, Mr. Connolly. I think
the reason it takes me now an hour, 45 minutes to drive down
from Baltimore is that I obey the speed limit. So, we will
leave it there.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Sessions. Do we need to put you under oath?
Mr. Mfume. No.
Mr. Sessions. We will leave that one alone, then.
Mr. Connolly. He is law abiding.
Mr. Mfume. Right.
Mr. Sessions. Yes.
Mr. Palmer. If the gentleman would yield?
Mr. Mfume. Yes, I would yield.
Mr. Palmer. If you were a member of the Alabama
Legislature, that would not be a problem.
Mr. Mfume. I am going to leave that one alone.
OK. Mr. Alles, let me start with you.
Department of Homeland Security's workforce is made up of
more than 260,000 employees, I think, and spanning 22 different
agencies. And I referenced FEMA earlier. My district does more
DHS casework than any other type from any other agency
represented here today.
So, could you take a moment to describe to the Committee
what factors lead to a determination of whether certain DHS
jobs are more conducive for in-person work or telework or other
remote options? I am just trying to figure out the calculus
that goes into that.
Mr. Alles. Thank you for your question, sir.
First off, it would be the position description of the job
itself.
So, as you can imagine, your law enforcement positions,
which is a large part of the Department, are not going to be
eligible for remote work or telework. They have to be in person
to do their jobs.
And then, beyond that, most of your--and that would apply
across TSA, CBP, ICE, Secret Service, a large part of our jobs,
and even FEMA in some cases, that they cannot telework just
because of the nature of the work that they have. So, a lot of
it is involved in the position description itself.
And then beyond that is whether that position is actually
telework eligible based on, again, the type of work that they
are going to do.
But I think an important part here is, whether they
telework or do not telework, I want to know that they are
working. And so, we apply metrics across our different lines of
business to measure the performance of our employees. And,
clearly, if they are not performing, then we are going to hold
them accountable.
We do that either via suspensions, disciplinary action
basically. And, in some cases, we have to move to removals if
we have employees who, in fact, are not performing or have
other various discipline issues.
I think a prime concern of everybody on the Committee is--
and I agree with--is, do we get the dollar we paid for out of
that employee or not? And, certainly, as a taxpayer, I want to
make sure that I am getting that out of that employee.
Mr. Mfume. Thank you.
And coming to the other witnesses, can you take a second
quickly to talk about utilization of different tools to track
absenteeism and productivity, which get to the heart also of
this question? What tools are you using, briefly?
Ms. Marrongelle. I can start. Thank you, sir.
We, similar to DHS, we have a pay--attendance monitoring
system. So, every pay period employees are required to attest
to their time worked, where it was worked, and their
supervisors need to verify and validate that.
Prior to partaking in any telework, our employees have to
undergo training. So, telework is considered a privilege, not a
right. And that training is for both employees and supervisors.
So, we are able to track that.
Similar to my colleague at DHS, we have metrics on that.
And if there are problems with time and attendance--and, in
particular, attendance--we are able to take disciplinary
action.
Mr. Mfume. And do you do that often, take disciplinary
action, or does that mean that there are not problems with it?
Ms. Marrongelle. It occurs occasionally. It is not a
systemic problem.
Mr. Mfume. Is it harder to track at the headquarters or at
the district offices? I would imagine, if you are not here
physically in Washington, it might be a bit tough to do.
Ms. Marrongelle. I will defer to my colleagues, because we
have only one building, in Alexandria.
Mr. Mfume. Anyone else, district versus the District of
Columbia in terms of being able to employ the metrics used to
track productivity and absenteeism?
Mr. Gibbs. No. I do not think there is any difference at
NASA between headquarters and our centers.
Mr. Mfume. So, it is a central sort of reporting.
Mr. Gibbs. We do it a little bit different at NASA. I think
it is probably important that we establish this distinction. We
do not look at a position and say: This position is telework
eligible. We look at the individuals and look at the work
necessary to accomplish the mission.
That employee then has to have a conversation with their
supervisor saying: This is how I could do telework. Here is how
I am going to do the work. Here is what we are going to do to
accomplish the mission.
Their supervisor then has to agree with that, and then that
has to go to another level of review prior to granting the
telework.
Mr. Mfume. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. So, it is structured differently.
Mr. Mfume. Thank you.
Mr. Dorman?
Mr. Dorman. Sir, there is three different things we can
look at.
Badging into the buildings, which applies in all of our
locations.
We can look at where employees are logging in from. Are
they logging in from our facility on our network or are they
coming in through a virtual network?
And then, third, as was indicated by others, our employees
report their time biweekly indicating what portion of that time
was done at their alternate work location. So that is tracking
where people are working.
In terms of performance, we have the assignment--work is
assigned by the supervisors. The expectations on delivery of
the product is managed by the supervisors, and that is what we
measure, is the outputs from the employees.
Mr. Mfume. OK. Thank you.
My time has expired, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sessions. The gentleman yields back his time. Thank you
very much.
The distinguished gentleman from Louisiana is recognized.
Mr. Higgins. I thank the Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, most of us just spent about a month in our
district working. We call it recess. The fake news media calls
it recess. But, trust me, it is not like recess in the fifth
grade.
So had countless meetings and townhalls and scores of very
important conversations with our constituents. And one of the
very alarming and consistent complaints that we have from our
constituents is the difficulty to navigate through the Federal
bureaucracy in whatever way that they are challenged to do so.
For businesses, including agriculture, it is a big problem.
EPA, DOL, for our constituency across the board, IRS, Social
Security, disability claims. Legitimate interactions between
the citizens that we are sworn to serve and the Federal
Government that allegedly performs in that manner.
Now, Congress, through Article I, we establish law and
appropriate moneys, and the executive branch executes law and
policy and spends money. That is a basic description of the
division of powers. So, it is the executive branch and the
departments and agencies thereof that our citizenry are loudly
complaining about regarding availability to work their case
files.
And we are told at the district level--there is 435
congressional districts in this country. You know, maybe some
of my colleagues are hearing something different. I would be
interested to know that.
But, from what I understand, across the country every
congressional district is the same story. We are getting told:
Oh, the backlog. Well, it is going to take 18 months to
process. It is going to take 6 months to process this.
You have to constantly update your own websites to advise
the citizenry, that we are sworn to serve, how early they need
to log in, get their application turned in, because there is a
backlog. Taking a long time. This is how long it takes. And
that amount of time is getting longer and longer and longer.
Passports, it is insane. We have had 9 million illegal
crossings, the floodgates opened on the southern border. I have
got husbands that cannot marry their wives, cannot get a visa,
trying to follow the law.
I have got businesses that cannot get their senior
engineers in here because they are installing a piece of
equipment that requires an international team. We cannot get
the engineer a visa.
I have got daughters that cannot come to America to care
for their dying mother because we cannot get her a visa
legally.
We might as well send them through Mexico. They can roll
right in and handle their business.
And the Federal Government, with all due respect to you
all--I mean, God bless you, one and all--but you are going to
sit here today and tell us everything is cool with teleworking?
It is not cool. We go into buildings in this bizarre realm
called Washington, DC, and just look at the doors. There is
nobody there.
There is old signs on a lot of these doors, says the office
is closed, we are working from home because of COVID. Little
mask symbol on the door. You have got old, like, Chinese
restaurant menus stuck in the door.
It is not working. We need our executive branch to perform
in person, in your office, end of story. If I ran things--many
are glad that I do not--everybody would be back at work and
performing in the manner in which we were sworn to do.
Mr. Dorman, I appreciate your service, and because of my
rant I am going to give you an opportunity in my closing half a
minute to respond, good sir.
Mr. Dorman. Thank you, Congressman.
The NRC remained open, as I said, throughout the pandemic.
We do not have those transactional services with constituents.
We work with licensees and applicants. And we also serve the
American public, as you noted.
Any member of the public can go to our website, and we have
a hotline. And that hotline was manned 24/7 throughout the
pandemic and is today. So, we are accessible----
Mr. Higgins. I appreciate your response, but, generally
speaking, your website operations, they do not work for a
regular American. It takes hours and hours. It says, if you
have a problem, make a phone call. You get on a phone call, you
are on hold for 4 hours, then you are disconnected.
I am telling you, it does not work.
So, Mr. Chairman, my time has expired. Thank you for this
hearing today. Hopefully we can have another.
I yield.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, an inquiry?
Mr. Sessions. The gentleman yields back his time.
Does the gentleman seek time?
Mr. Connolly. Just to inquire.
Mr. Sessions. The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the Chair.
Is it not true that, in fact, with respect to passport
operations, passport employees are not allowed to telework?
Mr. Sessions. Well, I, quite honestly----
Mr. Connolly. Is that not the case?
Mr. Sessions [continuing]. I do not have that direct
answer. But what I would say to you is the gentleman remembers
where we did have a hearing with, specifically, the young
Ambassador who handles that methodology, and she did recognize
they have problems.
Mr. Connolly. A problem. I agree.
Mr. Sessions. And she did. And that was what I think could
be said by Mr. Higgins, perhaps others, that there are places
where problems are apparent to people.
And I would remind the gentleman, that he would remind me
if I did not, that we are working together on that issue and
that she, the young Ambassador, gave us notice she would fix
that problem by the end of September.
Mr. Connolly. The Chair is correct that----
Mr. Sessions. That day comes very near, and we will then
reopen that issue. And I encourage the gentleman to be a part
of that. And I respectfully thank him for his feedback.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. And my only point was if there is
a problem, we agree, but it is not about telework.
I thank the Chair.
Mr. Sessions. Well, and I agree with the gentleman. It is
their problem to fix the problem. It is our issue that we have
people that abound who provide us feedback, too. And the
gentleman knows that. And I do respect and appreciate his
engagement.
The distinguished gentlewoman from Washington, DC, the
gentlewoman, Ms. Norton, is recognized.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate this
hearing.
And I would like to use my time to highlight the critical
work performed by Federal employees every single day and to
thank the Federal employees who are testifying today.
I have introduced a resolution that highlights their
important work. As I note in that resolution, Federal employees
should be applauded for their tireless work and extensive
efforts on behalf of the American people. Many of them live in
the Nation's Capital and the national capital region.
Thousands of civil Federal employees have given their lives
in the line of duty for their country. Federal employees have
supported, defended, and been indispensable to the progress the
United States has achieved through times of war and peace,
recession and prosperity, and global instability and
uncertainty.
From scientific advancements, to medical research, to
protecting the health and safety of the public, Federal
employees have been indispensable. They bring benefits to the
public welfare, to the progress of democracy, and to the United
States as a whole.
Instead of celebrating Federal employees, some of my
friends on the other side attack and talk derisively about them
and want to shut down the Federal Government on October the
1st, all for purely partisan political reasons.
A shutdown would harm critical programs and delay the
paychecks of Federal employees causing great harm to these
public servants and the public. Republicans want to
dramatically cut Federal spending, which would harm critical
programs and Federal workers. Some Republicans have indicated
they want to gut the civil service system, which ensures a
nonpartisan, merit-based, professional Federal workforce, and
to turn it into a patronage system.
It is time we recognize the hard work of Federal employees.
For example, I have introduced a bill aimed at combating
Federal pay compression. It will allow Federal employees who
reach the pay cap in their pay system to receive the base
locality pay adjustments they would otherwise be entitled to.
This is something they deserve.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
Mr. Sessions. The distinguished gentlewoman yields back her
time. Thank you very much.
The gentleman, Mr. Edwards, is recognized.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Dr. Marrongelle, you testified that employees are asked to
come back to work 4 days per pay period. What--how many days
are in a pay period?
Ms. Marrongelle. There are 10 days in a pay period.
Mr. Edwards. Ten days. So why are they asked to come back 4
days?
Ms. Marrongelle. Thank you for the question. As I
mentioned, we had a strong telework policy in place since 2004,
so prior to the pandemic. And we were already in 2018, 2019,
looking at ways to expand that for our workforce and enhance
that. The pandemic certainly accelerated that against a
timeline that we had----
Mr. Edwards. Excuse me, because I am on a clock. I have got
to get to the point. What are the--what are employees expected
to do in those 4 days that they could not do from their sofa or
comfort of wherever they are at?
Ms. Marrongelle. Thank you for clarifying. So, during those
days our employees are expected to collaborate, work together,
do the types of mentoring, network building within the agency.
That is more difficult to do when they are not onsite.
Mr. Edwards. And so why is 4 days the correct number in
order to be able to collaborate with one another?
Ms. Marrongelle. Well, unfortunately, there is no exact
science that points to a correct number. We know that it needs
to be more than what we--or we feel like it needs to be more
than what we have now, which is 2 days per pay period, and so,
we are moving to 4 as a next point.
Mr. Edwards. All right. Thank you.
So, for all of you, I would just like to ask, as quickly as
you could answer, from my perspective, in going through the
pandemic, because to a large degree, I did some telework as
well, and like many of you, I have participated in hundreds of
Zoom meetings. And I found it interesting to watch what was
going on, on the other side of these Zoom meetings, and it
causes me to question the productivity of the person on the
other side of that Zoom meeting.
I would see folks dealing with their pets, washing their
dishes, I would see laundry stacked up on the couch, and I
cannot help but think that we are not getting the maximum
productivity from folks when they are working from home. I know
what my own tendencies are. I get lost in walking the dog, or
the television is on and I get caught up in that. And so, what
measures of productivity have you put into place to ensure that
when folks are working at home, we get the same output as if
they were in the office for these 4 days? Mr. Alles?
Mr. Alles. Thank you for your question, sir. I think--a
couple of things. I will talk about measurements here in a
second. To me, time present is not work. I mean, they can be at
their desk in the office not accomplishing their work, they can
be at home not accomplishing their work, so I want to measure
what they are doing output-wise. And we do that across our
lines of business and also across our different components.
So, a couple of examples. Our obligation rates for the
money that Congress generously provides us stay high, in the
high 99 percent rate. In terms of our contract spending, it has
actually risen across the pandemic from $18 billion in Fiscal
Year 1918 to $22 billion in Fiscal Year 1923. FOIA is always a
particular concern for folks, have risen from $392,000 in 1920
to $535,000 in Fiscal Year 1923.
So, I am using different metrics. I want to see their
performance that they are actually producing. If they are in
the office or not--there are reasons to be in the office. I
talked with the Chairman earlier about engineering that is done
on our ships. It needs to be done in person, that kind of ready
access to the person. But otherwise, I want to see what their
performance output is.
Mr. Edwards. And so, I am clearly going to run out of time
here, so I will stick with you, Mr. Alles. When they are at
work, there is the possibility that someone is looking over
their shoulder, and they know if that employee is on their
Facebook, or they are watching funny cat videos or if they are
dealing with their email or if they are working on a
spreadsheet, what assurances do you have that folks are totally
engaged in their work when they are at home and not distracted
by so many other extraneous activities?
Mr. Alles. So, I think briefly, as you say, they can be
distracted. So, I want my supervisors to be engaged in the work
they are performing and evaluating their output very candidly.
That is the best thing I can do. But that applies in the office
too, sir.
Mr. Edwards. Yes. Do you have the ability to monitor
equipment when somebody is at home to know how many hours they
spent on programs that are not authorized or used in the normal
course of their business?
Mr. Alles. We can monitor what they are doing on the
internet, that is correct, sir. And we also have what is called
an insider threat program that monitors employees' use of their
classified and unclassified networks as a counterintelligence
method.
Mr. Edwards. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I see I am out of time, so I will yield.
Mr. Sessions. The gentleman yields back his time. Thank you
very much.
The distinguished gentleman from Florida is recognized.
Mr. Frost. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Federal agencies carry out critical missions of all kinds.
In Florida alone, civil servants have roles like nuclear
inspectors, emergency management professionals, and certain
rocket scientists that are vital and probably cannot be done
remotely. However, there are many vital roles that can be done
remotely.
It is no secret that hurricane season hits Florida harder
than most each year. By the projections from most scientists,
Florida is facing rising sea levels and increasingly violent
hurricanes. This summer, ocean temperatures off the coast
reached record levels, climbing to over 100 degrees, hot tub
levels.
In Florida, we know all too well that crisis can happen at
any moment, from a global pandemic to extreme weather events,
which are becoming all too common. The Federal Government has
to remain operational during these times, and the beautiful
thing about that, including telework as part of the solution,
is what the data shows. It is actually better for productivity.
That is right, telework is actually better for productivity,
which is borne out of the fact that more than 70 percent of
Federal employees reported that telework had improved
productivity at their agency a great deal.
No. 2, it is actually better economically. The General
Services Administration, the Federal agency that provides real
estate, discovered that in a single year, the Federal
Government saved more than $1 billion in cost from the reduced
office space. So, I think there can be some bipartisanship
around that, because I hear a lot from my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle about saving money. They want to talk
about SNAPs and food stamps; I think office space makes a lot
of sense too.
The Office of Personnel Management, the Federal agency that
manages the Federal workforce, also found that agencies
experience significant savings related to transit commuting
costs as well as reduced employee absences because of increased
telework. And it is actually better for recruitment and
retention.
Take NASA, for instance, which I--during my district work
period, I got to visit the mobile launcher for Artemis II. I am
really excited about that. Hopefully, the government does not
shut down, because I hear that can push back our launch date
quite a bit. In the agency's written response to the Committee,
NASA indicated that having a geographically dispersed telework-
ready force has helped them maintain the continuity of
operations in case of an emergency, including regional weather
events.
Mr. Gibbs, the mission support directorate includes the
Office of Human Capital Management, correct?
Mr. Gibbs. It does.
Mr. Frost. And what is the mission of this office?
Mr. Gibbs. So human capital, their--if you ask what does
human capital do, their first mission, take care of the people
of NASA. That is their ultimate responsibility for the agency.
Mr. Frost. And it is to ensure that NASA has top talent,
right?
Mr. Gibbs. Absolutely, 100 percent, to make sure we have
the right minds to compete, and to make sure we can complete a
very technologically challenging mission and one that is rather
unforgiving.
Mr. Frost. What other organizations or companies does NASA
have to compete with for top talent?
Mr. Gibbs. Pretty much everyone fundamentally. We are
recognized as a leader in the aerospace, engineering, science
exploration world. We see everyone from venture capitalists to
other engineering organizations, to you name it, looking at our
talent as an opportunity to bring in a new way of thinking to
their business process.
Mr. Frost. Virgin Galactic, SpaceX, right?
Mr. Gibbs. 100 percent.
Mr. Frost. For 5 straight years, NASA has been selected as
the best place to work in the Federal----
Mr. Gibbs. Correction, it is 11, just so we are clear.
Mr. Frost. Oh, 11, OK, I am sorry. Eleven straight years,
NASA has been selected as the best place to work in the Federal
Government, so I think you know a thing or two about what it
takes to attract top talent. Do these other employers have
telework policies, like SpaceX, for instance?
Mr. Gibbs. It is all over the board, honestly. We looked at
the top 100 companies across the United States, and honestly,
their telework and workplace flexibilities are all over the
board.
Mr. Frost. All over the board. SpaceX and Virgin Galactic,
for instance, are hirering roles that permit telework every
single week. So, the private sector has caught on to this. And
I can tell you, we know what pushes the private sector is
productivity and the bottom line, right?
Mr. Gibbs. Correct.
Mr. Frost. And so, they have noticed this, and they have
taken advantage of it. I do not want us to fall behind. I do
not want NASA to fall behind. I do not want the Federal
Government to fall behind in looking at the future of how work
is going to look like, so we can both save money, recruit the
best talent, and have the retention that we need to complete
the difficult missions ahead of us.
Many talented minds have committed themselves to working in
public service. I also want to say, I find it pretty offensive
that one of my colleagues would insinuate that Federal
employees, just because they are taking advantage and using
telework policies, are somehow not working. We are talking
about working-class Americans who have dedicated their life to
public service.
In fact, all of our constituent service teams cannot do
jack without the Federal employees on the other side of the
phone line that we are helping our constituents get connected
to. And so, I want to thank all of our Federal employees for
all their work. Telework is one tool in the toolbox to maintain
continuity and attract cutting-edge talent. Thank you. And I
yield back.
Mr. Sessions. The gentleman yields back his time.
The distinguished gentleman, Mr. Burchett, is recognized.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate those
adjectives.
Mr. Alles, is that how you pronounce your name, correct,
sir?
Mr. Alles. Yes, sir.
Mr. Burchett. You go by Tex? It says in my notes you go by
Tex. Is that correct?
Mr. Alles. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Burchett. All right. Well, Tex, let me ask you a
question. Which agencies within the Department--in your
department are still working remotely?
Mr. Alles. All the agencies have teleworkers. Some--and I
want to be careful here, I think most of them have remote
workers. All of them have some form of telework.
Mr. Burchett. OK. My staff, and that includes me, we
continue to have issues getting timely responses from the
United States Citizenship and Immigration Services. What are
you all doing to improve those response times for this agency?
Mr. Alles. So, Citizenship and Immigration Services, sir,
is on track this year to have a 15 percent higher completion
rate on their employment authorization documents, so they are
making progress there. They have also----
Mr. Burchett. I mean, that is their goal, or that is what
they are actually doing?
Mr. Alles. That is what they are actually doing.
Mr. Burchett. OK.
Mr. Alles. So, that is what they are actually doing. And
also, they are improving their processes on naturalization.
This will be our highest year of naturalizations, over 1
million is what is on track for them so far. And let me just
verify my numbers there, sir.
[Pause.]
Mr. Burchett. Do you want to get back to me on that?
Mr. Alles. No, that is correct. 1,076,000 is what they are
looking at this year.
Mr. Burchett. How has the Department of Homeland Security
implemented new measures during the switch to telework to
ensure the same level of border security as we had in pre-
COVID? That is the kind of the thing you cannot do from your
couch.
Mr. Alles. So, I think, as we described before, depending
on the job description, the job they are performing, it could
not perform remotely. So, when we talk about border security,
those are all in-person employees every day of the week. That
applies in other areas, such as the Secret Service, across my
HSI investigators at ICE. These are going to be employees that
have to be onsite every day, as you would expect in the law
enforcement realm. But they are----
Mr. Burchett. Sure.
Mr. Alles [continuing]. Supported in the back office by
some employees that are, in fact, teleworking.
Mr. Burchett. Well, has that--going along the same lines, I
think you have more or less answered it, but has the Homeland
Security's COVID era telework policies, have they impacted our
ground surveillance at the southern border? There is not much
at the southern border, but--that I feel like you all are
doing, but is it--has it impacted it any?
Mr. Alles. I would have to get back to you and ask CBP on
that one, sir. I do not think it has, but I would actually need
to verify with them.
Mr. Burchett. OK. Mr. Dorman, were nuclear regulatory
commission inspections impacted by the COVID-era telework
policies?
Mr. Dorman. Congressman, not by the telework policies.
During the height of the pandemic, we worked carefully to
manage the risk to our inspectors as well as to the control
room operators and other plant staff who ensure the safety of
the plant every day to make sure we were not putting them at
risk during peaks of COVID in the community. But our telework
policy did not impact our inspection.
Mr. Burchett. OK. Obviously, they would not be doing that
from the comfort of their homes. They would have to be there,
correct? Or, I mean, you know, because they are reading
monitors, and could they read the monitors in their house and--
--
Mr. Dorman. So, we have worked with licensees to get the
technology so that our inspectors are able to monitor plant
status remotely, and also access the licensee's records systems
remotely. But for our resident inspectors, whose duty station
is at the nuclear power plant, they are expected to be at the
nuclear power plant. And so, their presence is a component,
their availability to plant staff who may have a concern about
operations are key considerations. So, yes, our resident
inspectors are expected to be at the plant.
Mr. Burchett. I think that is a wise decision, less
distractions, less things going on, and they can keep focused
on it.
What are your all's telework policies?
Mr. Dorman. So, our telework policies----
Mr. Burchett. Briefly. Briefly, if you would.
Mr. Dorman. Yes, sir. So, we have the full suite of the
telework tools, so somebody can be full-time in office. There
are options for remote work. We have about six percent of our
workforce is remote. In between--if your proposal does not
involve a change to your duty station, basically the work model
that we are planning to put in place would allow you to work
that out with your first-line supervisor based on the nature of
your work.
And then we focus on, in the implementation, presence with
purpose. What are the reasons that we need to come together to
optimize our work and work out the details day by day, week by
week, on bringing people together to do that--do our work the
best.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you. I have gone over.
Mr. Chairman, I would just state for the record, I do not
like the telework situation, even the mayor of Washington, DC.
pleaded with the President of the United States about sending
folks back to work. The economic impact it is having on
Washington, DC, in this area, is pretty resounding. I think you
just walk down and see the restaurants that are no longer
there, the mom-and-pop shops that are gone, so I think at some
point we need to address this. But I do realize, like electric
vehicles, as much as I do not like them, I think it is going to
be--we better embrace it at some point, because it is part of
the future. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sessions. The distinguished gentleman yields back his
time. And the Chairman did hear your comments, and that is part
of the discussion and why you have been so important to this
conversation. I appreciate the gentleman.
The distinguished gentlewoman from Dallas is recognized,
Ms. Crockett.
Ms. Crockett. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to go at this a little bit differently. First of
all, let me thank each and every one of you for your service to
our country. And I think that, as Members of Congress, we
should do everything that we can to support you, and we should
listen to you, because this is the work that you do every day,
and it is why we bring you in to testify. Seemingly, everyone
has different ideas of what you do instead of wanting to listen
to you.
But nevertheless, I think we could save a lot of time if
Congress worked remotely, because I know--time and money,
because I know that it takes me almost 3 hours to get here from
Dallas. I have got another freshman colleague that is from
Hawaii, and we all know what happened in Hawaii here recently.
And she travels and leaves her husband and her two boys to get
here.
Yet, seemingly showing up to work does not necessarily mean
that you are going to get anything done, because the last time
I checked, we are currently facing a government shutdown. It is
pending. And people have shown up, but they have not shown up
to actually do the work. So, we are concerned about telework,
but what we really need to be concerned about is whether or not
we are going to do our work when we are in the building,
because we are the ones that are supposed to make sure that we
pass appropriations bills so that we can fund what you are
doing as we talk about backlogs.
So, let me talk about some of the reasons for some of the
backlogs that have been brought up. By a show of hands, I am
curious to know, any of your agencies, are they at 100 percent
capacity as it relates to having the workforce that you need?
No one? Ain't none of you all got 100--oh, OK. OK. So,
maybe you need some money so that you can hire some people. Let
me also ask you, and I know that it was brought up a little bit
earlier, I believe it was you, Mr. Dorman, that talked about
the fact that you are looking at what private industry is doing
and competing.
Is it not true--and anyone who feels like I am stating a
falsehood, please say something. Is it not true, that the
majority of private industry is offering flexibility and better
pay than the Federal Government right now?
OK. All right. So, it is hard to compete, because, No. 1,
we are not giving you all no money; No. 2, we are showing up
every day, but we are not doing our jobs because we seemingly
are about to shut down, because I do not know how you--I am
just a freshman. But from what I have been told, I do not know
how we are going to get through 12 appropriations bills in all
this time, especially when we keep cutting votes back because
they do not have the votes.
So, we may need to focus on how we can do better at our
jobs and support you so that you all can take care of our
constituents. So, with that, there are options on the table.
Republicans and Democrats, we need to come together and find
common ground, and we did this a little earlier this year.
I was working on a retention option, because in June, I led
a letter to the Secretaries of Defense and State and the OPM
director about concerns regarding the retention of federally
employed military spouses. This letter was co-led by a
Republican actually on my Oversight Committee.
I also introduced an amendment to the NDAA directing the
Secretary of Defense to provide employment flexibility to
military spouses deployed by the Department. This amendment was
cosponsored by several Republicans, including, again, one on
Oversight.
The military is currently facing a recruitment crisis. This
is why it is important--more important than ever that we retain
current military families. Over one-third of Active-Duty
military families cite difficulties securing spousal employment
as a reason for leaving the service. In fact, in the past
decade, military spouses have experienced persistently high
unemployment rates hovering around 21 percent, nearly seven
times the national average.
Consider Jessica, a military spouse of 19 years, currently
stationed at Fort Bliss, Texas, with her Active-Duty spouse.
Jessica is a senior passport specialist with the State
Department. Her husband recently submitted his Army retirement
packet because his transfer order meant Jessica would not be
able to work at State because it does not offer remote or
telework flexibilities.
How is this protecting our country? And I am sure the
majority of you never heard about this bipartisan amendment.
You heard about all the other trash that they wanted to put on
the Floor that had nothing to do with keeping our country safe.
What we need to do is focus in on the priorities, and the
priorities are not culture wars. That is not the priorities.
The priorities are making sure that people are working and
people are safe. And regardless of what the President said--and
I love the President. I support him, let me say that right
now--COVID is still around. We have Members that are out right
now because they are sick with COVID. So, for those that missed
the memo, COVID does still exist, and these flexibilities allow
people to not only be safe, but they also make sure that we are
keeping our country safe.
So, thank you for what you do every day. Thank you for
putting up with these questions. Thank you for fighting for a
country that somehow does not seem like it is fighting half as
hard for you and your employees.
And with that, I would just ask for unanimous consent to
enter into the record a statement from the Parallel
Professionals, EFM, MOH, and the U.S. Department of State
employee organizations for the spouses, partners of Foreign
Service professionals, who are civil servants, government
contractors, and who work at U.S. missions abroad, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Sessions. Without objection, that will be entered into
the record. Thank you very much.
Ms. Crockett. And I will yield.
Mr. Sessions. The gentlewoman yields back her time.
The distinguished gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Biggs, is
recognized.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I am sure that
nobody who offered some of those other amendments thought they
were trash. I think they probably thought they were pretty
good.
But let us just talk about just a couple things I need to
get into the record, Mr. Chairman. First of all, from Space
Magazine, from June 2, 2022, ``Elon Musk tells SpaceX, Tesla
workers they must be in the office at least 40 hours a week.''
And also, a report from the GAO entitled, ``Federal Real
Property: Preliminary Results Show Federal Buildings Remain
Underutilized Due to Longstanding Challenges and Increased
Telework.'' So----
Mr. Sessions. Without objection, that will be entered in
the record.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And just to respond to my colleagues talking about
congestion, there are more people who come in every day because
D.C. is open, so you have got a lot of tourists coming in as
well, and the buses really provide the congestion. And I do not
know what happened last Tuesday, but that was ridiculous on
395.
But anyway, let us just talk about the buildings for a
second and the impact on telework. For me, the biggest question
is productivity and constituent satisfaction in their
interaction with the Federal agency. That is--those are the two
areas that really drive my thoughts on this matter.
But I want to give it some context, because this is
testimony from earlier this year: The Federal Government spends
about $2 billion a year to operate and maintain Federal office
buildings regardless of the building's utilization, $2 billion
regardless of how much they are used, and we lease another $5
billion worth of buildings.
Now, why is that important? We are leasing 511 million
square feet of office space. That is what we get to. But of
that amount, in 1,500 federally owned buildings, what we get to
is this: 17 of the 24 Federal agencies use, on average, 25
percent or less of the capacity of their headquarter building,
25 percent or less, and the highest range is still below 50
percent.
So, what that means is, we are spending a bucket load of
money that we either do not need to, should not need to, and we
need to lessen our footprint. The other thing is, the
productivity and the constituent interface that we have,
everybody up here probably gets calls every week like I do, we
are having trouble with passports, we are having trouble with,
you name it, OSHA, whatever it may be. And you guys were
talking about--all of you were talking about different measures
of productivity.
And, Mr. Alles, you talked about somebody could even be
removed. So, I am wondering, how many people have been removed
for failing to perform under teleworking conditions?
Mr. Alles. I cannot address specifically teleworking
themselves, sir. I can tell you that in fiscal year----
Mr. Biggs. Well, this is--Mr. Alles, I do not mean to
interrupt. Well, I do mean to interrupt. I do not want to be
rude about it. But we are talking about teleworking, so that
would be--I would be interested in that, because all of you
said you have measures of productivity, you have measures----
Mr. Alles. Right.
Mr. Biggs [continuing]. If somebody is watching the cat
videos or whatever, you have ways to track and measure it. Some
of you have said, well, we want the supervisor to just make
sure that the work is getting done.
Look, Congress itself, remember, we are sitting in a
hearing. I would always come. I never missed a day. We are in--
we are doing a Zoom meeting one time. I am sitting in the
building in this room, and there is a guy, and we are watching
on the screen, and he Is sitting there in his pajamas in a bed,
right. There--you know, other people are showing up on the
boats. That is--that doesn't deliver good constituent services.
So, I want to know what really is a real metric for
determining whether constituents are satisfied. How are you
measuring whether constituents are--that you deal with, who you
interface with, are receiving proper and adequate service? How
do we do it? Let us start with Mr. Dorman and then go down,
please.
Mr. Dorman. Yes, sir. I think probably the best analog
there is our licensing caseload. And when we get an application
from a licensee or applicant, we establish a schedule for
review and a level of effort associated with it because we are
a fee recovery agency, and we communicate that to the
licensees. And so, we measure at the individual level what
their contribution is to the actions, and we roll it up at the
program level and look at are we meeting our metrics on that.
So that is the productivity piece of it.
Mr. Biggs. So just real quick, how has that changed pre-
COVID to now, I mean, when you went to teleworking?
Mr. Dorman. We have sustained, and, I would say, even
slightly improved, our performance in that area.
Mr. Biggs. Mr. Chairman, can the rest answer the question?
Mr. Sessions. Absolutely. The gentleman will be extended
that time to receive the answers that he has asked--is seeking.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. At NASA, we are not a constituent-facing serving
organization or agency. That is not necessarily what our
mission is. So, those metrics are a little bit different. But I
will tell you that we look at telework and remote work and
onsite work the same. The same rules apply. The same
expectations of professionalism apply. The same rules of making
sure you get your job done and service the mission apply.
NASA is a very matrixed organization heavily leveraged on a
contracted workforce. At every level of our organization there
are checkpoints, and there are sort of measures to ensure that
we are performing according to plan, so the individual reports
through an organization and through a mission directorate and
to the agency. And at the agency level, we have six independent
measures looking at health, and we have six measures looking at
overall agency performance.
I will tell you, throughout the pandemic, there were costs
of getting our work done, as there were in all of our lives.
But the cost of getting the work done and things that had to be
overcome, as we all had to do, were overcome, and we were able
to accomplish amazing things for the American public.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you. Doctor?
Ms. Marrongelle. At NSF, similar to NASA, we are not a
constituent-facing agency. One of our measures of productivity
is number of proposals processed. That number peaked in 2021
when we were at maximum telework throughout the agency. That is
not the same, of course, as measuring the effectiveness of the
agency. We have new metrics in place to understand how we are
reaching out and attracting in institutions who have not had
track records with NSF to NSF, and in states like EPSCoR states
and others, and we are embarking on a new customer service
experience program to understand how our work with our
customers, our principal investigators, is effective.
Mr. Biggs. Look forward to seeing a copy of those
guidelines, please.
Mr. Alles. For DHS, sir, for TSA, they have now reached, in
the Fiscal Year 1923, they have reached and exceeded Fiscal
Year 1919 pre-pandemic levels. Six of our 10 record throughput
days at airports have occurred this year, and the service
continues uninterrupted.
I would point out for FEMA, they have had 487 deployments
this year involving 44,184 FEMA personnel to serve the American
people. TSA precheck, typically 600 enrollment locations, you
get your service in less than 2 weeks. You can get an
appointment and you get your known traveler number no more than
3 to 5 days after that. My chief of staff recently just
experienced that herself. So, I think there are metrics we use
to measure performance, sir.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sessions. Before the gentleman yields, would the
gentleman like to cover those things with this panel that he is
interested in receiving information back for, or would you like
for me to attempt to give that dialog at the end?
Mr. Biggs. I think that would be better if you gave it at
the end. And, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate you extending that
courtesy. I think what I am intending to do is write maybe a
followup letter with regard to some of the information that I
have heard here today. And I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sessions. The gentleman yields back his time. Thank you
very much.
The gentlewoman from Pennsylvania is recognized.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The lifeblood of our Federal Government is its people, and
to attract and retain those workers, the Federal Government has
to use every tool and innovation available to build a Federal
workforce that reflects the people they serve. This country's
workforce changed during COVID-19 pandemic, and we should
acknowledge and accommodate that rather than pushing to move
backward and holding hearings against it.
Evidence shows that Federal agencies offering telework and
remote work opportunities have expanded their pool of talented
job applicants when compared to those who have not offered
telework. During a March hearing before this Committee, OPM
Director Karen Aruja said that remote jobs posted on the
USAJobs website between June and October 22d of last year had,
quote, 17 times more applications than non-remote jobs,
significantly more applications from military spouse eligible
applicants as compared to non-remote jobs, that is on average
25.2 applications as opposed to 1.4 applications, a higher
percentage of female and minoritized candidates as compared to
non-remote postings, and a greater geographic diversity with
applications from candidates in 37 different states as compared
to just seven states for non-remote postings.
Telework and remote work availability has also opened doors
to people with disabilities. Even before the pandemic, the
Office of Personnel Management recommended agencies publicize
workplace flexibilities, including telework, to make their
organizations more attractive to candidates with disabilities,
and to better retain those employees. And the Federal
Government can do even more to recruit and retain employees
from underrepresented groups.
Dr. Marrongelle, what role did telework play at the
National Science Foundation during the pandemic?
Ms. Marrongelle. Because our staff were already familiar
with telework and had used telework prior to the pandemic, we
were easily able to transition into full telework mode. We did
not miss a beat as an agency. As I mentioned, we processed a
record number of proposals in 2021 when our staff were
operating at full telework mode.
Ms. Lee. Why is the recruitment and retention of diverse
employees important to the National Science Foundation?
Ms. Marrongelle. It is incredibly important. It is
important for national and economic security of our country.
Because we fund science at the cutting edge, keeping us a
global leader, we have to maintain our ability to attract and
retain the best and brightest at the National Science
Foundation. Telework flexibilities are a part of that type of
recruitment and retention.
Ms. Lee. And one last question very quickly. Has the
National Science Foundation's telework policies allowed the
agency to have broader outreach to stakeholders? More
specifically, did it find that telework helped expand the
agency's hubs?
Ms. Marrongelle. Yes, absolutely. Because we have one
central location in Alexandria, we--prior to the pandemic, we
had done a lot of travel to states which was somewhat limited.
Because of the new technologies and flexibilities, we have been
able to, over tenfold, increase our outreach to constituents,
especially those that have not had a track record with NSF.
Ms. Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs, in documents provided to the Committee, NASA
said that telework has provided, quote, ``a tremendous
opportunity for NASA to remain competitive in the modern job
market, especially when attempting to attract highly skilled
employees.'' How has telework helped NASA stay competitive with
the private sector?
Mr. Gibbs. I would like to answer that in a little bit
different order----
Ms. Lee. Please.
Mr. Gibbs [continuing]. If you do not mind, ma'am. I would
like to talk about internships and the impact. One of our
missions at NASA is inspiring the next generation of engineers,
scientists, explorers that support our Nation's interests.
Working through the tools we developed or really perfected or
got better at, honestly, during the pandemic, we were able to
increase our internship opportunity from the 10 geographically
located areas to every state in the union. We were able to
increase the diversity of those populations. We were able to
increase and get participation from across the country.
So, when you are looking at it from a competitive
perspective, starting with interns at NASA, you have changed
the pool from that one local geographic area to the entire
Nation. Our success, our ability to do the great things that
this Nation asks us to do, to put the first woman and next man,
first man of color on the moon, rely on sort of building this
incredibly diverse workforce that can accomplish amazing
things.
So, I will tell you, from our perspective, there was--there
is opportunity there, and we saw it in our interns.
Ms. Lee. Thank you so much for lifting up that particular
angle on perspective.
Workforce diversity fosters innovative solutions and better
problem-solving capabilities. As Representatives, we should be
working to help foster a workforce that most effectively serves
our constituents and this Nation, rather than hindering it,
like this hearing is attempting to do.
Telework attracts individuals regardless of race, location,
religion, and it can offer opportunities to those who have
disabilities or lives overseas or military spouses, or simply
need to be near their families. Why would we hamstring our
Federal agencies by eliminating a powerful tool to recruit a
talented workforce that serves our Nation?
I thank the panel, and I yield back.
Mr. Sessions. The gentlewoman yields back her time.
The distinguished gentlewoman from Colorado is recognized.
Mrs. Boebert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the witnesses for being here today.
Mr. Dorman, on August 4, 2023, White House Chief of Staff,
Jeff Zients, sent an email stressing the importance of
increased in-person work, stating increasing in-person work is
a priority for President Biden to, quote, ``deliver better
results for the American people,'' end quote, by improving
teamwork and productivity within the Federal workforce, which
contradicts the previous statements.
Folks have argued that the email was only sent as a result
of a fairly aggressive letter that was sent from this
Committee, from the Oversight and Accountability Committee, by
myself, Chairman Comer, and Subcommittee Chairman Sessions. Was
there any confusion within your agency after this change of
tone?
Mr. Dorman. I think we did reach out to OMB to seek
clarification, Congresswoman, because in response to OMB M-
2315, which calls for significant increase in meaningful in-
person presence, the NRC had significantly increased our in-
person presence in November 2021. And the plan that we provided
to OMB in May, in response to that memo, and got OMB's
feedback, we were wondering if this email was suggesting a
change in expectation. And so, we circled back with OMB and
confirmed that their expectation was that we move forward with
the plan that we had provided to them, and they were really
looking for, OK, now implement.
Mrs. Boebert. OK. And did the White House email result in
more employees in your agency actually getting back to work in
person, working full-time? And if it did, then what is that
percentage of your workforce that is back to work, working in
person 5 days a week?
Mr. Dorman. Congresswoman, I do not have that specific
percentage, but in the first half of this calendar year,
approximately 60 percent of NRC's work was in-person work. And
the--that memo did not--as I indicated, that did not change
anything because we had already had our plan, gotten feedback
from OMB, and were working toward implementation of it.
Mrs. Boebert. And are you still bringing more employees
back to work in person?
Mr. Dorman. So, our model at this point is focusing on the
purpose of the in-person presence. So, we are really looking at
how we are bringing people back and making sure that it has
actually got the meaningful engagement so that we are
optimizing the way we are working in a hybrid environment.
Mrs. Boebert. OK. And, Tex, could you please tell me what
the agency's telework policies were prior to COVID?
Mr. Alles. So, telework, again, was--well, like now, and
thank you for the question, was handled still on a case-by-case
basis. There was not as much telework prior to the pandemic.
That has increased during the pandemic. We fortunately equipped
our employees with equipment before the pandemic to enable them
to work remotely, so it was somewhat seamless from that
standpoint. But it was a very low rate of telework before the
pandemic.
And then post-pandemic, it stayed at a higher rate.
Currently, as indicated in the statement, we are 85 percent
spend the majority of their time in the office, and then 15
percent are in a telework status, which is typically 2 days per
pay period.
Mrs. Boebert. So, what was the agency's telework policy
when they were at their maximum with telework?
Mr. Alles. I would have to get the exact number to you.
That would have been during Fiscal Year 2020 when everybody
went out for the pandemic.
Mrs. Boebert. And were you monitoring what employees were
actually logging on and producing work products?
Mr. Alles. So, I was--I think the way that is done is via
the office performance metrics.
Mrs. Boebert. And there was policies in place to track
that, to ensure that employees were working during the time
that they were home tele----
Mr. Alles. The supervisors are responsible for the
employees work whether they are in the office or remote,
absolutely.
Mrs. Boebert. Sorry, my time is running out. In April 2023,
OMB issued guidance that called for increased meaningful in-
person work. Did this guidance result in any changes to the
agency's telework policies?
Mr. Alles. That was for me, ma'am?
Mrs. Boebert. Yes.
Mr. Alles. Yes. We have seen a decrease of about 20,000
employees from the height of the pandemic until now that are no
longer working in a telework status. So, the actual memo though
is the direction we were already moving prior to the memo,
meaningful in-person work. And it is increasing, our percentage
is increasing.
Mrs. Boebert. OK. And just quickly, Mr. Gibbs, what is your
current reported occupancy rate in the NASA building for
employees working full-time and in person? Because I am just
showing, since my time is short, I would like you to answer,
but I am showing that some agency headquarters reported
occupancy rates as low as nine percent.
Mr. Gibbs. So, across the agency, onsite work is 66 percent
right now for NASA.
Mrs. Boebert. OK. My time is expired. Mr. Chairman, I
yield.
Mr. Sessions. The gentlewoman yields back her time.
I see no other Members that are expressing time, and so I
would yield myself the time at this point.
We have had a chance to hear from each of you, and as you
could see, there is widespread difference in, perhaps, what
today's hearing was about. I hope it was not a gotcha. Mr.
Mfume and I both believe that this is of value to not only
ourselves, but we hope to you. We think that we have asked fair
questions, but you can see that there is some bit of difference
of opinion.
Before I get to ask Mr. Dorman his question, and before I
ask Mr. Gibbs a question that I prepared, I want you to know
that part of the subject matter behind this is not only
information that we believe we receive, but also the experiment
that we went through for essentially 3 or 4 years. We could
argue whether it is 3 or 4 years, but where we in Congress did
that.
And I notice the gentleman from Virginia has shown up, and
I will be pleased to give him time.
But what I would say is, it was a difficult transition for
Members of Congress even to the last hearing. It was
complicated. It was time-consuming. It was a waste of time. It
produced, sparingly, opportunities when we were doing--when
what was a waste of time many times were the 3 hours that we
would wait before Committee hearings where we tried to get
people on or off, or move them back and forth. It was delayed
many times by any number of very technical issues that we were
working through. So, I--we were simply trying to make sure that
we were receiving those benefits of your chances as you worked
on that.
So, I am now going to, because the gentleman, Mr. Connolly,
has arrived, I am going to suspend my questions, as I said, Mr.
Dorman, and Mr. Gibbs, and yield time to the distinguished
gentleman, my friend, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You are always
gracious. And I have got another hearing at exactly the same
time----
Mr. Sessions. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. And it is in the Visitor Center,
so I am running back and forth, so thank you so much for
accommodating that schedule.
And I also want to thank the Chair, in his opening remarks,
I thought you made a really thoughtful distinction that I want
to reemphasize between universal remote working in a pandemic,
and a structured telework program. Those are two very different
things, and I really appreciate the Chairman making that
distinction.
Mr. Sessions. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. Not all of our colleagues do. And, by the
way, it is bipartisan. I mean, I heard the Mayor of Washington
conflate the two, you know, bemoaning empty offices and empty,
you know, shops and restaurants.
Mr. Sessions. Well, she looks at the results.
Mr. Connolly. Yes. But that is not caused by telework. We
had robust telework before the pandemic, and those offices were
not empty, and those shops were doing bustling business, and
so, we have got to separate the two. And I think our four
witnesses today certainly did that in their opening remarks.
And I just want to really emphasize what the Chairman said
in his opening remarks and add my own two cents to it. We need
telework. We need telework for lots of reasons.
For example, Doctor, would you say at NSF, as we look at
the next generation of employees, is telework an expectation in
the work offering when we go to make a job offer?
Ms. Marrongelle. Yes, it is.
Mr. Connolly. Why?
Ms. Marrongelle. Because we are in a different time now,
today. We have learned so many lessons over the past few years,
and we are able to offer flexibilities to attract the best and
brightest workforce, and they do expect those flexibilities.
Mr. Connolly. Right. And so, if we want to recruit and
retain the next generation--and by the way, what is your
estimate of--at NSF, for example, what percentage of your
current workforce is eligible for retirement over the next
several years?
Ms. Marrongelle. I would have to get back to you on an
exact percentage, but it is--it is a high percentage.
Mr. Connolly. Yes. Well, overall, Federal Government is
somewhere between 30 and 40 percent. So, we have got a huge
wave of retirements coming, and how are we going to replace
them, and we have got to be competitive. And, you know,
somebody made some comment about the private sector. I spent 20
years in the private sector. Telework is a very vibrant tool in
the private sector. They are way ahead of us in the public
sector, you know, Accenture, AT&T, just to name a couple. I
mean, there are plenty of companies that actively use telework
and make it work for them in terms of productivity, morale,
recruitment, and retention.
There was also a comment, I think, from my friend from
Alabama, Gary Palmer, that, you know, there are reports that
people using telework time for happy hour and pickle ball and
watching soap operas and washing the dog. Answer that.
Ms. Marrongelle. Well, I think----
Mr. Connolly. I mean, my gosh, what are you doing?
Ms. Marrongelle. I do not--I--we do not have evidence that
that is the case. I think----
Mr. Connolly. Oh, you do not have evidence. That would
imply you have got a methodology for monitoring how people use
telework. Is that true?
Ms. Marrongelle. Well, we can see from our productivity. We
can see from our productivity, from the amount of vacation and
other leave times that people are taking, those numbers have
not plummeted and our productivity has risen. And I do not--it
does not square to me how you would get results like that----
Mr. Connolly. And I am trying to get at something a little
different. Telework is a structured program, right?
Ms. Marrongelle. It is.
Mr. Connolly. It is not an informal, well, if you feel like
not coming in today, no problem. We will call that telework.
That is not telework. Is that correct?
Ms. Marrongelle. That is correct.
Mr. Connolly. So, in a structured program, I thought I
heard Mr. Gibbs say earlier, you have got to be qualified, it
has got to be reviewed, it has got to be approved. But
presumably, you are also evaluated on productivity, on checking
in, on being available, right? We monitor that to know you are
doing your job. Otherwise, we are going to rescind that
privilege. Is that correct, Mr. Gibbs?
Mr. Gibbs. One-hundred percent. And the way we look at it
is accomplishing the mission, making sure the work is
sufficient to accomplish that much.
Mr. Connolly. Right.
Mr. Gibbs. And the employees have to be trained. The
supervisors have to be trained. There has to be an agreement in
place that clearly lays out the roles and responsibilities of
the individuals, and it has got to go to senior level to be
approved.
Mr. Connolly. Right.
Mr. Gibbs. And----
Mr. Connolly. Yes, otherwise rockets would be falling from
the skies or never get up into the skies at all. So far, NASA
seems to have a pretty good track record, as does NSF, as do
the other agencies.
I just want to end by saying, it is really important, and
again, I appreciate the Chairman's distinction because it
reflects a respect. A million Federal employees continued
working in person during the pandemic. I lost a number of
wonderful people who succumbed to the COVID virus because they
went to work without protection. There were no protocols, but
they went to work.
And I want to make sure we honor those people. And I want
to make sure that as we pursue this subject and other subjects
about Federal performance, that we give due respect to the
brave men and women who serve this country every day in person
or remotely, and we should take care in our language, as the
Chairman did in his opening remarks, not to disparage, even by
implication, the overwhelming majority of public servants who
care about their mission.
I yield back, and I thank the Chair.
Mr. Sessions. Yes, sir. The distinguished gentleman yields
back his time. Thank you very much.
I am now going to resume my questions and would like to in
the same spirit that the gentleman accused me of trying to be
thoughtful about this, as Mr. Mfume and I have tried to work
together on this for all of our Members, giving them the
opportunity to express their own opinions as both sides have
done.
Mr. Dorman, the other day, perhaps yesterday, you and I
spoke, and it was significantly directed to new employees, and
new employees, and how we mature their not only growth, but
work in an environment that is about the mission statement that
you have. One of the concerns with telework is the impact on
new hires as we have noted today. And you and I began a
discussion. Do you mind continuing that discussion about how
you mature new employees, how you bring them in, how you
properly analyze them and build their confidence as, in
essence, Federal employees?
Mr. Dorman. Yes. Thank you, Chairman. So, at the NRC, one
out of every six employees is new to the agency in the last 2
years, so this is a very important area for us as we deal with
the retirement wave that the Member from Virginia referred to.
And so, in this environment, you know, I think we do see a new
generation that is interested in telework, but I also see a new
generation coming into my offices that are saying, I need to
connect with the people who are here, and I need to learn from
them.
And so, as part of our presence with purpose, one of the
areas is the on-boarding and training and qualification of our
new staff. And so, a number of our offices have specific core
days that are dedicated to staff training and development, so
that we make sure that the inspectors, the license reviewers,
the engineers and scientists that come into the agency, learn
the regulatory craft and are ready to carry forward our mission
into the future.
Mr. Sessions. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs, I do not want to turn this like we have got
problems, but I will tell you, as part of the viewpoint that we
had, there was a discussion about the JPL at CalTech and a
particular project called Psyche or Psyche? And----
Mr. Gibbs. Psyche, that is correct.
Mr. Sessions. And evidently, as part of the feedback from
that, there was an independent review board that was regarding
this that pointed to remote and hybrid work policies as
contributing factors for the lack of success that it may have
accomplished. And it called for more in-person work.
Now, I am not trying to say on your side of the ball or
their side of the ball, but the way I view NASA is they have a
mission statement, once again, as we have spoken about for the
success, whether it is your rocket or someone else's rocket, a
collaborative effort to make America look good when we put
something up, because when it does not happen that way, whether
we go to the Challenger or the United States Air Force with
Titan rockets for a number of years, failure is an indication
of a problem. Could you please discuss with me your take on
that independent review board report?
Mr. Gibbs. Yes, sir. So, Psyche, one of the contributing
factors to poor performance on Psyche was telework, amongst
many other contributing factors. I think the important message,
at least within the NASA walls, is that we are owning up,
having a critical evaluation, independent review board, and we
are committed to corrective actions, not only on Psyche, but on
other future missions interacting with JPL and across the NASA
portfolio completely.
We have a lot of complex partnerships. We have over 650 new
partnerships on an annual basis across our country and 65
internationally. We have to ensure that our communication, our
ability to lead, all of these things, you know, doing our
science and doing the rest of the mission work is accomplished
efficiently and effectively. I think for me, though, the
takeaway was we are willing to take a look, have a hard
conversation, and commit to corrective actions.
Mr. Sessions. Yes, sir. Well, we are--and thank you for
that answer.
The importance of our oversight responsibilities is
especially enumerated in the Constitution of the United States,
which rests in this Committee and Subcommittee, is to ensure
that we are hearing from you, that you are hearing from us, and
it is my hope that, as I stated in the beginning, we are trying
to recognize those who responded to what I would say in a
positive, favorable way.
We were attempting to also gain, from the Committee's
perspective, that I believe Mr. Mfume recognizes and supports,
as Mr. Connolly, is your feedback to us. Several of our Members
today have indicated, and you, likewise, have boiled down to,
we are interested in your analysis that I would expect that
each of you would provide to this Committee, in writing, your
evaluation of what those metrics are when someone is working
from home. That would include your rules, regulations, ongoing
experiences of who that includes.
We had, in my prior life, what we called craft employees. I
worked for AT&T for 16 years. You have management employees,
and you have what I will just call workers who contribute to
the critical role that you play across the government.
If you could distinguish for me, do your supervisors, are
they exempted? Do they come to work? What is their role with
the management structure? How is that working? And the reason
why I say this is because, perhaps there is some disagreement
in Congress about how effective our procedures were. It was
very attractive to young people who were freshmen. They wished
they had that same opportunity now to work remotely, and really
not come to Washington but to be somewhere else.
Our experiences that we had in Congress of dealing with
remote working, Zooms, having Committee hearings, the
effectiveness of hearing each other, talking with each other,
in my opinion, was a less-than-favorable experience. You have,
today, tried to provide this Subcommittee with the viewpoints
that you believe you have a favorable experience.
You believe you have been able to craft your workforce up
to and including your ability to hire people, to manage people,
the productivity that would be involved, and perhaps, the end
result of providing us at least four agencies, once again, that
we selected because we viewed that what you provided us was
information where you were forthright about it. We would like
to make sure we get it right also.
And so, your time that you spent today was valuable to the
distinguished gentleman and myself and this Committee. We want
to followup a little bit more. We are going to be holding
hearings in a couple weeks of those who did not offer us the
favorability of giving us insight into their operations. We
applaud you as not only Federal employees, but your service,
whether it was at the Marine Corps, whether it was at the
United States Navy, or whether it is vast experience of working
for the Federal Government.
But with that said, we are also trying to determine the
same things that are very apparent that would be available to
us, and that is that we saw, in education, where people,
children, young people, students, did not get outside their
home; did not have human interaction; did not, so to speak,
work with other people and sharpen their skill set; did not
build themselves; did not, perhaps, became lethargic in other
areas.
We saw in education and across workplaces, in what I would
call the free enterprise system, where there were remarks
across the board where real valuable development of employees
lagged, real opportunity to move an employee perhaps more
quickly up to an experienced level lagged, where they were
having a difficult time in the free enterprise system in
private industry getting people to come back to work because it
is not meeting the expectation, not because they do not have a
public at them.
Mr. Sessions. We have seen adaptivity on behalf of what I
would say American Airlines, who I deal with on a regular
basis. And at 2, 3, 4 in the morning, they would get calls.
Weather patterns have meant that they did have to have
employees perhaps work overtime, that had not come into work.
All I am suggesting to you is, is that industry leaders are
now seeking--and I hear this on a regular basis--I am from
Waco, Texas, what might be called deep in the heart of Texas.
Employers are coming to Texas because they need people who come
to work.
And I believe I hear from industry leaders every day who do
not harbor resentment against COVID, but harbor some sense of a
change in workplace procedures, professionalism, guidance,
developing their people, people developing themselves, and a
sense of a wilderness by many employees who do not have the
same thing that perhaps I grew up with, that perhaps you grew
up with.
And I would simply suggest to you that workplace
performance, education, and what we see happening provides us
with insight about who is going to come to work, and why is
that work at home, and wasn't there a valuable experience that
was gained, from professionally being developed by someone,
like Mr. Mfume and myself?
I think we help new Members of Congress, occasionally.
Mr. Mfume. Oh.
Mr. Sessions. OK. Well, perhaps not as much by Mr. Mfume,
but I believe that I have Members and staff who seek out my 25
years' experience, especially now, instead of going to fear, we
go to work and process.
So, I would simply say to you, I appreciate and respect you
coming here today. I think, from the two calls that I made
yesterday, I wanted to set an expectation that this Committee
finds your insight as professional managers of the business
insightful and that you are evidently trying to make it work,
but would tell you that, across industry, in many of the same
organizations, whether it be sheriffs' departments, whether it
be other areas that deal with deep need, dark--not dark, but
deep subjects that require notice and working together and
actually getting it right and putting it on the board and
experience-yielding opportunities and managers who build and
develop the next generation, industry is telling us they are
not getting it, and that is why they want people back at work.
And I saw you do the opposite today.
And so, without a challenge to you, I would say, as an open
conversation with you and my colleagues, that we would hope to
glean information about what you are doing that is making it
successful, that many others are finding of a future where we
just do not know each other. We do not glean the experience of
having to come in and be in a room where there is a problem and
you have got to work together.
It is not just one or two people on a Zoom call, or 10. I
would suggest to you that diminishes the ability to get where
you want to go, because it is either, A, the loudest person in
the room, or the boss in the room who simply gave you the
answer without working through things.
So, thank you for this experiment. Thank you for lending us
your time.
I would like to see you go back, and without challenging
me, present to us what you believe were proper viewpoints of
how you looked at what you did. You very clearly spoke about--
well, your level of efficiency was well up, and yet, industry
struggles.
And I think that your ability as a supporting role to that
should correspondingly offer perhaps a little bit more guidance
of a team rather than a Zoom call.
Mr. Mfume, I want to allow you an opportunity to offer any
closing remarks. You and I try and mirror each other.
But the distinguished gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Mfume. Well, I want to thank you again, Mr. Chairman.
And in their absence, I want to thank Members of both sides of
the aisle in this Committee for their participation today,
albeit limited. There are a lot of things going on this week,
so they have been in and out. But I thank them.
I thank the witnesses again, as I did previously, for their
testimony.
And, you know, someone once said, if you live long enough,
you will see everything twice. So, I recall being here in this
body in 1987 as a young Member. Ronald Reagan was President.
Jim Wright was my Speaker of the House. And there were enormous
sets of hearings around something called telework. I cannot
even begin to tell you how difficult it was defining it in
those days, not by the advocates, but against--but by those who
did not want to enter anything new into the concept of work.
So, looking back through that telescope of time, I have got
a little bit of perspective on this. It is amazing, for me at
least, that I can be as old as a dinosaur, and here we are
still talking about telework. It was great that this was
divided, as Mr. Connolly said in referencing your remarks, that
what was going on in the pandemic and what is going on now are
really two different things. Telework has always been with us.
When I say always, I will go back to 1987. I cannot go beyond
that.
But it has developed over time, and I asked the question
about matrix and measurement because, as Mr. Biggs said, at the
end of the day, it is really about productivity. Are we
producing, and is the Federal workforce producing? And the
answer is yes, we are.
It is our responsibility, I think, to get out of our own
minds, no matter whether we are on the left or the right of
this, the idea that what was happening during the pandemic in
real time, policies being developed almost overnight to make
sure that we were getting work done, is not the same thing that
is going on now.
What is going on now is the basic telework that has always
gone on with measurements--real measurements to look at
productivity and to look at the bottom line, and then to be
able to course-correct where necessary.
So, it was interesting to hear all of you talk about how
you identify where there are lapses in that and how you move
quickly to straighten that out so that, again, productivity is
not severely hampered.
I am hoping, quite frankly--I guess I am still an
optimist--that, 25 years from now, 40 years from now, we still
will not be on this ledge of telework. And I do not want--I
really do not want for us to do the sort of post-mortem on
COVID as if that is something that we are trying to figure out.
We figured it out. We did it in real time. Did we make some
mistakes? Yes. Did we get it right? Yes. Is it over with?
Hopefully it is.
But the question becomes: How do we improve on the concept
of telework, which we have been improving on as a government
for many, many, many years.
I represent Baltimore, and so, I am just 40 miles up the
road. There are Federal workers all over the small state of
Maryland. So, I hear and I see and I understand differently, in
many respects, the position of those who are teleworking, who
are doing their work. And I understood, also, what we went
through during the pandemic.
So, for the sake of the future and the sake of productivity
and the sake of telework, to the extent that we can continue to
refine it, and define it, and make it even more efficient year
after year after year, we would have served our country in a
way that, for me at least, would be quite satisfying.
We are not going backward. And, since we all agree that we
are going forward, how do we define that future?
Mr. Connolly talked about the wave--and I think, Mr.
Dorman, you also did--about this wave of retirements that we
are getting ready to get hit with. And how do we go about,
Doctor, finding, as you said, ways to attract younger people
and what the real job requirements and what the job market
looks like when we juxtapose ourselves against the private
sector that understands this and who realizes that their bottom
line is profit; our bottom line is productivity. And they have
moved exceedingly fast to create a model that it might be good
for us to emulate.
So, I want to, again, thank Chairman Sessions for the time
this morning.
He and I came into this Committee at the beginning of this
Congress based on new ratios and a new Majority. But we decided
together that, to the extent that we could find a way, in a
bipartisan manner, to bring issues and to solve problems, we
would do that.
We both reserve our rights to disagree on things where we
may be philosophically opposed, but we realize that finding
consensus in government is the fastest and the most effective
way to get something done.
And so, that is what this hearing represents.
I thank him again for his leadership with the Committee.
And I yield back my time.
And, again, I thank all of you for being with us.
Mr. Sessions. The distinguished gentleman yields back his
time.
One last point. I do not want to rebut anything Mr. Mfume
said, but in 1987, my father served as Director of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, and I recall, quite candidly, the
discussions that took place about that agency, and they felt
like they were under the same demand of replacing what would be
new FBI agents with agents that retired.
I think we are always at this point, or have been since at
least 1987, when I started to grow a brain, of recognizing that
this country does need its workers. We need the experienced
people. We need the new people.
I would simply say to you my side of that balanced equation
was--I think it is in everybody's best interests that we pay
attention about what we are doing to ourselves, because, when
somebody stays at home all day, telework, they may not be as
prepared for the future that is tomorrow.
I want to thank each of you.
Mr. Mfume and I are going to walk down--he is going to walk
down his side. I am going to walk down my side. We are going to
stick our hand out, and we are going to say to you, thank you
very much.
Please know this, that I would expect that you will respond
back to us, in your own way, of the metrics and the ways that
you look at it with us as an opportunity to glean what you
think is success.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Mfume. Would the gentleman yield----
Mr. Sessions. Yes, sir.
Mr. Mfume [continuing]. For just a second? And I apologize.
Mr. Sessions. Yes.
Mr. Mfume. And I have a statement for the record that was
submitted earlier by military spouses.
Mr. Sessions. Without objection.
Mr. Mfume. These spouses belong to employee organizations
at Department of State, the U.S. Agency for International
Development, Department of Agriculture, and the Department of
Veterans Affairs.
These are spouses who want it on the record to talk about
and to find a way to encourage the Committee to embrace a
flexible, adaptable workplace policy which allows military
spouses to retain their jobs.
So, with unanimous consent, I would like to have it entered
into the record, and I thank the Chair for that.
Mr. Sessions. Without objection, we will do that.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Mfume and I will come down and extend our
hand of thanks to you on behalf of your agency and on behalf of
the U.S. Congress, this Committee.
We have now finished this hearing.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:24 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
