- OVERDUE OVERSIGHT OF THE CAPITAL CITY: PART I

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERDUE OVERSIGHT OF THE CAPITAL CITY: PART I

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 29, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-16

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
51-721 PDF          WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Ro Khanna, California
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Katie Porter, California
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Cori Bush, Missouri
Byron Donalds, Florida               Shontel Brown, Ohio
Kelly Armstrong, North Dakota        Jimmy Gomez, California
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
William Timmons, South Carolina      Robert Garcia, California
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Maxwell Frost, Florida
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Becca Balint, Vermont
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Greg Casar, Texas
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Dan Goldman, New York
Chuck Edwards, North Carolina        Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Nick Langworthy, New York
Eric Burlison, Missouri

Mark Marin, Staff Director
Jessica Donlon, Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel
Alex Rankin, Professional Staff Member
Ryan Giachetti, Counsel
Mallory Cogar, Deputy Director of Operations and Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5074

Julie Tagen, Minority Staff Director
Contact Number: 202-225-5051
------
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

Page

Hearing held on March 29, 2023...................................     1

Witnesses

----------

Phil Mendelson, Chairman, D.C. Council
Oral Statement...................................................     6

Charles Allen, Councilmember, D.C. Council
Oral Statement...................................................     8

Glen Lee, Chief Financial Officer, Washington, D.C.
Oral Statement...................................................    10

Greggory Pemberton, Chairman, D.C. Police Union
Oral Statement...................................................    12

Written opening statements of the Members and the statement for
the witness are available on the U.S. House of Representatives
Document Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

* Rep. Connolly Statement for the Record; submitted by Rep.
Connolly.
* Letter, to Chairman Mendelson from Mayor Bowser, January 4,
2023; submitted by Rep. Clyde.

* Article, The Washington Post, ``D.C.'s Crime Bill Could Make
the City More Dangerous''; submitted by Chairman Comer.

* Witness Invite, March 29, 2023, to Mayor Bowser; submitted by
Chairman Comer.

* Article, The Washington Post, ``D.C. U.S. Attorney Declined
to Prosecute 67% of Those Arrested''; submitted by Rep.
Fallon.

* Article, Vox, ``The House GOP's Investigations are
Flopping''; submitted by Rep. Garcia.
* Article, Third Way, ``The Two-Decade Red State Murder
Problem''; submitted by Rep. Goldman.

* Bill Text, DC Home Rule Improvement Act; submitted by Rep.
Gosar.

* Graphic #1; submitted by Rep. Luna.

* Graphic #2; submitted by Rep. Luna.

* Graphic #3; submitted by Rep. Luna.

* Graphic #4; submitted by Rep. Luna.

* Graphic #5; submitted by Rep. Luna.

Documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

OVERDUE OVERSIGHT OF THE CAPITAL CITY: PART I

----------

Wednesday, March 29, 2023

House of Representatives,

Committee on Oversight and Accountability,

Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. James Comer
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Comer, Jordan, Turner, Gosar,
Foxx, Grothman, Palmer, Higgins, Sessions, Biggs, Mace, Fallon,
Donalds, Perry, Timmons, Burchett, Greene, Boebert, Fry, Luna,
Langworthy, Burlison, Raskin, Norton, Connolly, Krishnamoorthi,
Mfume, Porter, Brown, Garcia, Frost, Balint, Lee, Casar,
Crockett, Goldman, and Moskowitz.
Also present: Representative Clyde.
Chairman Comer. The Committee on Oversight and
Accountability will come to order, and I want to welcome
everyone.
Without objection, the Chair may declare a recess at any
time.
The Committee welcomes the public to this very important
meeting. While you are here, I want to point out to the Members
and the audience today that House Rule XI provides that the
Chairman of the Committee may punish breaches of order and
decorum, including exclusion from the hearing. All participants
will be required to avoid unruly behavior and inappropriate
language. Expressions of support or opposition are not in
order. I expect all parties to these proceedings to conduct
themselves in a manner that reflects properly of the U.S. House
of Representatives.
I recognize myself for the purpose of making an opening
statement.
For the first time since 2019, this Committee is holding an
oversight hearing examining the District of Columbia. Since
that time, our Nation's Capital has deteriorated and declined,
crime has risen dramatically, education levels have plummeted,
and the city's finances are in disarray. D.C. officials have
not carried out the responsibility to serve their citizens.
Therefore, our Committee must fulfill its responsibility to
conduct oversight of the District of Columbia.
We have a tall task today examining D.C.'s failures. The
crime statistics alone are shocking. According to the D.C.
Metropolitan Police Department, carjackings in the District
have increased 105 percent compared to this time last year.
Fifty-six percent of these carjackings are committed by
juveniles. Total property crime is up 28 percent. Homicides are
up 37 percent since 2019. Just days ago, 14 men were shot in 10
separate incidents within a 27-hour span in Washington, D.C.
D.C. clearly has a crime crisis.
The D.C. Council saw these rising crime trends, but rather
than support policies to protect the residents, it did the
opposite. On November 15, 2022, the D.C. Council passed the
Revised Criminal Code Act of 2022. It contains several soft-on-
crime measures that would escalate D.C.'s crime. The Revised
Criminal Code Act eliminated almost all mandatory minimum
sentencing requirements for violent crimes, and it drastically
reduced the maximum penalties for many violent crimes. These
and other changes further embolden criminals to run rampant
throughout the Nation's Capital.
Mayor Muriel Bowser vetoed this legislation last December,
yet the Council persisted in pushing its soft-on-crime agenda
and voted to override Mayor Bowser's veto. Thankfully, my
friend from Georgia, Mr. Clyde, a former Member of this
Committee introduced the House Joint Resolution 26 of
Disapproval. This resolution rejects the D.C. Council's revised
Criminal Code Act. Some blasted this effort as a partisan
attack on the District, including many of my Democratic
colleagues in this room, but this resolution passed Congress
under bipartisan support and was signed by President Biden
earlier this month on March 20. Hopefully D.C. officials took
notice and are reconsidering its soft-on-crime approach.
Today, we are fortunate to have two witnesses from the D.C.
Council to answer how they plan to move forward in reducing the
crime plaguing our capital. The Council must work with our men
and women in uniform to craft legislation and policies that
support the Metropolitan Police Department in thoughtful ways
to ensure public safety.
The Council also needs to focus on the District's children
who have been placed last in priority the past few years. Four
schools shut down during the pandemic, led to huge drops in
math and language scores for students across all grades. This
has also led to record-level truancy. In 2022, 48 percent of
D.C. students qualified as chronically absent--48 percent.
Almost half D.C. students are not consistently going to school,
and now D.C. students' long-term prospects are sinking. Experts
are projecting an over 40 percent decline in students seeking
advanced education after high school. In 2022, D.C. ranked 4th
from last in high school graduation rates among U.S. cities.
Something needs to be done to turn this around. I hope to hear
some solutions today.
The District must also take steps to address financial
concerns outlined by one of today's witnesses, Chief Financial
Officer Glen Lee. In his February 28 report, Mr. Lee determined
that D.C. is in a weaker financial position in 2023 than it was
in 2022. Some of those reasons include the loss of tax revenue
from commercial properties and expanded telework. It seems the
D.C. Council wants to ignore this poor fiscal outlook and is
pushing expensive progressive policies and programs. One of
these programs is free busing, but free busing is not free.
Taxpayers still have to pay for it, and, unfortunately, D.C. is
losing taxpayers as businesses and residents are fleeing at a
record pace. D.C. must prioritize policies that promote
economic growth, not find ways to spend money it does not have.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses about ways that
D.C. intends to spur growth and encourage business. One idea is
simply protecting your residents and small business owners.
That will go a long way in promoting economic growth.
This Congress, this Committee, has and will continue to
conduct oversight of the District of Columbia. We must for its
residents, our constituents who visit from across the country,
and those who work in this city. They deserve a safe and
prosperous city. I look forward to working with my colleagues
and the District leaders to achieve that ideal.
I now recognize Ranking Member Raskin for his opening
remarks.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Good
morning, everyone. There are two problems in America that we
could solve today and that would unify the American people. The
first is the problem of gun violence and related forms of
criminal violence, and second is the problem of
disenfranchisement and unresolved struggles for political
democracy and equal rights in the country. No one is in favor
of lethal gun violence, and everyone should be in favor of full
democratic inclusion and participation, and yet, rather than
working together to solve these two problems, which we could
easily do, our GOP colleagues would simply use the existence of
one problem to block the solution of the other, while doing
nothing to address either of them.
When a mass shooter guns down three children and three
adults, as happened on Monday in Nashville, or a mass murderer
assassinates 10 people at a supermarket in Buffalo, where a
racist killer massacres 23 people and wounds 22 others at a
Walmart in El Paso, Texas, or a gunman murders a D.C. Metro
transit employee trying to protect riders from the armed
attacker as happened in Washington last month, these acts of
deranged criminal violence should be a spur to immediate
nationwide bipartisan action to pass a universal violent
criminal background check on the sale of all firearms in the
United States of America, a measure supported by more than 90
percent of the American people. And it should be a spur to ban
military-style weapons of war on the streets of America, in the
schools and churches, and in the supermarkets and shopping
malls.
And this will work, and how do we know it will work? Well,
America has the loosest, most permissive and liberal gun laws
in the world, and we have a rate of gun violence unseen in the
rest of the industrialized world. Firearm homicide rates are 22
times greater here than in Europe. We are the only
industrialized Nation where gun violence is the leading cause
of death for children. If we took the actions that our
counterparts have taken from Canada to Japan to Australia, we
would dramatically lower the rates of gun death in America.
The states with the strictest gun laws today have the
lowest rates of gun homicide, and the states with the loosest
gun laws have the highest rates of gun homicide, but alas, our
GOP colleagues throw up their hands. They bewail and bemoan the
existence of evil in the world as if we were cloistered
theologians rather than responsible public officials, and they
say there is nothing, just nothing, that we can do to stop
criminal gun violence. Our dear colleague, Congressman Tim
Burchett, is a genuinely decent and beloved man around here,
and even he just gave voice to this pervasive and shocking
sense of capitulation and surrender among our colleagues to the
monstrous problem of criminal gun violence. After Monday's mass
shooting at a Christian school in Nashville, he said, ``It is a
horrible, horrible situation, and we are not going to fix it.''
He said, ``Criminals are going to be criminals.''
But even worse than this fatalistic surrender to criminal
violence in America, is the decision today to use the stubborn
pervasiveness of criminal violence everywhere in America as an
excuse to deny people in one community their basic rights as
Americans to participate in representative government on an
equal basis, and that is what is happening in this hearing.
The more than 700,000 U.S. citizens living in Washington,
D.C. pay more taxes per capita than the people of each of the
50 states. They have fought in every war from the American
Revolution forward. They are draftable. They are subject to all
the laws of the country, and yet they have had no voting
representation in the U.S. House or the U.S. Senate since
passage of the Organic Act in 1801, although they did win the
right to participate in Presidential elections in 1961 with
passage of the Twenty-Third Amendment. But they are
disenfranchised in Congress, the only residents of a national
capital on planet earth who are not represented in their own
national legislature, and they are fighting a crime problem
that Americans are fighting everywhere from Washington to
Louisville, Kentucky to Bakersville, California.
Yet, when violent insurrectionists came to this chamber on
January 6, 2021, the people of Washington as Capitol officers,
as officers in the Metropolitan Police Department, as staffers,
and the citizens rallied to the defense of the republic and the
very Congress that they cannot participate in as voting
members. If anyone had an authentic political grievance against
the Union it would be them, but, no, they stood up to defend
the Congress and the Vice President against a violent mob of
rebels without a cause and rebels without a clue, who savagely
attacked our police officers. And, now, the very same Members
who have come together today to denounce crime in Washington
and the response of the D.C. Government that they know very
little about are astonishingly many of the same Members who
visited violent criminals in the D.C. jail and praised them as
heroes and political prisoners as if they were Nelson Mandela
or Alexei Navalny. What an obscenity and what a disgrace to
this institution.
In any event, the people of Washington never attacked our
body or our officers. They are demanding change the right way.
They organized a Statehood convention and a Statehood
referendum in 2016, and they petitioned us for admission to the
Union. The House voted in both the 116th and the 117th
Congresses to grant their petition for admission to statehood.
The Senate failed to act in both cases. Their petition is in
the mainstream of our history. Statehood admission has been a
driving force behind the growth of American democracy from a
Union of 13 to a Union of 50 states. The vast majority of
Members of the House, 307 of us, represent people living in
states that were admitted by Congress under Article IV rather
than people living in one of the original 13 states that
ratified the Constitution, who are represented by only 128
representatives. I happen to be one of those, but all of us
have equal votes regardless of whether we were one of the
first, or we were one of the most recent states to be admitted.
In the process of state admissions, all kinds of objections
have been raised. We said Utah was too Mormon. New Mexico, too
Catholic. Other candidates were thought too poor, too big, too
small. Hawaii and Alaska were non-contiguous, so they were
obviously too far away and unqualified. Texas was its own
country, and where does it say we could admit a whole country
as a state? Representatives complained that too many people in
Arizona spoke Spanish, and Senator Beveridge, Chairman of the
Committee on Territory, said that they were likely to be
traitors and un-American. Louisiana was way too French, and one
of the main criticisms leveled against almost every community
has been that the people there were two wild, too criminal, and
too ruffian to be admitted. And, of course, beneath the
surface, there has always been the quicksand of racial,
religious, and ethnic animosity and hatred.
But the amazing and redeeming fact of American history has
been that ultimately all of these irrational, non-
constitutional, and arbitrary objections have been swept away
in favor of the great democratic imperative embodied in the
first three words of the Constitution, ``We the people.'' And
the Declaration of Independence set forth the beautiful self-
evident truths that have guided us as a country. All Americans
born equal. All of us having unalienable rights, including the
rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness,
government existing only on the consent of the governed, and
nobody should be governed or taxed without their own direct
representation.
This hearing, called to malign the people of D.C. and their
leaders for criminal violence that our colleagues will do
nothing to stop, should instead be a hearing to examine and
move statehood for the people of Washington, D.C. in the 118th
Congress. And I know there will be lots of criticisms against
this or that provision of D.C. law, this or that budgetary
decision or policy decision, but all of it is quite beside the
point. The people of Washington are an independent, self-
governing community who want their statehood, and you no more
have to agree with every law or government decision in
Washington than you have to agree with every law or government
decision in Louisiana, or California, or Massachusetts, or New
Mexico, or Alaska, or Texas. In a democracy, people have a
right to make their own decisions and even the right sometimes
to make their own mistakes.
Is there a state in the Union that has not made a policy
mistake? I am certain there is not a Member of this Committee
who would want every law and policy of your state, or their
localities, to be examined and reviewed by the representatives
of every other state, whenever they think it is in their
political interest to do that. Have our colleagues so given up
on the possibility of making real progress together on reducing
gun violence in America, as a whole, that they would prefer to
turn the Congress of the U.S. into a 535-person city council,
the largest city council on earth, just to bedevil and harass
the people of Washington, D.C.?
Let these people have their equal rights. Let them have
their democracy. I thank all of our witnesses for being here
today. I thank the people of D.C. for your patience and
determination as we work to secure statehood. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Comer. The Ranking Member yields back. I am
pleased to introduce our four witnesses today. Phil Mendelson
has served on the D.C. Council since 1998, currently serving
his 4th term as Chairman. Chairman Mendelson serves as one of
the Council's five at-large members. Charles Allen also serves
as a member of the D.C. Council, representing Ward 6, the
District's largest ward. Mr. Allen has been a councilmember for
eight years during which he has also served as Chairman of the
Committee on the Judiciary and Public Safety and is the current
Chairman of the Committee on Transportation and Environment.
Glen Lee currently serves as the Chief Financial Officer of
the District of Columbia, a post he has held since June 2022.
Mr. Lee's role is that of an independent CFO. He manages the
District's financial operations, which include more than 1,700
staff members in the Tax and Revenue Administration, the
Treasury, the Comptroller and Budget offices, the D.C. Office
of Lottery and Gaming, economic fiscal analysis and revenue
estimation functions, and all District agencies. Gregg
Pemberton serves as the Chairman of the D.C. Police Union,
representing over 3,200 officers, detectives, and sergeants,
who work with the department. He is also on his 18th year of
service for the department and currently a Detective Grade 1.
I look forward to hearing from all our witnesses about
their experiences with the District, as well as their efforts
to work to ensure our Nation's Capital is a safe and well-
managed place for all.
Pursuant Committee Rule 9(g), the witnesses will please
stand and raise your right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you God?
[A chorus of ayes.]
Chairman Comer. Let the record show that the witnesses all
answered in the affirmative.
We appreciate all of you being here today and look forward
to your testimony. Let me remind the witnesses that we have
read your written statements, and they will appear in full in
the hearing record. Please limit your oral statements to five
minutes. As a reminder, please press the button on your
microphone in front of you so that it is on, and the Members
can hear you. When you begin to speak, the light in front of
you will turn green. After four minutes, the light will turn
yellow. When the red light comes on, your five minutes has
expired, and we would ask that you please wrap up.
I recognize Mr. Mendelson to begin with his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF PHIL MENDELSON, CHAIRMAN

D.C. COUNCIL

Mr. Mendelson. Thank you, Chairman Comer, Ranking Member
Raskin, Congresswoman Norton, and Members of the Committee. I
am Phil Mendelson, chairman of the Council of the District of
Columbia. I am pleased to testify today.
Chairman Comer's invitation cited two issues: city
management and crime. With regard to city management, our
successes are the envy of policymakers in states and cities
around the country. Twenty-five years ago, the District was
under 17 consent decrees, six of which involved receiverships.
Now only one of these consent decrees remains, and it is
nearing conclusion. Moreover, our budgets are balanced, and
every year we end with the surplus. Both our pension and OPEV
funds are fully funded. Our financial reserves are also fully
funded, equal to 60 days' operating costs, a GFOA best
practice.
Our population is once again growing. For the past decade,
we have seen the District Government's revenues grow by at
least three percent a year. Meanwhile, between 2015 and 2018,
the District lowered its business income tax rate by almost 20
percent. We established a community college as part of our
state university where residents can obtain an associate's
degree or certificates in certain vocational specialties.
Working with our Maryland neighbors, we raised our minimum
wage. We also have a generous paid family leave law that
benefits anyone who works in the District. We are making the
District a good place to work. I would say our city management
is strong.
Affordable housing is in crisis across the country, but we
have a robust array of policies in place. Indeed, on a per
capita basis, we have the largest housing production trust
fund. Healthcare continues to be a challenge across the
country, but because of the D.C. Health Care Alliance, we have
one of the highest, if not the highest, insured rates for our
residents.
The District was the first in the region to step up with
dedicated funding for the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit
Authority to get Metrorail back to a state of good repair. The
District continues to be a world-class tourist destination. As
we sit here this morning, the District is hosting thousands of
tourists for the National Cherry Blossom Festival, and our
hotels are over 75 percent booked. We are a world-class theater
town, boasting more theater seats than any city other than New
York, and the District invests more funds per capita on our
creative economy than any other jurisdiction in the United
States. We run the city well.
As for public education, the District of Columbia public
schools are the fastest improving among large urban school
districts, and over the last decade, the District has
modernized or rebuilt almost two-thirds of its DCPS school
buildings. We spend far more per pupil than the national
average. In addition to DCPS, the District has a thriving
public charter school sector, one of the largest, if not the
largest, in the country, serving almost half our public school
students. The District is so well run that the Wall Street
ratings agencies have increased our ratings year after year.
Until now, we are Triple A with Moody's and one notch lower
with Standard & Poor's and Fitch. But an explicit negative in
their ratings is congressional interference with our
governance.
For instance, House Joint Resolution 42 would repeal the
Comprehensive Policing and Justice Reform Amendment Act, which
is already law in the District. Contrary to what some would
say, this legislation is not an attack on police or a threat to
public safety. Rather, it promotes police accountability by
codifying our Use of Force Review Board, enhancing auditing
capabilities, strengthening training requirements, and
prohibiting the hiring of officers with a history of
misconduct. It enhances our police chief's ability to
strengthen the force by firing officers who engage in egregious
misconduct or commit serious offenses, like sexual assault,
domestic violence, DUI, and shooting strangers while off duty.
The primary opposition to this act comes from the D.C.
Police Union, and their primary concern is that the law
prohibits their ability to bargain the disciplinary process for
bad cops. They couch their opposition more broadly, but it is
the provision prohibiting their ability to bargain discipline
that they took the court and lost, and then pressured me to
water down or repeal. Our decision to include this prohibition
is based on research, research which shows that police union
negotiated discipline is bad for public safety, bad for
accountability, and bad for oversight. Rather than blocking a
police accountability bill that actually improves public
safety, please consider the nine actions you should take,
including statehood, that I list in my written testimony.
Finally, with regard to crime, yes, there is considerable
concern, but while perception is important, the reality is less
concerning. Let me be clear. People should feel safe, and it is
a problem that many residents of the District do not. But the
number of violent crime incidents in 2022 was 45 percent lower
than a decade earlier, and total violent crime last year was
seven percent less than the year before. I know this belies the
common belief, and when it comes to crime, how people feel is
important, but there is not a crime crisis in Washington, D.C.
In conclusion, I must note that the four of us invited by
the Chairman do not embody the diversity that comprises
Washington, D.C. and that we value. Nevertheless, I appreciate
the Committee's attention and this opportunity to testify. I
look forward to answering any questions you might have. Thank
you.
Chairman Comer. Mr. Allen?

STATEMENT OF CHARLES ALLEN, COUNCILMEMBER

D.C. COUNCIL

Mr. Allen. Good morning. Thank you. Chairman Comer, Ranking
Member Raskin, Congresswoman Norton, and distinguished Members
of this Committee, my name is Charles Allen, and I represent
Ward 6 on the Council of the District of Columbia. I am
currently the Chair of the Council's Committee on
Transportation and the Environment, but I served as the Chair
of the Committee on the Judiciary and Public Safety previously.
I am assuming that is why I have been invited today, and so I
am, therefore, going to speak mostly to public safety in my
testimony.
The 13 members of the Council are elected to represent the
nearly 700,000 D.C. residents who pay Federal taxes, proudly
serve in our Nation's military, and deserve full statehood,
autonomy, and representation in this Congress. I am honored to
represent my constituents and all those who call the District
home. I echo what Chairman Mendelson outlined about how strong,
how well run, and how vibrant the District is, and I also note
this invited panel does not reflect the rich diversity of our
city.
During my tenure as Chair, the Judiciary Committee passed
more than 120 bills, many of which are listed in my written
testimony. We held nearly 250 oversight hearings. Public safety
was my top priority with a focus on gun violence. Public safety
is also personal for me. I am a gun violence survivor. I was
the victim of an armed robbery, and the scar on the back of my
head is an ever-present reminder of that. But that experience
has also given me purpose and real-world understanding of the
urgency of preventing and reducing crime. It is also part of
what was so hard to hear a Member of the Majority say this week
following just the latest massacre of children in our country
that, ``We are not going to fix it,'' and ``I do not see a real
role that Congress can do.'' That is a heartbreaking
perspective, but in an effort to be solutions oriented, I would
refer to the Committee to the 10 recommendations for
congressional action at the end of my written testimony, some
of which I will mention in a moment.
Despite a 39-percent reduction in violent crime and a 25-
percent reduction in property crime during my time on the
Council, we still have a lot of work to do. Many residents feel
unsafe, and the District is experiencing persistent, troubling
increases in two areas of violent crime in particular:
homicides and carjackings. These trends are being seen
nationwide, and the District is not immune. 40 lives have been
taken due to gun violence this year, including five in my ward.
This is simply unacceptable.
Our strategy to reduce gun violence requires consistent and
focused coordination between government and community. This
involves what I call a both/and approach and response.
Successful interventions for the relatively small, identifiable
group of people who are at most risk of committing or being
victims of violence and crime will require both law enforcement
and the other agencies that have roles to play in improving
public safety, as well as the community. I believe police are
central to ending gun violence, and people also need jobs,
education, stable housing, mental health services, all
components of successful participation our society. This is not
radical. This is realistic.
It is also our reality that meaningful progress is
confounded by the absurdity of the District's criminal justice
system, which is within Congress' power to remedy. You could
not have designed a more complicated and unsafe system if you
tried. For example, we have a local police department, but
almost all adult crimes are prosecuted by a federally appointed
U.S. attorney. This position is unaccountable to D.C. residents
and D.C. Government. We can not control whether an arrest is
papered or tried in court. Frankly, we are not even respected
enough to be told the outcome of a case that happens on our
block.
We also have no control over the Federal Bureau of Prisons,
which has custody over D.C. residents sentenced for felonies.
This is dangerous because people are sent hundreds of miles
away and disconnected from everything they need to reintegrate
successfully once their sentence is complete. And when they do
come home, D.C. is not even notified, and they are most often
placed under Federal supervision, unaccountable, again, to us
locally. You can act by conducting oversight on conditions of
confinement in the Bureau of Prisons and help us bring back
residents in Federal custody close to their release, so that we
can better connect them with jobs and housing.
Further, our courts are run federally. Our judges are
federally appointed and federally confirmed. Congress can
improve public safety by quickly confirming judges for our 11
vacancies. Meanwhile, evidence is growing stale, memories are
fading, victims can not get closure, the innocent may be
jailed, and the guilty are not being held accountable. Congress
also must address gun trafficking. Illegal gun recoveries
increased by 143 percent from 2013 to 2022 in the District. Our
top five source states include Georgia, North and South
Carolina, and we need leadership to help stem that tide.
And last, do not overturn critical legislation passed by
the District's duly elected representatives. The Comprehensive
Policing and Justice Reform Amendment Act improves trust in law
enforcement, which, in turn, improves public safety. This is a
commonsense bill. It prevents MPD from hiring officers who
committed serious misconduct in other jurisdictions, requires
de-escalation training for officers to protect themselves and
others. It grows our MPD cadet academy, and it gives the chief
of police the authority he needs to discipline for misconduct.
He shouldn't have to re-hire officers he fired for sustained
misconduct, like child abuse, domestic violence, sexual
assault, at great expense to D.C. taxpayers.
To conclude, we are making meaningful progress to reduce
violence and crime in the District, in large part due to the
unwavering commitment of the many residents in this room and
watching at home today. I am proud to represent you and call
the District of Columbia my home, and I appreciate the
Committee's time and look forward to the conversation today.
Chairman Comer. Thank you, Mr. Allen. Mr. Lee, you are
recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF GLEN LEE

CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER

WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Lee. Good morning, Chairman Comer, Ranking Member
Raskin, Congresswoman Norton, and Members of the House
Committee on Oversight and Accountability. I am Glen Lee, Chief
Financial Officer of the Government of the District of
Columbia. The Office of the Chief Financial Officer is an
independent agency charged with ensuring the long-term
financial health and viability of the District of Columbia. I
am pleased to provide testimony today on the state of the
District's finances and economy.
The District of Columbia has made a remarkable journey to
the strongest financial position in its history with a positive
General Fund cash balance exceeding $4.8 billion. Today, the
District sits at the highest possible credit rating of Triple A
with Moody's, as was mentioned earlier, an accomplishment
achieved by only 10 of the 25 largest cities in the country and
a rating higher than 38 other states. This turnaround is
testimony to the financial practices put into place, and that
continued to be enhanced by the District's elected leadership
and key stakeholders.
The District's financial practices include a balanced
budget and multi-year financial plan, a six-year capital
improvement plan, quarterly revenue estimates to ensure
spending stays on track, a self-imposed debt limit to restrict
excess borrowing, and best practices when it comes to cash
management and reserve management. District law sets a cash
reserve policy of 60 days of operating revenues as compared to
federally mandated requirements of 22 days.
The District has implemented a comprehensive capital asset
inventory system and long-range financial and capital plan to
bring all assets or infrastructure to a state of good repair
within the next 10 years. No other city or state in the United
States has developed an implementable program to reach this
goal. The District also has fully funded its public safety and
teacher pension trust funds, a funding level few, if any,
states can claim. Finally, the District has achieved 26
consecutive years of clean audits as verified by outside
independent auditors.
A common misperception is that the District is strictly a
Federal Government town. In fact, 26 percent of the work force
are Federal employees. The reality is the District and the
Washington Metropolitan area have developed into a vibrant and
dynamic region, and a diversifying economic base, and fast-
growing private sector. That is said, the District is facing
economic headwinds due to Federal Reserve action to raise
interest rates in order to deal with inflation, and declining
commercial property values due to post-pandemic employment
patterns--remote work. These factors have been incorporated
into our forecast and financial plan, and the District
leadership must balance their spending against the implications
of these headwinds. In my experience, this level of fiscal
discipline is unique in state and municipal government finance.
In many respects, the District functions as a state,
county, and city. As a result, the District collects personal
and business income taxes, administers unemployment
compensation programs, and runs a Department of Motor Vehicles.
In addition, the District provides local services to businesses
and residents, including fire, police, and public works
services, and operates a school district.
The District is similar to states in that we receive
Federal grants, mostly for Medicaid, education, and other human
services, and transportation programs. While the Federal
Government's presence drives a large part of the economy, the
District's budget is comparable to states in its reliance on
Federal dollars as a part of total revenue. A 2016 study
estimated that the 50 states averaged 32 percent of state
revenue derived from Federal grants and aid. In the District,
less than a quarter of the Fiscal Year 2023 revenue will come
from Federal sources. Direct comparisons are difficult to make
because the District performs both state and local functions.
However, this illustrates that the District relies on less
Federal dollars to balance its budget than a considerable
number of states do.
The District's residents population is approximately
672,000, making it the 23rd largest city, according to the U.S.
Census. However, prior to the pandemic, roughly 500,000 workers
from Virginia and Maryland, many of them Federal employees,
came to the District to work every day, almost doubling the
population served during business hours. Services, operations,
infrastructure must be sized to handle this large level of
commuter population. In addition, approximately 30 percent of
our total commercial property is owned by the Federal
Government. Foreign mission buildings are another category of
non-taxable property disproportionately located in the
District. Between the diplomatic and federally owned buildings,
we estimate the city forgoes over $640 million annually in real
property tax revenue.
In conclusion, the fiscal foundation of the District is
extremely strong right now and is capable of overcoming the
fiscal challenges that lay ahead due to its strong financial
condition and institutionalized best financial practices. I
thank you for allowing me the opportunity to provide testimony
at this important hearing, and I am happy to answer any
questions you have. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. Thank you, Mr. Lee. Mr. Pemberton?

STATEMENT OF GREGGORY PEMBERTON, CHAIRMAN

D.C. POLICE UNION

Mr. Pemberton. Good morning, Members of the Committee.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify. As the Chairman of
the D.C. Police Union, I speak on behalf of approximately 3,200
sworn police officers, detectives, and sergeants who serve the
District of Columbia as members of the Metropolitan Police
Department. I am a Detective Grade 1, I have worked for the MPD
for 18 years, and I take great pride in serving the city. I
would like to focus the scope of my testimony today on issues
related to public safety, crime, and law enforcement; more
specifically, how numerous actions by the D.C. Council, to
include their rhetoric, has resulted in a mass exodus of sworn
law enforcement officers and an exponential increase in violent
crime.
Beginning in June 2020, the D.C. Council began introducing
anti-police legislation designed, in their own words, to
``listen to the voices of District residents and act
accordingly to bend the arc of justice.'' I would like to
provide a list of just some of the legislation that D.C.
Council would introduce over the course of the next 2 1/2
years: the Comprehensive Policing and Justice Reform Emergency
Amendment Act, seven times; the Comprehensive Policing and
Justice Reform Temporary Amendment Act, four times;
Strengthening Oversight and Accountability of Police Amendment
Act; the Revised Criminal Code Amendment Act; the Reducing Law
Enforcement Prescence in Schools Act; the Law Enforcement
Qualified Immunity Cessation Act; the Law Enforcement Present
Sense Impression Act; the Law Enforcement Vehicular Pursuit
Reform Act; the School Police Incident Oversight and
Accountability Amendment Act; and the White Supremacy in
Policing Prevention Act.
The rhetoric that Councilmembers used when speaking
publicly about law enforcement amounted to nothing short of
virulent attacks on all police officers in the District. One
Councilmember stated in a public hearing, ``I know for a fact
there are police in the District who are bad actors and who
have been going on without the proper penance.'' He also felt
the need for Metropolitan Police Department officers to receive
``some kind of retribution.'' Other Councilmembers bragged
about defunding the Department or making ``the biggest
reduction to MPD he had ever seen.'' Without delving into the
granular details of how terrible these bills are or how
blatantly awful the rhetoric used by the Council was, I can
assure the Members of this Committee that the direct result was
a mass exodus of police officers from the Department.
To put a finer point on the issue of attrition, when I took
office as head of the police union in April 2020, membership
reports showed that we had 3,626 members of the rank and file,
which is all officers, detectives, and sergeants. Our most
recent membership report from March 24, 2023, states that we
were down to 3,167. This is a net loss of 459 union members.
Since the beginning of 2020, the MPD has lost 1,194 officers,
one-third of the Department. Four-hundred-eighty-four-thousand,
nearly 40 percent, of those separations were resignations--
employees who just walked away from a career with MPD.
While there is much rhetoric around the concept of the
number of police and the amount of crime, the following facts
are indisputable. Over the past six years of plummeting numbers
of police, homicides have increased 75 percent, armed
carjackings have increased 227 percent, armed robberies have
increased 46 percent, and most tragic and alarming is that last
year alone the juvenile homicide rate doubled. Additionally,
the ability for MPD to hire new officers appears to be almost
non-existent. Between October 1, 2022, and February 28, 2023,
just a five-month window, the MPD lost 165 sworn members while
only hiring 68, a deficit of 97 officers. If these deficits
continue, MPD will lose 396 employees per year.
This negative trend currently shows no signs of stopping,
meaning that the concept of increasing the number of officers
is completely unattainable without immediate and comprehensive
changes to the way employees are treated by their elected
officials. Over the past 2 1/2, the union has been sounding the
alarm about this problem to anyone within earshot, including
the D.C. Council. We tried to inform our elected leaders of the
unintended consequences of these policies. Unfortunately, we
were ignored. Now, over two years later, we have all seen the
results of the D.C. Council's experiment. The empirical data is
in, and we know for certain that their efforts have been an
abject failure, resulting in thousands of more victims of crime
for the city. The lasting impacts of these horrible policies
will not be fully realized for some time, and the efforts to
repair the damage done could take decades without swift and
thoughtful actions.
The purpose of my testimony here today is to inform the
Committee on this ongoing crisis that exists in the District
and to publicly state that we are prepared to assist in any way
we can. Again, I thank you for the opportunity to testify, and
I welcome any questions the Committee may have. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. Thank you all for your opening statements.
We now enter into the five-minute questioning portion of our
hearing today. The Chair recognizes Ms. Foxx for five minutes.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank our
witnesses for being here today. Mr. Pemberton, just this
Saturday, we saw one of Senator Rand Paul's staffers attacked
and stabbed multiple times in Northeast D.C. by man who was
released from prison just the previous day. According to Police
Chief Robert Contee, on average, any given homicide suspect in
D.C. has already been arrested 11 times before he or she
actually commits homicide. Why is D.C. allowing violent
criminals to remain on the streets for so long, and I would
like a fairly concise answer, please.
Mr. Pemberton. Yes, ma'am. Thank you for that question.
Most of the answer for that is that the criminal penalties that
exist within our criminal justice system are incredibly weak,
and that is due a lot to provisions passed by D.C. Council.
There is the Youth Rehabilitation Act. There is the
Incarceration Reduction Act. There is the Public Safety and
Justice Act. There are a number of provisions that have been
put in place that reduce sentencing guidelines for D.C.
Superior Court.
Ms. Foxx. So, to keep violent offenders from returning to
the street, the D.C. Council needs to tighten up on the
penalties. Is that correct?
Mr. Pemberton. Yes, I would agree with that.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you. Again, for you, Mr. Pemberton, as part
of Vision Zero in D.C., we are seeing new bike lanes, traffic
calming measures, such as lane closures, and new medians being
constructed across the city. What impact do these measures have
on police response times?
Mr. Pemberton. Well, particularly in main thoroughfares,
when bike lanes are introduced, it impedes police response
times because it makes it much more difficult for emergency
vehicles to get through those areas.
Ms. Foxx. Right. Thank you. Mr. Mendelson, we all know
schools were shut down for long periods during the COVID
pandemic, which has created tremendous learning losses, drops
in test scores, and contributed to the city's low graduation
rates. Do you see a link between these school closures and the
high truancy rate that still linger in D.C.? And I just need a
``yes'' or ``no.
Mr. Mendelson. It is difficult to just give a ``yes'' or
``no.'' There is some link. I mean, our schools closed, and we
had virtual learning as did jurisdictions around the country.
Ms. Foxx. Yes.
Mr. Mendelson. And so, we are coming back from that.
Ms. Foxx. Well, as I am sure you know, nearly half of D.C.
students qualified as chronically absent during 2022, a rate
which has persisted since the COVID school shutdowns began in
2020. During this time, we saw an increase in juvenile crime,
especially carjackings. Do you see a link between the high
truancy rates and increased juvenile crime in D.C.?
Mr. Mendelson. No, I don't.
Ms. Foxx. You don't? OK.
Mr. Mendelson. I do not see a link there.
Ms. Foxx. What is the D.C. Council doing to address the
high truancy rates and rising juvenile crime in D.C. if you
don't see a link?
Mr. Mendelson. As the Chair of the Committee as a whole, I
have had a number of hearings on attendance and truancy, and I
am very concerned about the attendance rate. But let me be
clear, the accurate measure of the quality of our educational
system is in the test scores, like the National Education
Assessment Test score, NEAP, and we see improvement. Like all
jurisdictions, the scores went down during the pandemic, but
they have been coming back up. Yes, attendance is a concern,
but in terms of educational outcomes, we are seeing some
improvement.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you. Mr. Pemberton, common sense says
reducing consequences for crime invites even more crime. This
not only harms residents of increasingly lawless communities,
but businesses and their customers. Are you concerned that
increased crime will push businesses out of D.C.?
Mr. Pemberton. Absolutely. There are dozens of restaurants
and other commercial establishments that have closed in the
past few years, and I think many of them have left due to
crime.
Ms. Foxx. Are you concerned that an increase in crime will
discourage people from moving to D.C., and perhaps push those
people instead to the Suburbs of Maryland and Virginia, or even
out of the Metro Area completely?
Mr. Pemberton. Yes. What we hear from citizens quite often
is that they are looking to move out of the city because of the
crime rates.
Ms. Foxx. Well, I want to say that even a staffer of mine--
they kept hearing gunshots around their house, and a week ago
sold their house and moved out to Maryland. This is a very,
very real issue. So, one more question. Given these negative
economics and social consequences, why do you think D.C.'s City
Council has adopted such a soft-on-crime stance?
Mr. Pemberton. Well, I think part of it is because they
have always had this lean toward defendant-friendly policies.
But, frankly, over the past few years, I think they have been
chasing headlines and trying to jump on the bandwagon of anti-
police rhetoric that is happening all over the country.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Comer. The Chair recognizes Ranking Member Raskin
for five minutes.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The District's police
force is five times larger per capita than the police force in
Bakersfield, California, a city with one of the highest crime
rates in the United States and the home, of course, of our
Speaker, Kevin McCarthy. The D.C. police force is three times
larger per capita than the force in New Orleans, which has one
of the highest crime rates in the United States, and is, at
least partly, represented by Majority Leader Steve Scalise.
Councilman Allen, I was interested by your testimony where
you pointed out that the lack of statehood for Washington means
that the people are unable to control large parts of the
criminal justice machinery. People in D.C. are not allowed to
elect their own judges. People in D.C. are not allowed to
elect, for the most part, the prosecutors who are prosecuting
the most serious crimes. You are saying there is a lack of
transparency and accountability in Federal prosecutions for
crimes committed in the District. Say a word, if you would,
about how statehood would change that and make the people of
Washington far more effective in their ability to address crime
since obviously nobody is more concerned about crime in
Washington than Washingtonians themselves.
Mr. Allen. Thank you very much for the question, sir. I
think it is built on the front end and on the back end. I think
most people probably saw The Washington Post story today, which
has been talked about for quite some time, with the 67-percent
declination rate of moving forward with prosecutions following
an MPD arrest by the Federal U.S. Attorney's Office. I have
been talking about this issue for last couple of years where
upwards of 60 percent of MPD's gun arrests don't move forward
to a prosecution. We have no ability to hold the U.S. attorney
accountable. When we even invite the U.S. attorney into
hearings to talk about public safety, they decline to come. So,
on the front end of that, we see a concern with the U.S.
attorney's office that we have no accountability and no
oversight.
On the back end, when we look at individuals that are going
to be coming home following a conviction, we have a Federal
Bureau of Prisons that leaves people entirely disconnected, and
when someone does come home, there is no communication or
coordination with the District of Columbia. I appreciate
Congresswoman Norton, who introduced legislation just this week
to require the Bureau of Prisons to coordinate and communicate
to the District of Columbia. We are unable to be able to have
that type of coordination and communication, and most often,
that individual then moves into another Federal agency for
supervision, again, not accountable to the District of
Columbia. Statehood would change that.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you. Chairman Mendelson, you similarly
point out that the U.S. Attorney's Office, which is in charge
of prosecuting the most serious offenses that take place in the
District of Columbia, is overwhelmed. One reason they are
overwhelmed is because there are more than 1,000 cases coming
out of January 6, then they are warning that there could be
another 1,000 arrests coming for people who assaulted Federal
officers, brought dangerous weapons into the Capitol, engaged
in seditious conspiracy, and so on. You are calling for
adequate resourcing of the U.S. Attorney's Office. Tell us what
that means to Washington, D.C. to get Federal funding into this
office.
Mr. Mendelson. Let me start by echoing what Councilmember
Allen said, which is that because these are Federal agencies,
the District Government doesn't have the appropriate control to
make these agencies more responsive or to have a better
criminal justice system. So, all of our felonies and most of
our misdemeanors are prosecuted by the U.S. attorney, and what
we see over and over again is that they have to prioritize
cases. They will take the more violent cases. They will not
prosecute the misdemeanors or the less serious felonies, or
they will plea bargain to lesser sentences, which then has
consequences if that person gets re-arrested because that
person isn't considered a dangerous offender.
You know, I would note, I think it is horrible what
happened to Senator Paul's staff person, who was sentenced by a
judge who was appointed by the President of the United States,
who was released without notice to the District Government by
the Federal Bureau of Prisons, and who was supposed to go into
custody or supervision by CSOSA, which is also a Federal
agency. This is something that was horrible, and yet it is
something of which we have no part because of the way our
criminal justice system is structured. But in short, if the
U.S. attorney is going to be prosecuting our cases, they need
more resources so that they can prosecute more cases.
Mr. Raskin. And that reminds me that if you read the
Declaration of Independence, one of the things that Jefferson
was calling for was control in America over judges and
prosecutors, saying that the king had no real interest in
public safety locally, and you seem to be saying the same
thing. If there are problems there, let the District control
its own judges, its prosecutors.
Mr. Mendelson. Yes.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman, thank you for your patience. I
yield back to you.
Chairman Comer. The Ranking Member yields back. The Chair
recognizes Mr. Palmer for five minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to direct
some questions to Mr. Allen. D.C. has experienced an
unprecedented surge in crime. We are now three months into the
year. So far this year, juveniles accounted for over half of
the carjacking arrests. Given this, how can you justify passing
legislation to allow 25-year-olds to be tried as minors?
Mr. Allen. I am sorry. Legislation to have 25-year-olds
tried as minors?
Mr. Palmer. As I understand it, that is what you supported,
and that is your position. So, you say that is not your
position?
Mr. Allen. No, sir. That is not the law in the District of
Columbia.
Mr. Palmer. Well, during a November 2021 roundtable, you
let witnesses testify that they experienced workplace
retaliation after reporting their concerns over both the D.C.
jails central detention and the treatment facilities to Mayor
Bowser's Administration. I just want to know what you or your
other Councilmembers have done to hold the Mayor's Office
accountable to address these concerns.
Mr. Allen. Related to the Department of Corrections you
said?
Mr. Palmer. The whistleblower who experienced workplace
retaliation as a result of bringing this to the attention of
the Mayor's Office and to the Council.
Mr. Allen. Yes, sir.
Mr. Palmer. Have you responded to that?
Mr. Allen. Yes, sir. I believe you are referring to staff
individuals with the Department of Correction Central Detention
Facility and Central Treatment Facility. So, under my
leadership previously of chairing the Committee, we held
numerous oversight hearings of the Mayor and of the Department
of Corrections. That then led to legislation that increases
accountability and reporting with the Department of
Corrections. One of things we found was that we have a dearth
of ability to get into the Department of Corrections, and we
also have what is called the Corrections Information Council,
which is an independent entity to be able to conduct oversight.
They were being prohibited from doing their job as well. So, we
changed the laws to be able to open up that access and
requirements as well, so that we have not just the Council be
able to have improved oversight, but independent entities that
can go into do independent oversight.
Mr. Palmer. You know, you were one of the champions of the
RCCA, and, from what I understand, carjackings have gone up 118
percent in the city since then and over 56 percent among
juveniles, and I think there is a message out there that you
can get away with crime. Also, this emergency police reform
that you guys pushed through, I think, Mr. Pemberton, you have
had in the range 600 police officers that have left the force.
How has that impacted your ability to keep the city safe?
Mr. Pemberton. Yes, that is correct. I think the chief of
police testified last month in an oversight hearing that we
were short over 500 police officers, which measures up with our
numbers. I think the total staffing of the police department
right now is about 3,400.
Mr. Palmer. But that is a huge problem for recruiting and
training officers, isn't it?
Mr. Pemberton. It is impossible, and as I stated in my
testimony, we are running a deficit every month. We are losing,
you know, 15, 20, 25 officers per month, and we just can't keep
up with the crime. We can't keep up with the demand. The
response times are going up. We don't have enough detectives to
investigate these cases.
Mr. Palmer. Washington, D.C. is experiencing some of the
same issues that other cities are experiencing, and it is
interesting to note that one of my colleagues talks the number
of children dying from firearms and didn't mention the number
of children dying from drug overdoses, particularly fentanyl
poisoning. We had a record number, unprecedented increase in
adolescent drug overdoses over the last couple of years,
largely because this stuff is coming across our Southern
border, and my colleagues across the aisle have zero concern
about it. They do nothing to secure the border. You have got an
unprecedented number of increase in murders in Democrat-run
cities. And I just wonder in your experience in your law
enforcement of dealing with gun crimes among adolescents, how
many of those are related to drugs? A significant portion of
them?
Mr. Pemberton. Many of the violent crimes that we
encounter, especially street crimes, involving guns are usually
some sort of street beef. It could emanate from some sort of
argument, but it oftentimes emanates from drugs and drug
trafficking.
Mr. Palmer. A significant number of homicides are not
related to drugs or not involve firearms. People are beaten to
death and other means of murder, right?
Mr. Pemberton. I would say most of them are firearm
related, but that is correct that there are non-firearm-related
homicides in the city every year, yes.
Mr. Palmer. So, it sounds to me like we have got a huge
problem, and to your point, Mr. Mendelson, about how great the
theaters are in Washington, you have got crappy schools. Your
schools are not only dropout factories, they are inmate
factories. And you can look at this anywhere you want to in the
country, and a lot of these adolescents who are committing
these crimes are kids who, if they graduated high school at
all, and this is pretty consistent around the country. And you
can shake your head in disagreement all you want to, Mr. Allen,
it is just the fact. So, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Mendelson. If I could just respond, Mr. Chairman. I
don't agree that the D.C. public schools are inmate factories.
I will say that our urban----
Mr. Palmer. I am not saying all of them are.
Mr. Mendelson. Sure.
Mr. Palmer. I said you have some crappy schools. So, you
are telling me all of them are excellent?
Mr. Mendelson. No, I am not saying all of them are
excellent----
Mr. Palmer. Well, thank you.
Mr. Mendelson [continuing]. But I would not say that they
are factories for crime.
Mr. Palmer. Well, if you look at who is in prison----
Mr. Mendelson. If I look at what?
Mr. Palmer. If you look at who is in prison----
Mr. Mendelson. Yes.
Mr. Palmer [continuing]. This is consistent around the
country, regardless of race or gender, over 60 percent of them
are high school dropouts. We have a problem in our schools.
Mr. Mendelson. So, the Council is very aggressively
fighting with the chancellor to improve the stability and
funding for our individual schools so that there are more
dollars in the classroom so that we have better educational
outcomes.
Mr. Palmer. We are spending more money than we have ever
spent----
Chairman Comer. The gentleman's time----
Mr. Palmer [continuing]. In our history on education----
Chairman Comer. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Palmer [continuing]. And it is not helping.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Palmer. I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. The Chair recognizes Ms. Norton for five
minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me point out that
D.C.'s difficulties in recruiting and retaining officers is not
unique to the District. The International Association of Chiefs
of Police said that, ``The challenge of recruiting law
enforcement is widespread and affects agencies of all types,
sizes, and locations across the United States.'' In the 116th
and 117th Congress, the Democratic-led House of Representatives
passed the D.C. Statehood Bill, which would have given D.C.
residents voting representation in Congress and full local
self-government. There was nothing radical about this proposal.
The bill would admit D.C. as a new state and reduce the size of
the Federal District. These are both things Congress has done
before.
The admissions clause of the Constitution empowers Congress
to admit new states to the Union. Congress has admitted all 37
new states by simple legislation. Congress, using its authority
under the District clause, has also previously reduced the size
of the Federal District by 30 percent. In 2021, dozens of
prominent constitutional scholars urged Congress to admit D.C.
to the Union, explaining in a letter that, ``There is no
constitutional barrier,'' to admitting the state of Washington
Douglas Commonwealth.
In opposing D.C. Statehood in recent years, Republicans
have made a variety of dubious arguments. For example,
Republicans have fretted about D.C.'s lack of car dealerships.
They worried that D.C. does not have workers in the mining and
logging industry. And Senator Cotton [corrected] claimed that
D.C., which would have the largest percentage of African
Americans of any state, would not be, quote, ``a well-rounded,
working-class state,'' end quote.
Some Republicans even admitted the quiet part out loud.
They opposed statehood because they presumed D.C. would elect
two Democratic Senators.
There is nothing new about such unprincipled opposition to
the admission of new states by Members of Congress.
Partisanship, racism, regionalism, slavery, and religion have
all played roles in congressional debates over the admission of
new states. Eventually, all such opposition was overcome.
Mr. Mendelson, in 2016, D.C. held a referendum on
statehood. What percentage of D.C. residents voted in favor of
statehood?
Mr. Mendelson. You know, Congressman, I do not remember
whether it was 80 or 85 percent, but it was somewhere around
there.
Ms. Norton. Yes, it was around there. It was 86 percent.
The people of the District of Columbia want statehood. They
want voting representation in Congress. They want to govern
themselves like everybody else in this country. Congress has
the authority to admit the state of Washington Douglas
Commonwealth. It is time for Congress to pass the D.C.
Statehood bill.
I yield.
Mr. Raskin. Will the gentlelady yield?
Ms. Norton. I yield to my friend.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you. I just wanted to followup on your
last point, Ms. Norton. Republican Senator Mike Lee of Utah
just tweeted, ``Time to relieve D.C. government of its
authority over our Nation's capital city, which belongs to
Congress under Article 1, Section 8, Clause 17 of the
Constitution. That power should not be delegated to a third
party, especially the people bent on encouraging lawlessness.''
Well, his statement is an argument really for the Statehood
legislation which would precisely shrink the Federal city down
to the National Capital Service Area, the Mall, and grant
people in Washington, who have petitioned for statehood, their
own state outside of it, and then Congress can directly govern
the Mall area and the Federal buildings.
I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Higgins for
five minutes.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the panelists
for being here today. Mr. Chairman, today's hearing is to
discuss our oversight of crime issues in the Nation's capital.
Before I get to my questions, I would like to address something
that seems to be a repeated talking point of my Democratic
colleagues now regarding gun violence, and gun violence being
the No. 1 cause of death of children in America today. You will
hear that a lot. Let me correct both.
There is no such thing as gun violence. There is only human
violence. It is intellectually unsound to state otherwise. And
the No. 1 cause of death for children in America remains
abortion. CDC numbers, 620,327 legally induced abortions in
America in 2020. In that same year, tragically, 4,357 children
died from firearm accidental discharge, suicide, and homicide,
and my heart goes out to those families.
I lost my first daughter in 1990. I am not sure how I
survived, really, and over the course of my life I have come to
understand that part of me did not survive. Indeed, part of me
died with my daughter that day. And I do not appreciate my
Democratic colleagues constantly lying to the American people
referring to gun violence as if it is not driven by human
violence and ignoring the fact that America has allowed
millions upon millions of children to be killed in the womb.
Let's turn to crime, shall we? Oh, before I get to crime,
D.C. Statehood. Democrats had majority control up until a
couple months ago. The House, the Senate, and the White House.
D.C. Statehood does indeed have constitutional barriers.
Overcome that, want to create the 51st state, knock yourself
out. You had majority control and it did not happen because
there are indeed significant constitutional barriers. That is a
hearing for another day. We have had many.
Let's turn to crime, shall we? Mr. Pemberton, thank you for
your service, my thin blue line brother. Considering that D.C.
Chief of Police Robert Contee's testimony on February 23, 2023,
stating that the D.C. Metro Police Department is experiencing
record low number of officers and recruitment is incredibly
difficult, how might the D.C. Council's Comprehensive Policing
and Justice Reform Amendment Act of 2022, a provision which
permits activists and anti-police groups to search for officers
past complaints, how might that affect your recruitment and
retention of police officers in D.C. Metro Police Department,
sir?
Mr. Pemberton. Yes. Well, thank you. First of all, the bill
has 26 subtitles in it, and all of them are completely
detrimental to keeping and retaining and hiring new candidates.
You are asking specifically about Subtitle X. Subtitle X
actually creates a disciplinary data base in which every
officer's disciplinary history would be posted publicly. It
would be hosted by the Office of Police Complaints.
Mr. Higgins. So that America understands, this is a
complaint, not a conviction or a suspension, et cetera. We are
talking about all complaints are accessible for public review?
Mr. Pemberton. That is how I understand it. Additionally,
it also creates a carveout to FOIA exemptions, which allows any
citizen to FOIA an officer's personnel record, and the only
requirements for redaction would be their address, date of
birth, and Social Security number. You know, we have concerns
about undercover officers and other sensitive personal
information that could end up in the hands----
Mr. Higgins. That would have quite a chilling effect on
effective policing, may I say, as a former police officer.
Let me just close by saying to you gentlemen from the D.C.
Council, it is going to get worse because the word on the
street--it is not uncommon for criminals to leave their base of
operations in a city for a period of time, when the heat is on.
And the word is on the street that D.C. is a good destination
because prosecution is virtually zero and crime is rampant. It
is what you have created here, in this liberal stronghold. It
is going to get worse.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes Mr. Connolly for five minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pemberton, listening to your testimony in the
beginning, you had strong objections to rhetoric, things said
at the City Council. Is it your contention that things said by
elected officials on the City Council are what is driving
police officers from the force?
Mr. Pemberton. Partially, yes, and just as Congresswoman
Norton pointed out that these problems are in existence all
over the country.
Mr. Connolly. Right.
Mr. Pemberton. And the reason that they are in existence is
partly because of rhetoric people have taken up, talking about
police officers and the industry of law enforcement in general,
yes.
Mr. Connolly. Do you reside in the District of Columbia?
Mr. Pemberton. I did reside here for 16 years. I recently
moved out.
Mr. Connolly. So, you could not run for D.C. City Council.
Mr. Pemberton. No, sir.
Mr. Connolly. But they are elected by the people of the
District of Columbia. You are not.
Mr. Pemberton. No. I am elected by the law enforcement
officers in the District of Columbia.
Mr. Connolly. I mean, at some point we have to respect the
will of the people, and the people elected Mr. Mendelson and
Mr. Allen. So, you can disagree all you want--it is a free
country--but they get to make laws, they get to pursue
policies, and they get to express themselves. And if the voters
don't like it, they can vote them out, right?
Mr. Pemberton. I agree completely. I am not trying to
undermine that, sir. I am trying to talk about the unintended
consequences of the rhetoric.
Mr. Connolly. All right. I just wanted to clarify that.
Mr. Pemberton. [continuing]. You have had officers leave
the department in droves----
Mr. Connolly. In the beginning, your testimony seemed to
question their----
Mr. Pemberton. [continuing]. When they hear the city
council talking about police officers----
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. Rights to say it, and that
bothered me.
Mr. Pemberton. OK. I----
Mr. Connolly. As somebody who comes from local government
and had to run a police department.
OK. Of course, I don't even understand why we are having
this hearing because we can have hearings until the cows come
home about various municipalities or rural parts of American in
which we all disagree, or some of us disagree, but should we?
At what point do we deal with our own contradictions about
the right of people to self-government, irrespective of--hey, I
can go through a lot of states right now, especially on the red
side, that I do not like. I don't like their policies, I don't
like their elected officials, and I would like to have a
hearing to second-guess them and overturn their legislation.
And the only thing we hide behind around here is that the
Constitution grants us oversight. Yes, the Constitution does,
but the Constitution did not foresee a vibrant urban area
called the District of Columbia. In fact, D.C. did not exist
when the Constitution of the United States was written. That
happened after the formation of the new government pursuant to
the Constitution of the United States.
And if we want to run for local government, run for local
government. If Senator Lee cares so much, let him chair the
Zoning Committee. Tom Cotton, Senator from Arkansas, a well-
known expert in the District of Columbia and local government
generally, referred to a working-class and well-rounded--D.C.
was neither a well-rounded nor working-class state.
Now, Mr. Mendelson, I am sure there are working-class
people in the District of Columbia. I have only been here 50
years, but I am struck with the fact they do have working-class
people. But, am I wrong?
Mr. Mendelson. No, we have lots of them.
Mr. Connolly. Oh good. OK. So that part we met.
Now well-rounded. There is an interesting concept. It
sounds a little subjective to me. Are we going to take the
well-rounded test for who qualifies for statehood, and for that
matter, who gets a vote here in the United States Congress? Mr.
Allen, I don't know. What do you think?
Mr. Allen. I find the District of Columbia to be very well-
rounded.
Mr. Connolly. So, that is your opinion. So, we will pit
your opinion against Mr. Cotton's opinion, and that is not
arbitrary or whimsical. And meanwhile, based on that thinking,
that logic, if one can call it that, almost 700,000 people are
denied their voting rights in the U.S. Congress. That is the
absurdity we have now descended to.
As I say to my colleagues on the other side, yes, you can
have a hearing like this, and you can overturn laws, but the
question is, should you? And at what point do you live up to
your own commitment to local government is closest to the
people and we believe in self-determination. That ought to be a
conservative as well as progressive principle.
I yield back.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman yields back.
Before we recognize the next questioner, I would just like
to answer my friend, Mr. Connolly's, question as to why we are
having this hearing. First of all, the Oversight Committee has
legislative jurisdiction. We have a constitutional authority to
oversee and provide checks and balances for the city of
Washington, D.C. And second, I think this is a very important
part of this hearing, the Democrat President and a Democrat
Congress objected to the change in the D.C. Criminal Code. That
was pretty big news, and it is a fact. So, that is why we are
having this hearing.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Timmons for five minutes.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You took the words
out of my mouth. I thought we were going to talk about crime in
D.C. and the changes that were made by City Council and whether
those were in the best interest of the District or not. But
instead, we are talking about statehood. I find that very
interesting that my colleagues across the aisle always go back
to this conversation of statehood, but--do a little research.
In 2009, the Democrats had a filibuster-proof Majority in the
Senate, they had the White House, and the House. The Senate
passed S. 160 out on February 26, 2009, 61-37.
So, if my colleagues across the aisle actually wanted D.C.
Statehood, and a number of them were here during this, they
could have voted on it. The Majority in the House, with Speaker
Pelosi at the helm, was 235-198. I do not know why we are still
talking about this. The people that want it, that want D.C.
Statehood, did not give it to you when they could have very
easily given it to you.
So, that was then, and that was when 61 Senators agreed to
it. Now, 81 Senators said that what you all did was wrong, and
both of your testimoneys cannot be true. The two councilmembers
and the detective cannot both be right. They cannot both be
right. So, either we have a crime problem in D.C. or things are
getting better.
Councilmembers, 81 Senators disagree with you that things
are getting better. They think things are getting worse. The
President of the United States disagrees with you that things
are getting better. They think that things are getting worse.
So, I went to undergrad at GW. I was here from 2003 to
2006. I worked on the Hill briefly. I came back for law school
for one semester, and I have been around D.C. for the last five
years. And I have to tell you, it is not safe. It is the least
safe that it has ever been.
So, you are up here telling us that things are getting
better, but my personal experience says that is not true. Your
detective, the Chairman of the police union, says that is not
true. 81 Senators, 250 Members of the House, 81 Senators say
that is not true. The President of the United States says that
is not true.
So, I guess let us just get to the purpose of criminal law.
Criminal law, generally, the two principles are deterrence and
retribution. Your criminal code currently does not deter crime.
And one of the most abhorrent examples of this was the Uber
Eats driver that, a 15-year-old woman that previously was
arrested for carjacking and released, did it again, weeks,
months later, and killed an Uber Eats driver. And, by the way,
15 years old in South Carolina, if you kill somebody you are
getting tried as an adult. But instead, your criminal code and
your criminal justice system has tried her as a minor, and she
is going to be released when she turns 21, and not have a
criminal history.
That is not justice. That is wrong. And it doesn't deter
people from committing crimes in the future. Clearly the first
carjacking arrest didn't do anything, so the second carjacking
arrest and murder, her friends are looking at that and saying,
``Well, you know, she is getting out when she is 21. She is
never going to do hard time.'' I mean, that is wrong. That is
just objectively wrong.
So, as you look back at your decisions that you have made,
I know that you both are in favor of D.C. Statehood, you are
further away today than you have ever been, and you were never
actually that close because the Democrats could have given it
to you in 2009. So, get this city safe. Get this city safe.
Support your law enforcement. Create a criminal code that
deters crime. Create a criminal code that gives individuals
that are victims of crime retribution. Because the purpose of
the criminal code is to give them retribution, so they do not
seek it for themselves.
I am sorry that I did not ask any questions, but there is
no point because Detective Pemberton cannot be telling the
truth if you all are telling the truth. And 81 Senators and 250
House Members and the President of the United States say that
things are getting worse in Washington, D.C. They are getting
worse. Do your job and make us safe.
With that I yield back.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Mfume.
Mr. Mfume. Thank you. I have a parliamentary inquiry.
Chairman Comer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Mfume. Was the Mayor, Mayor Bowser, invited to this
hearing?
Chairman Comer. We are inviting the Mayor to the next
meeting. We felt like the Mayor needed to have her own, just be
the only witness and not on a panel with multiple other people.
Mr. Mfume. OK. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. This is Phase 1 of our hearings, first
hearing.
Mr. Mfume. Thank you very much. It is kind of ominous. It
just got dark in here. But let's try, if we can, to shine some
light on a couple of facts.
First, to my distinguished colleague from South Carolina
who has just exited the room, he is a little off on his
history. That 1993 vote that he talked about did, in fact,
occur. It is just that he did not know that there was a vote 18
months ago that also occurred, in which the House of
Representatives passed the D.C. Statehood bill. So, let us make
sure it is history and not his story.
The second thing, it is very important here, that when we
have these discussions, we really get to the crux of why we are
here and what continues to bring us back. And Ranking Member
Raskin is correct, and the distinguished woman from the
District of Columbia, correct. It gets back to statehood and
the absence of the ability of men and women to determine their
future.
Let us not forget what happened in December of 1773, when
American colonists dumped over 300 barrels of tea into the
Boston Harbor because they were upset that they were being
taxed, but had absolutely no say in the running of things, no
say in their government whatsoever.
So, fast forward to where we are today, and when we bring
these issues up, in this case related to police and policing,
which I really want to speak to, all of a sudden we are accused
of having some kind of strange agenda. This will continue to
happen as long as people are denied the right to be able to
represent themselves when they pay taxes, when they serve in
the military, and when they are told they can't have voting
representation in the Congress of the United States.
So, this is not about all cops are bad or all cops are
good. This is about policing. And I want to go back to a couple
of former police chiefs, so that we can get on the record what
they said. And for the record, I and many Members of this
Committee, have worked to establish bills and processes that
empower the ability of law enforcement to do their job, whether
it is trying to deal with protectors or survivors or victims--I
have got a Victim Assistance Act that has been endorsed by the
FOP, that provides money to protect people who want to come
forward in criminal cases. So, let us not get this twisted.
This is not about bad cops. And by the way, nobody hates a bad
cop more than a good cop. So, let us put that on the record
also.
But when there are bad police, they bring down the entire
department. Case in point, the Police Department has been
forced to rehire significant numbers of officers that it fired
for misconduct, primarily because of decisions of arbitrators.
Every police chief for the last 25 years has lamented the fact
that they have been forced to rehire officers for serious
misconduct, making it bad for good police officers to do their
job.
Former D.C. Police Chief Peter Newsham said he had to
allow, quote, ``very bad police officers back into the
department.'' Former Police Chief Charles Ramsey said, quote,
``It is demoralizing to the rank and file who really don't have
a say, because it takes a tremendous amount of anxiety and
places it on the department.'' And he said our credibility is
shot whenever these things happen. Current D.C. Police, Mr.
Contee, said eliminating arbitration would, quote, ``help
reduce the risk of returning poor performers''--bad police--
``back to the force.''
So, I don't know how much time I have, Mr. Chairman, but
just a couple of quick things for the record. One officer in
the past struck a suspect multiple times in the head. The
officer was convicted of assault and sentenced to 30 days in
jail and three years of probation, and then reinstated and
given back pay of $679,000. Point two, an off-duty police
officer sexually assaulted a person and was convicted. That
officer was sentenced to 100 days suspended sentence, one year
probation, reinstated, and then given a back pay of over half a
million dollars.
I could go on and on and on. The issue here all goes back
to the fact that when you can't determine your own destiny,
even though you pay taxes, when you have no say in your city,
these sorts of things crop up, and then the side issues, like
good cop versus bad cop tend to take over the discussion and
the argument. The citizens of Washington need representation,
and the D.C. Statehood bill, again, for the record, passed in
2021. I was there in 1993. I saw what happened in 2021. So,
when we play around with history let us make sure it is
history, and not his story.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman's time has expired.
I would like to enter into the record, this is a letter
dated today that we are sending to Mayor Bowser. We were going
to send this at the conclusion of the meeting, inviting her to
an Oversight Committee hearing on May 16, and presumably she
would be the only witness. We would treat her just like we
would treat a Cabinet secretary.
Mr. Mfume. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. Without objection.
Chairman Comer. I would also like to enter into the record
The Washington Post--I don't do this very often--The Washington
Post editorial entitled ``D.C.'s crime bill could make the city
more dangerous.'' Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman Comer. The Chair recognizes myself for five
minutes for the purpose of asking questions.
Chairman Mendelson, the D.C. Council overrode the Mayor's
veto of the Revised Criminal Code Act on January 17. Is that
correct?
Mr. Mendelson. Yes.
Chairman Comer. And House Joint Resolution 26 passed the
House of Representatives on February 9. Correct?
Mr. Mendelson. I assume that is the correct date.
Chairman Comer. President Biden announced, on March 2, that
he did not intend to veto this measure. Is that correct?
Mr. Mendelson. That is my recollection.
Chairman Comer. You informed the U.S. Senate on March 6
that you were pulling the legislation from consideration. Is
that correct?
Mr. Mendelson. Correct.
Chairman Comer. You were trying to stop the Senate from
considering the Revised Criminal Code Act. Correct?
Mr. Mendelson. Yes.
Chairman Comer. So, did you attempt to withdraw the Revised
Criminal Code Act to help cover for House Democrats after it
became clear the resolution of disapproval would pass the
Senate and be signed by the President?
Mr. Mendelson. I did not do it to cover. I did it--I mean,
this is, I think, typical in any legislature. When you see that
you are losing you pull the bill back. You pull the amendment
back so that you can work on it further.
Chairman Comer. I wonder, Chairman Mendelson, did any
Federal elected official or staff of any federally elected
official request that you or anyone on the Council attempt to
withdraw the Revised Criminal Code Act from congressional
review?
Mr. Mendelson. No. Any conversations I had were with my
staff.
Chairman Comer. So, no one from the Biden Administration
asked you to withdraw the bill.
Mr. Mendelson. Correct. Nobody asked----
Chairman Comer. No congressional Democrat asked you to
withdraw the bill.
Mr. Mendelson. That is correct.
Chairman Comer. Did any government officials ask you to
withdraw the bill?
Mr. Mendelson. No.
Chairman Comer. Chairman Mendelson, no provisions exists in
the Home Rule Act that allow for a withdrawal of action, and I
have serious concerns about your attempt to circumvent proper
congressional action without any statutory support or
precedent. Furthermore, I am seriously concerned that your
actions may have been an attempt to provide cover for
congressional Democrats by withdrawing the RCCA only after it
was clear it would pass the Senate and be signed by the
President.
So, let us move on to actual impacts of the RCCA.
Mr. Mendelson. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Comer. Yes.
Mr. Mendelson. I did not do this as cover to anybody, and
the Home Rule Act does not prohibit what I did. It is silent,
and my reading is that I am required to transmit the
legislation so that the Congress can look at it. It cannot
become law until Congress looks at it. I withdrew it so that it
cannot become law. It cannot become law. I will have to
retransmit it. That is what I said in my withdrawal letter.
Chairman Comer. So, you just had a change of heart after
the House voted on it.
Mr. Mendelson. As I said, not a change of heart, sir, but,
you know, when you see yourself losing, because it was clear
that the Senate, the votes weren't there, then you pull it back
and you work on it some more. I felt that that was a much
better option than to just simply pretend that, yes, we want
the vote, and we are going to lose the vote.
Chairman Comer. OK. Mr. Pemberton, do you think the
proposed reductions in penalties for carjackings and violent
crimes have emboldened criminals in Washington, D.C.?
Mr. Pemberton. Absolutely, and not only that, even just the
rhetoric around the RCCA, I think, has caused criminals to
realize that the city has become even more soft on crime than
they were, even though the RCCA is not in effect.
Chairman Comer. Mr. Pemberton, do the 330 million Americans
who want to come to the Nation's capital have a right to not be
mugged?
Mr. Pemberton. I would agree with that, sir. This is the
Nation's capital, it is Washington, DC, but this is everyone's
city.
Chairman Comer. So, instead of reducing the penalties for
violent crimes at a time when violent crime is a problem in the
District of Columbia, what should the D.C. Council do instead
to reduce crime in our Nation's capital? And that will be my
last question.
Mr. Pemberton. Well, the first thing they need to do is
deal with police staffing. We cannot manage the city and the
demands for the city. We know how many 911 calls there are. We
know how many reports there are. We know how many cases we have
to investigate. We do not have the proper number of police to
do that.
And just to address some of the other comments that have
come up about D.C. having the most police per capita, what that
doesn't consider is that the population of the city doubles
during the day. There are another 500,000 or 600,000 people
that drive into the city because they work here. We do not have
county police. We do not have state police. We do not have
other jurisdictions that assist us. So that per capita number
is a bit of a trope, if you ask me.
But the short answer to your question, sir, is that we need
to have the right number of the police and we need to have the
backing of our elected officials so we can go out and properly
do our job and try to get the criminal justice system to
cooperate so we can hold criminals accountable.
Chairman Comer. Well, thank you, and please relay the
message that we appreciate the support and the service that the
women and men of the police force provide our Nation's capital,
and hopefully we can get legislation that will make their jobs
easier and not more difficult.
Mr. Pemberton. They will appreciate that. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Comer. The Chair now recognizes Ms. Brown for five
minutes.
Ms. Brown. Good morning to my colleagues and our witnesses
here today. Unfortunately, today's hearing is yet another
assault on the governance of the District of Columbia. Our
Republican colleagues claim they have a constitutional duty to
legislate for the District of Columbia, and as has been proven
today, that is simply not true. congressional interference in
D.C.'s local affairs is not a duty; it is a choice, and a bad
one. The framers fully expected Congress to establish a local
government for the District of Columbia. Federalist 43, James
Madison said the following about future residents of D.C. I
quote, ``A municipal legislature for local purposes, derived
from their own suffrages, will, of course, be allowed them.''
Indeed, Congress has established various forms of local
government for D.C. since 1802. In 1953, the Supreme Court held
that, and I quote again, ``there is no constitutional barrier
to the delegation by Congress to the District of Columbia of
full legislative power.'' If Congress had a constitutional duty
to legislate for D.C. it would legislate on all D.C. matters,
not just when it is politically advantageous.
During the 50 years since the passage of the Home Rule Act,
Congress has chosen to intervene in D.C. affairs in some
instances and refrain from others. Perhaps Republicans have a
theory or philosophy for when interference in D.C. affairs is
warranted, but if there is a unifying theory for their efforts
to intervene, I don't see it.
So, Chairman Mendelson, I would like to explore this
supposed constitutional duty to interfere in D.C. affairs. In
the last five years, how many House or Senate Republicans have
testified before the D.C. Council on legislation pending in the
Council?
Mr. Mendelson. None.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. In the last five years, how many
House or Senate Republicans have contacted you about affordable
housing, splitting up the Department of Consumer and Regulatory
Affairs, ward redistrictings, street sweeping, trash pickup
days, residential permit parking zones, or bike lanes on
Connecticut Avenue?
Mr. Mendelson. Well, I do have conversations with our
Congresswoman, Congresswoman Norton, but other than that, no.
Ms. Brown. Republicans was my question, but thank you for
the record. So, the answer is none.
Mr. Mendelson. None.
Ms. Brown. None. OK. So, it is clear, Republican
interference in D.C.'s affairs is a choice. It is not about
constitutional duty or serving the interests of D.C. residents.
Instead, it is about using D.C. to score political points.
I urge my colleagues to end this charade. Let us let D.C.
residents govern themselves. And with that I yield back.
Mr. Palmer. [Presiding.] The Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Burchett, for five minutes for
his questions.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Members,
for being here, and I want you to know that your
congressperson, Eleanor Holmes Norton, has represented you all
well up here, and she articulates your point very well,
although we do disagree. She is a friend and I appreciate her.
And I guess the first thing I was wondering, I do not know
if anybody has asked this or not. You know, all I see up here
is White men. How come there aren't any Black folks that are
testifying in this thing? Is anybody----
Mr. Mendelson. Sir, that was a comment that I alluded to at
the end of my testimony. Mr. Allen alluded to that as well. But
we did not choose the witness list.
Mr. Burchett. I am sorry you didn't.
Mr. Allen, in 2020, you proposed cutting $15 million to the
Police Department budget. Is that correct?
Mr. Allen. The Council approved a redirection of $9.6
million from MPD that year.
Mr. Burchett. Yes, sir, but you proposed cutting $15
million. Correct?
Mr. Allen. The 9.6 was in operating dollars. The remainder
was in capital funds from a half-a-billion-dollar budget, yet.
Mr. Burchett. OK. Still a lot of money.
Mr. Allen, on June 28, 2020, you tweeted that this would be
the biggest reduction to Metropolitan Police Department you
have ever seen. Is that correct?
Mr. Allen. I don't have that in front of me. It was three
years ago, but I am assuming you are reading something, so I am
going to assume that that is correct. That was an explanation
of the redirection of about one percent of the half-a-billion-
dollar budget to other public safety priorities.
Mr. Burchett. OK. You also tweeted on that same day, in
essence--this is in quotes--``In essence, unless money is
transferred in by the Mayor there will be an effective hiring
freeze for new officers.'' Is that correct?
Mr. Allen. Yes. I was explaining the net effect would be
that the District, as we went through the summer of 2020, would
experience a reduction in new hires for MPD. We actually ended
up hiring, I believe, I can get you that number for certain,
about 100 new officers that year. But that was the net impact.
Mr. Burchett. Yes, we would have a hiring freeze. Thank
you.
Mr. Allen, after the tragic shootings on the city's Metro
transit system in February 2023, you called for an increased
police presence. Is that correct?
Mr. Allen. I frequently work with the men and women on the
Police Department and whenever we have acts of violence we work
together to increase presence, yes.
Mr. Burchett. OK, Mr. Allen, but your 2020 comments seemed
kind of shortsighted, don't they, with what was going on?
Mr. Allen. No, sir. I worked with the Police Department,
the First District leadership, Chief Contee, and all the
assistant chiefs. Whenever we are working proactively, both to
work to keep neighborhoods safe, we partner with the police as
well as other entities, and whenever we do have acts of
violence that take place, we work with the Police Department to
have a response.
Mr. Burchett. Mr. Pemberton, the proposed D.C. crime bill,
which the Council pushed through despite a veto from Mayor
Bowser, that would eliminate mandatory and statutory minimum
sentences, other than first degree murder. Is that correct?
Mr. Pemberton. Yes, sir. That is correct, for all crime
categories, no minimums.
Mr. Burchett. Mr. Pemberton, this bill would also reduce
the maximum sentence for first degree sexual assault and first-
degree sexual assault of a minor from life in prison to 30
years. Is that correct?
Mr. Pemberton. Yes, sir. That is correct.
Mr. Burchett. Are you aware that homicides have increased
19 percent compared to March 2022?
Mr. Pemberton. Yes, sir. I am aware of that.
Mr. Burchett. Are you also aware that sexual abuse crimes
are up 100 percent compared to March 2022?
Mr. Pemberton. I think it is even higher than that, but
yes.
Mr. Burchett. Yes. It probably is. Everybody likes nice
round numbers up here.
In your opinion, how do these soft-on-crime policies toward
murders and rapists reduce homicides and sexual assaults?
Mr. Pemberton. None, sir. They do quite the opposite. They
exacerbate the situation.
Mr. Burchett. Yes, sir. Thank you for your honesty.
Mr. Allen, in your Ward 6 update, dated March 12, 2023, you
published a section called ``Hands Off D.C.'' in response to
the Senate disapproving of your crime bill. Is that correct?
Mr. Allen. Yes, sir.
Mr. Burchett. In the section, you stated House Republicans
are playing political theater and that this is a very real
threat to D.C. residents. That is correct too as well, is it
not?
Mr. Allen. I do believe that is what is happening, yes,
sir.
Mr. Burchett. OK. Property crime is up 27 percent compared
to March 2022. Don't you feel like that is a very real threat
to D.C. residents?
Mr. Allen. I think any crime is a threat to D.C. residents
and our community and that is why, as we talked about the
trends over time, both that violent and property crime have
gone down, we have persistent issues around public safety that
we continue to work on, both with traditional law enforcement
as well as the other ways we invest in our communities to stop
cycles of violence.
Mr. Burchett. OK.
Mr. Allen. And then hold accountable individuals who commit
those crimes.
Mr. Burchett. Motor vehicle theft is up 105 percent
compared to March 2022. I feel like that is a very real threat
to the D.C. residents. And I am about out of time, but I would
encourage you all, and my friends across the aisle, when we
bring people in here that it should reflect the community that
we have, and four White men I don't think quite does that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back no time.
Mr. Allen. Thank you. I agree with that completely.
Mr. Palmer. I thank the gentleman.
I would just like to point out that the Committee invited
D.C. councilmember Kenyan McDuffie and he was unable to attend
the hearing today. And we also reached out to Councilman Trayon
White, and we did not receive a response.
I would also like to comment on the fact that the
Constitution anticipated the national seat of government when
it was ratified in 1788, and that is the District of Columbia.
I now recognize Mr. Garcia for five minutes for his
questions.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you to our witnesses for being here as well.
I want to just start by asking unanimous consent to submit
this article from yesterday from Vox into the record, ``The
House GOP's investigations are flopping.'' This continues to
happen, of course, today, so Mr. Chairman, I would to have
unanimous consent for that article.
Mr. Garcia. You know, I served as a mayor in California for
the last eight years--I just got elected to Congress--it was a
city of about half a million people. And what is interesting is
I didn't realize that when I was running for Congress to
actually come back to a City Council, which is clearly what
many of our colleagues here are interested in. And I would
encourage folks that are interested in actually running cities
to actually run for councils, run for mayor. It was a great
experience, and I appreciate particularly those that are
serving on that body. It is not easy work.
I also think it is really important that we thank the D.C.
officials that are here. As a now part-time resident of the
District, you have a city that is clearly focused on density,
on good transit, on a great bike network which I think is
enviable for cities across the country, and you are taking on
issues around criminal justice reform, which are also really
important.
I also want to remind this Committee of what actually
happened over the last couple of years. So, we are talking a
lot about what happened in the last year, the last two years as
it relates to crime statistics. We just went through the single
largest emergency and loss of life event, the pandemic, in
these last couple of years. What we have seen in cities across
the country are absolutely challenges as it relates to safety,
folks that are unhoused, and responding to the emergency as
cities come back. So, we have gone through a massive emergency
and now we are all working together to build back, so I think
that is important to put this discussion actually into a little
bit of context as it relates to the pandemic.
Because if we actually look at 10 years ago or 20 years ago
or 30 years ago, the data that everyone is actually claiming to
know a lot about, D.C. actually had more danger and more
violent crime back in the 1990's and the early 2000's. So, it
is actually safer today, on the data, than it was 20 or 30
years ago. And that is a fact, even though some of my
colleagues were not interested in that data, just the data from
the last few years ago.
Now, when I was mayor, my council passed a landmark racial
justice and reconciliation act in 2020, which is something that
was supported by the entire community. It strengthened our
police oversight commission as well, which went to the voters,
and I am very proud that they did. And we implemented many of
the same reforms as Washington, DC, has, that has been
consistent with the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act. I
think that is really, really important work.
If, when I was mayor, I had another body or Washington, DC,
coming at the laws that we passed, I certainly would be pretty
upset. Home rule is actually very important, and I am not
sure--if my Republican colleagues are so interested in trying
to bring up data about Washington, DC, then we should do the
same and focus and have hearings on states. We should be having
hearings on why Texas has more uninsured people than any other
state in the United States. We should be talking about why
Louisiana and Mississippi have some of the lowest life
expectancy of any other state. Those are also data points that
my colleagues are not interested in having discussions about or
having hearings around. I have no interest in telling
Mississippi or Louisiana or Texas how to run their states, and
my colleagues should not be involved in the business of running
or trying to be involved in how a city actually runs their
operations. So, I hope that is something also that we can look
at in the weeks ahead.
I believe in home rule. The people of D.C. deserve better
than this hearing, and they absolutely deserve statehood.
We also know that later on in this Committee there will be
a markup process where they are going to try to even roll back
more reforms that have been put in place. And I am not sure
what they object to so strongly. Do they object to a ban on
chokeholds? Are they objecting to the public release of body
camera footage after shootings? Are they objecting to civilian
oversight of police? Are they objecting to a public data base
of legitimate allegations of misconduct? Maybe they are
objecting to increased accountability for police officers? Are
they objecting to restrictions on car chases? I am not sure
what they are objecting to actually, but these are all
obviously important measures around criminal justice that the
city and the district of D.C. is actually putting in place.
So, I do not have any questions for all of you because I
think this hearing is actually a waste of everyone's time. I
want to thank all of you for your service to the city, all four
of you, and I look forward to our future committee hearings
where we go over all the states across the country that
obviously we can talk a lot about data and how they are also
failing.
So, with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Palmer. The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
Colorado, Mrs. Boebert, for five minutes for her questions.
Mrs. Boebert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is clear that far
left policies driven by progressive D.C. councilmembers are
having a deteriorating effect on education standards, rising
crime, and increased financial instability in our Nation's
capital. Last Congress, Democrats only had one single hearing
with a D.C. councilmember witness, and it was related to their
pursuit of statehood, not actual oversight.
Mr. Allen, you stated public safety is a priority for you,
and police are essential to reducing crime, yet your policies
restrict and weaken law enforcement officers' ability to keep
the public safe. You demand more help from police in tweets
like this one, yet you strip law enforcement's funding with
budget squeezes.
Mr. Lee, how much was the Metropolitan Police Department's
operational budget cut from 2020 to today?
Mr. Lee. It is my understanding it is roughly $20, $25
million.
Mrs. Boebert. The statistics I have, Mr. Lee, from the D.C.
Fiscal Policy Institute, state that from 2020 to current MPD's
operational budget has been cut by more than $61.5 millions.
Mr. Allen, you even called to reduce MPD's budget, as we
have heard today, by $15 million in 2020, after the Antifa-led
George Floyd riots. Sir, you are ``defund the police.''
Chairman Mendelson, you stated that is not crime crisis in
D.C.
Mr. Mendelson. Correct.
Mrs. Boebert. I would disagree. Mr. Allen, you even
seconded the Chairman's statements today and went as far as to
say that D.C. is strong and vibrant. Do you stand by that
comment? Do you stand by seconding those remarks? The Chairman
has already stood by his remarks with his response.
Mr. Allen. The District of Columbia is incredibly strong
and vibrant, yes.
Mrs. Boebert. Do you agree that there is not a crime crisis
in Washington, D.C.?
Mr. Allen. As I outlined in my testimony, we have seen
reductions in both violent crime and property crime, except for
two main categories----
Mrs. Boebert. I would disagree. That is very troubling. Let
us start with a few statistics. From 2022 to 2023, sex abuse
cases increased by 110 percent----
Mr. Mendelson. To 38, a total of 38.
Mrs. Boebert. One-hundred-ten percent, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mendelson. Yes.
Mrs. Boebert. That is alarming. Even one percent is
alarming and should not be happening, especially when you were
cutting MPD's funding and limiting them to protect people from
these sexual assaults.
Mr. Mendelson. Congresswoman, I am just trying to----
Mrs. Boebert. In 2022--reclaiming my time, sir. It is my
time. From 2022 to 2023, homicides in D.C. increased by 23
percent. From 2022 to 2023, carjackings--not car thefts,
carjackings--increased by 108 percent.
Chairman Mendelson----
Mr. Mendelson. Mendelson.
Mrs. Boebert [continuing]. Do you still stand, under oath,
and state that there is not a crime crisis in Washington, D.C.?
Mr. Mendelson. Yes, because if you look at carjackings----
Mrs. Boebert. It is remarkable. It is absolutely
remarkable.
Mr. Mendelson [continuing]. Robberies are down----
Mrs. Boebert. I would like to talk about--thank you.
Mr. Allen, based on these statistics I would like to talk
to you about some other things that are going on here in
Washington, DC, specifically an initiative that you led. In
November 2022, you led the charge to reform D.C.'s crime laws.
Is that correct?
Mr. Allen. I chair the Committee that that proposal came
through.
Mrs. Boebert. You led this charge. Yes, sir. And these
changes are now law here in D.C. Correct?
Mr. Allen. You mean the revised criminal code?
Mrs. Boebert. Yes.
Mr. Allen. No, those are not the law.
Mrs. Boebert. Those are not the law.
Mr. Mendelson. The revised criminal code was rejected by--
--
Mrs. Boebert. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman. I am talking to Mr.
Allen. Mr. Allen, did you or did you not decriminalize public
urination in Washington, D.C.?
Mr. Allen. No, we did not.
Mrs. Boebert. Did you lead the charge to do so?
Mr. Allen. No. The revised criminal code left that as a
criminal charge.
Mrs. Boebert. Did you lead the charge to decriminalize
public urination in Washington, D.C.?
Mr. Allen. No, ma'am. In the revised criminal code----
Mrs. Boebert. Did you ever vote in favor of decriminalizing
public urination in Washington, D.C.?
Mr. Allen. The revised criminal code that was passed out of
Council----
Mrs. Boebert. Did you ever support----
Mr. Allen [continuing]. Kept it as a criminal offense.
Mrs. Boebert. And you support this?
Mr. Allen. I voted for it, yes.
Mrs. Boebert. You voted to keep it as a criminal offense.
Mr. Allen. That is correct. The full Council did.
Mrs. Boebert. We have records that show that you were in
favor of removing that criminal offense and allowing public
urination.
Mr. Allen. No. The----
Mrs. Boebert. Is that something that you intend to pursue
in the future?
Mr. Allen. No. The legislation you are referring to that
came from the Criminal Code Reform Commission changed public
urination from a criminal to a civil offense. The Council then
changed that to maintain it as a criminal offense at the
request of the Mayor.
Mrs. Boebert. Thank you. I yield.
Mr. Palmer. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Florida, Mr. Frost, for five minutes for his questions.
Mr. Frost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The D.C. Home Rule Act
was passed in 1973 and established the 12 members of the D.C.
Council and the Chairman's position, all who serve four-year
terms. Each four years, elected officials make their case and
D.C. voters decide who represents them in which positions.
A Black man was lynched in broad daylight and the
Washington D.C. City Council took action to make public safety
work for everybody. And now, Republicans on this Committee are
pissed about it. You know, I am wondering what happened to the
Republican Party. I thought this was the party of small
government, yet here they are weaponizing this Committee to
overturn laws passed by duly elected officials of a City
Council. It is really interesting.
So, today I have heard my Republican colleagues talk about
the impact of gun deaths and violence in a local community, and
it is great to hear the renewed interest in gun violence. You
know, it is an important conversation that should not be
reserved for just this D.C. hearing.
I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record reports on
gun deaths in Mississippi, Louisiana, and Wyoming--Republican-
led states, by the way--the three states with the highest rates
of gun deaths per 100,000 residents. And if we are going down
this road maybe we will see the individuals of these Republican
state legislatures here soon.
This is a devastating reality, and I am curious why there
isn't equitable attention and outrage on gun deaths in these
states as there is with what is going on in D.C.
Recently I am seeing a trend where state and Federal
officials are deciding that they know best, instead of
respecting local control, and they want to impose their views
on Americans across the country. And don't get me wrong. I
don't agree with every local policy out there in the entire
country, especially my home state of Florida, but I respect
that certain decisions are made under home rule. And when it
comes to rolling back local policies that were democratically
elected, decided, I just haven't heard a single rationale that
I am sympathetic to.
Chairman Mendelson, I wanted to make something pretty
clear. When you ran for office, you had to make the case to the
D.C. voters that you were the best person to represent their
interests. Correct?
Mr. Mendelson. Correct.
Mr. Frost. When you were first elected to represent the
residents of D.C., what did you do when you ran for office? How
did you make your case to the voters in D.C.?
Mr. Mendelson. When I first ran for office, which was a
while ago, I had been an advisory neighborhood commissioner, an
elected commissioner from a neighborhood, and I ran principally
on the platform that I was close to communities and understood
grassroots and would be representative of them.
Mr. Frost. So, you have been reelected many times because
the people of D.C. support your policies and positions.
Mr. Mendelson. Correct.
Mr. Frost. I ask this because at the heart of today's
hearing is a resolution introduced by Republican lawmakers that
clearly interferes with democratically approved measures. To
your knowledge, has Republican Representative Andrew Clyde from
Georgia, who sponsored this bill, ever knocked doors in D.C. to
make the case that he understands what D.C. voters want or
need?
Mr. Mendelson. I am unaware of him knocking on any doors.
Mr. Frost. Mr. Allen, are you aware of the Representative
who is sponsoring this bill knocking on doors in D.C., speaking
with members of the City Council, holding roundtables, doing
any kind of townhalls to figure out what the citizens of D.C.
need?
Mr. Allen. I am unaware of any actions like that.
Mr. Frost. I am unaware of any, too, and I actually do not
think they have happened at all. I think a lot of people find
it very confusing that D.C. City Council passed legislation to
address an issue impacting residents, and we have a D.C. City
Council where officials have been representing voters long
before Mr. Clyde and/or I were in Congress. And I don't pretend
to know any better than Mr. Clyde what local measures D.C.
needs, and that is what local government is all about.
Some on this panel want to undermine the bipartisan
principle of home rule to score political points, and I cannot
support it. It is happening in my state of Florida right now,
where the Governor is abusing his power to overturn and target
political enemies at the local level. I don't think that is
freedom. I don't think that is liberty. I don't think it was
the principles that this country was founded on. And it is part
of the reason why I am very against this measure. It is harmful
to what is going on across the country.
This is not what needs to be happening right now in terms
of D.C. We need to be talking about statehood, which is
something that the residents of D.C. actually want, not this
type of legislation.
Mr. Raskin. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Frost. I yield.
Mr. Raskin. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Frost. I yield.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you very much. Mr. Allen, you represent
Ward 6?
Mr. Allen. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Raskin. Are we in Ward 6 right now?
Mr. Allen. You are.
Mr. Raskin. We have a number of Members of Congress who
live in their offices when they come here. Have any of them
ever contacted you about a constituent issue or about criminal
justice reform or police reform?
Mr. Allen. I actually have several Members of Congress that
contact me on constituent issues, everything from help with
DCRA permitting to alley issues, the trash pickup. I always
treat that in a respectful, private way, so I would not
disclose who those members are, but I have Members of Congress
reach out to me.
Mr. Raskin. And have you had any reach out about the
legislation at issue today?
Mr. Allen. Oh, no, sorry. Not at all about policy or
legislation.
Mr. Raskin. OK. Thank you for yielding, Mr. Frost.
Mr. Palmer. Without objection, the gentleman's submission
for the record is accepted.
Mr. Palmer. The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
Florida, Mrs. Luna, for five minutes for her questions.
Mrs. Luna. Good afternoon, everyone. One of Congress'
duties is to provide robust oversight over Washington, DC, and
its policies. After all, this is the capital city for all
Americans. But, unfortunately, one of the most egregious crimes
occurred in D.C. with absolutely no hearing and no oversight.
On March 25, 2022, a pro-life group received a box
containing bodies of 115 children from a worker that was taking
it from Washington Surgery Center to be incinerated at a
renewable waste facility. Inside the box, along with 110 early
term babies, were 5 full-term babies. I encourage all of you to
look at these photos because some of these babies were born
alive. The five babies are Christopher, a full-term baby boy
whose body was almost fully intact; Harriet, a baby who was
born with one eye open; Phoenix, a baby that was born
[inaudible] meaning an amniotic sac; and Holly and Angel, two
babies that were dismembered and mutilated to the point that
they were in pieces.
Some of my colleagues on this Committee say that they care
about the safety of children, yet they have failed to turn a
blind eye to this awful situation because it does not fit their
narrative, and I encourage all of you again to continue,
because I see people not looking at these photos, to look at
these photos, because this is horrific, and this is known as
late-term abortion.
The lack of oversight in the situation has allowed Dr.
Cesare Santangelo, who has two open lawsuits against him for
botched abortions, to continue practicing despite these open
lawsuits and medical malpractice. Even if you are for choice,
you cannot argue that this man should still have his medical
license. One of his victims, which he killed, showed during an
autopsy that there were fetal remains lodged in her lung due to
the botched abortions. How is this doctor who charged up to
$12,000 per late-term abortion still allowed to practice as a
medical provider in this city? It is clear that there is no
regard for human life, the Hippocratic Oath, or humanity.
My questions are as follows. First of all, yes or no,
please, Mr. Mendelson and Mr. Allen. Are you aware of the
situation of the five that happened in this past year? Yes or
no, only, please.
Mr. Mendelson. No.
Mr. Allen. I recall speaking to the Metropolitan Police
Department as charges were being brought.
Mrs. Luna. There is still an ongoing investigation and
people are not able to FOIA the information. Is that ongoing
investigation still continuing, Mr. Pemberton?
Mr. Pemberton. Ma'am, I do not know the answer to that. I
am not familiar with this investigation.
Mrs. Luna. I understand that you all recently went through
a big D.C. criminal code rewrite. Was there anything that would
have made the murder of these children, as it appears some of
these children were born alive, one of which had suffered on
her own amniotic fluid in sac?
Mr. Mendelson. The revised criminal code, which is not law,
would not have changed the law with regard to this.
Mrs. Luna. In recent years, the D.C. Council has passed
several abortion laws, most of them while you have been under
leadership, Mr. Chairman. While the D.C. Council has worked to
protect doctors like Santangelo, who have killed women and
refused to protect the lives of children, what are you doing
for the victims?
Mr. Mendelson. The D.C. Council and the government does
support choice. However, if----
Mrs. Luna. A woman was killed and this man still has his
medical license.
Mr. Mendelson. We don't support that.
Mrs. Luna. So, would you support the removal of his medical
license and just shut that down?
Mr. Mendelson. If the allegations are true, yes.
Mrs. Luna. The autopsy, sir--just so you know I am not
trying to be rude, but the autopsy did confirm that lung
tissue, or that fetal remains were found in her lung tissue.
Just so you are aware.
There is a belief that Dr. Santangelo violated the statute.
Are you going to be updating the laws to ensure that this
doesn't happen in the future for anyone else?
Mr. Mendelson. I am not quite sure how to answer that. If
this criminal then there is no need to update the statute to
make what is criminal, criminal.
Mrs. Luna. I believe that we are talking about--sorry to
not clarify--but regarding the late-term abortions, sir. Some
of these babies were apparently born alive. And one of the
issues that we are hearing is that these babies are still in
the local morgue and we have been unable to actually locate a
pathologist to run the autopsies because people don't want to
touch it, because it is such a politicized case. But in my
opinion, when you have a child that is born alive, and there
has been something already passed to protect children that are,
again, born alive, that this shouldn't have taken place
altogether. It is criminal. We are asking for your help. Will
you help?
Mr. Allen. I know your time is ticking down, but while I
cannot replace charging decisions by the U.S. Attorney's Office
or MPD, I would be happy to followup after the hearing.
Mrs. Luna. Will you help us so this does not happen again?
Thank you. Thank you.
And to finish out, I want to let you guys know that I am
appalled by this situation. I appreciate your willingness to
look into this case. But I do believe that because of what has
happened in Washington, DC, with the lack of oversight, to
include within the criminal codes of this city to see what has
actually taken place, I would fully support removing the home
rule, and I don't believe that D.C. will ever be a state.
Thank you, Chairman. I yield my time.
Mr. Palmer. The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
Vermont, Ms. Balint, for five minutes for her questions.
Ms. Balint. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I continue to be
amazed by what the Majority chooses to spend our limited time
on. Rather than addressing a number of really serious concerns
that our constituents have, they are choosing to waste our time
by meddling in the District of Columbia and talking about
public urination. I just want to make sure, do you have
anything additional you want to say about public urination? Now
is your time.
Mrs. Boebert. I do.
Ms. Balint. No, not you. I am talking to--it is not your
time. It is a question.
Mrs. Boebert. I will wait until your time is up. I do have
something else to say.
Ms. Balint. Do you have anything additional to say
regarding public urination?
Mr. Allen. I didn't on that, but if I could have 30 seconds
to clarify something from a previous conversation.
Ms. Balint. Yes, please. I would, Mr. Allen. Go ahead.
Mr. Allen. There had been a discussion earlier that I
thought I heard related to Subtitle X in the Policing Reform
and Accountability legislation. I believe I heard it stated by
a Member that it would allow people to go back in time to look
at allegations--and I want to be very clear for the record--
about what it is that this does. It is for incidents occurring
on or after the law's effective date, so it does not go back in
time. And that data base is only for sustained allegations of
misconduct--sustained allegations of misconduct--pertaining to
an officer's commission of a crime, interactions with members
of the public, or their integrity in criminal investigations.
That is it, but a very crucial element of accountability.
Ms. Balint. Thank you, Mr. Allen. I really appreciate that
clarification. Yes, Mr. Mendelson.
Mr. Mendelson. Regarding public urination, yes, there was
discussion about it. There was never a proposal before the
Council, the Council itself, that would have decriminalized it.
What was given to the Council, what came out of Committee to
the Council, was as a criminal offense.
And this is one of the challenges with the revised criminal
code is that there are a lot of misstatements that have been
made over the last several months. For instance, one Member of
Congress, I believe, said that we were decriminalizing
carjacking, which we were not. And I could go into more detail,
but time probably doesn't allow. But urination is, and under
the revised criminal code would have continued to be, a
criminal offense.
Ms. Balint. Thank you for clarifying that. I really
appreciate that.
You know, our Nation was born out of a revolution over
taxation, and yet we are here in this Committee contemplating
overriding, yet again, a piece of legislation passed by the
duly elected members of the D.C. Council. The people of D.C.
deserve better. They are Americans. They deserve statehood.
They deserve to have their voices heard.
D.C. residents are required to pay all Federal taxes,
despite the fact that they have no voting representation in
Congress. What an un-American idea.
Let us look at D.C.'s contributions to the Federal
Treasury. D.C. pays more Federal taxes than 23 states, and six
of our Republican colleagues on this Committee represent states
that pay less in Federal taxes per capita than D.C.--Alabama,
Kansas, North Dakota, South Carolina among them. D.C. pays more
Federal taxes per capita than any state. Per capita, D.C. pays
over $50,000. Mr. Chairman, your home state of Kentucky pays
just over $8,000--$50,000 per capita versus $8,000 per capita.
Chairman Mendelson, what is it like for D.C. residents to
be drafted, tax-paying American citizens who have no voting
representation in Congress? Please give voice to your
constituency.
Mr. Mendelson. Well, it is very frustrating, but more than
that, it is not good government. It means that governing the
District of Columbia is more difficult. We have outlined here
ways in which our criminal justice process would function
better if we had full home rule, which is statehood. But I am
not here so much today to talk about statehood as just, you
know, to dispel some of the misunderstandings with regard to
the bill that I believe the Committee is going to consider
rejecting later today, and that it is about police
accountability, and actually most of it is law right now
because most of it has gone through congressional review
already.
And so, if Congress were to repeal it, that is the
challenge we have, not having statehood. If Congress were to
reject it, then it actually a step backward. For the first
time, the union was not able to negotiate its discipline, and
as one of the members pointed out, chief after chief after
chief has said that the union bargaining its disciplinary
process has actually been--has resulted in bad cops being
reinstated on the police force. Not only does it cost us
money--the auditor put out a report that said $14 million in
back pay--but these are bad cops. Somebody who rapes a woman
and then is put back on the police force, and not only is that
not a cop that I want representing us, but it is also a cop who
will not be--the U.S. attorney cannot use in court. They have
no credibility as a witness in any case.
So, this is really harmful when Congress is able to step in
and, in this piecemeal way, reject policies that we have
adopted. And in this case, the police accountability bill. And
I apologize I have used up so much of your time.
Ms. Balint. That is OK, Mr. Mendelson. I really appreciate
it.
And in conclusion, what I just want to say is that there
are no other democratic nations in the world that deny voting
representation to citizens living in their capital.
I yield back.
Mr. Palmer. I would just like to point out to the
gentlelady, there are a number of reasons why the income tax is
so much higher in D.C. The median income is higher.
With that, the Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
South Carolina, Mr. Fry, for five minutes for his questions.
Mr. Fry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for having
this hearing today. To our panel, thank you for being here
today.
You know, Washington, DC, at this time of year is really
amazing. You see spring is in the air, the cherry blossoms are
coming, you have people around the country, and indeed around
the world, that come to this city to visit Washington, to see
what is going on. I want my constituents to see that. I want
them to visit the Nation's capital. I want to welcome them and
let them see how democracy works.
But instead of these images that they see on National
Geographic or whatever, they get here and they see carjackings,
shootings, homicide, robberies, auto theft, arson, riots--I
could go on.
And you know what they read in the news? I am going to read
a few headlines here. Headline: ``Man shot, killed in Northeast
D.C. marks the district's 200th homicide in 2022, police union
says.'' Headline: ``D.C. averaging one carjacking a day.
Council expected to lessen penalties with criminal code veto
override.'' Headline: ``D.C. reaches 100th homicide mark faster
than any other year since 2003.'' This is not a way to welcome
our fellow Americans, or really world travelers, to our
Nation's capital.
In my opinion, you have allowed this to happen. To me, D.C.
Council is more focused on governing via bumper sticker slogans
than actually focusing on the real challenges of the district.
Mr. Chairman, I have witnessed today, being down here on
the floor as a freshman, many in the crowd snicker and roll
their eyes at anybody who dares question what is going on in
this city.
I want to put up a quick video to the Committee staff. This
is a screen recording of a member of my staff's phone who
receives crime alerts from the D.C. Police. This staffer lives
in the Capitol Hill neighborhood. You see robbery in here. You
see stabbings, shootings, robbery again. These crimes occurred
in just the month of March alone in the Capitol Hill area.
This is just one of the many things that people have to do
around here just to stay safe. People should feel safe in our
Nation's capital, and quite frankly, they don't, as evidenced
by President Biden's signing of legislation that originated in
this House.
So, Mr. Allen, let us talk about homicides in D.C. They are
up 40 percent over last year. On March 6, the D.C. Police Chief
Robert Contee was asked what D.C. can do differently to get
homicides down. He replied, ``Keep violent people in jail.''
Well, that sounds like a pretty good idea to me. Mr. Allen, do
you think that Chief Contee feels supported by D.C. City
Council in his efforts to crack down on crime? Yes or no.
Mr. Allen. I saw him last night. Yes.
Mr. Fry. I find it completely remarkable that that is your
answer, given that you advocated for defunding the police. You
also starved them, based on your Twitter, you starved them of
morale. You constantly demonize police in your city. It is no
wonder that there is an exodus in the Police Department here,
and we wonder, causation and effect. You have D.C. police,
after you defunded them, and after you demonized them, you had
them leave the department, and now you see, inexplicably, crime
go up in Washington, D.C.
According to Chief Contee, he said right now the average
homicide suspect has been arrested 11 times prior to committing
a homicide. Do you think the men and women who serve the
Metropolitan Police Department feel supported by D.C. Council
to keep D.C. safe and to stay safe themselves?
Mr. Allen. Thank you for the question. I do not support
defunding the police, nor did the D.C. Council defund the
police. Earlier you heard about the police misconduct. Over the
last 10 years, D.C. has had to pay out $91 million in police
misconduct settlements. That is 10 times the amount that you
are referring to, from a $9 million that was redirected out to
other public safety efforts from a half-a-billion-dollar
budget. That is not defunding our police. It is talking about
how do we have a both-end approach to support our law
enforcement----
Mr. Fry. With respect, with respect, your Twitter says, ``I
know not everyone agrees with where we landed. I hear you. And
now that we have gone through Committee to do the full Council,
I am happy to keep work going. This is the biggest reduction to
MPD that I have ever seen.'' That is defund the police. You
have done that.
Mr. Allen. No, it is not, sir.
Mr. Fry. There was an article with the headline that talked
exactly about that, that you were the chief architect. In fact,
there is a Twitter handle called ``recall you,'' and it is
about your efforts to defund the police. Now you are saying----
Mr. Allen. I----
Mr. Fry. [continuing]. Now you are gaslighting the American
people and telling them they don't matter and that they are not
seeing the truth here?
Mr. Allen. I was just reelected a couple of months ago,
Congressman.
Mr. Fry. Reclaiming my time. If D.C. were a state it would
have, far and away, the highest per capita murder rate of any
other state. In 2014 to 2020, D.C. ranked the highest with a
homicide rate of 19.84 per 100,000 people. D.C. wants to be a
state. They cannot even be a city. This is your premier case of
what you get when you defund the police, you do not prosecute
criminals, and you turned a blind eye to crime on the streets.
This is our Nation's capital, and quite frankly, it is
unacceptable.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Higgins. [Presiding.] The gentleman yields.
The gentlelady from Pennsylvania, Ms. Lee, is recognized
for five minutes for questions.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So, we are here in the
Committee on Oversight and Accountability, yet it seems that
oversight does not apply to law enforcement. This Committee
would rather disenfranchise D.C. voters than let a single cop
face accountability.
D.C. voters and councilmembers saw the problem of police
perpetuating different forms of misconduct or violence plaguing
not only their city, but the entire country and chose to act.
In 2022 alone, 1,194 people were killed by police. That is more
than any other year in the past decade. Yet, officers were
charged with a crime in only nine of those cases. Where is the
accountability?
Vehicle chases are one of the most dangerous police
activities. Thousands of police officers, suspects, and
bystanders have been killed. Tens of thousands have been
injured in chases across the country.
Chairman Mendelson, yes or no. Does the Comprehensive
Policing and Justice Reform Amendment Act impose limits on
vehicular chases to protect people?
Mr. Mendelson. Yes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. In 2015, Alonzo Smith was murdered
after an incident with D.C. Special Police officers. After
Alonzo was handcuffed behind his back, the officers kneeled on
his back and held his neck down. A factor in Alonzo's death
was, quote, ``compression of torso.'' Not a single officer has
been charged.
Councilmember Allen, why does the Comprehensive Policing
and Justice Reform Amendment Act prohibit neck and asphyxiation
restraints?
Mr. Allen. Because it can lead to death and kill someone.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. D.C. has also paid tens of millions of
dollars in settlements for police misconduct related to
protests. Aggressive policing tactics should not infringe upon
our constitutional right to protest.
Councilmember Allen, what changes does the Act make to the
use of dispersal tactics by police in connection with protests?
Mr. Allen. The Metropolitan Police Department, we are not
stranger to First Amendment assemblies here in the district.
MPD is handling dozens of them probably every day. This makes
sure that we have constitutional protections for people to be
able to exercise their First Amendment rights.
Ms. Lee. Thank you.
D.C.'s Comprehensive Policing and Justice Reform Amendment
Act honestly doesn't go far enough, but it is a vital first
step forward toward comprehensive criminal justice reform. I am
astounded that this Committee is willing to silence the voices,
the votes, and the will of D.C. citizens over these common-
sense measures. I will add no taxation without representation,
and I will yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Higgins. The gentlelady yields.
The gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman, is recognized
for five minutes for his questions.
Mr. Grothman. Yes. I am going to start here with a little
anecdote, and we will build off of that. About 12 years, 14
years ago, before I was a Congressman, I went on a tour of
Taiwan. You know, the standard tour. At the end of the night,
about eight o'clock, me and a buddy of mine, another Member of
the Wisconsin legislature, we figured we would go out and just
tour Taiwan. So, we asked our guide, ``Is there anywhere we
shouldn't go?'' And we were told, ``No. There is nowhere you
can't go.''
And I asked him again because Taiwan, you know, is a bigger
city than Chicago, the only city in America--or Taipei, I am
sorry--Taipei is a bigger city than any city, but Chicago. And
he said, ``No, no. Everywhere in Taipei is safe,'' which I
found out to be true. And it made me a little bit ashamed about
our Nation's capital, because I thought if our tour guide came
to Washington, DC, and asked me if there was anywhere he
couldn't walk at night, I would have to give him all sorts of
places.
And it looks like things have not changed. You had a little
bit of a downward dip in murders last year, but this year, you
are up again, and you are over 200 a year, which for a city
this size is really intolerable. It is almost as bad as
Milwaukee, which is adjacent to my district. There is anecdotal
evidence that you are constantly, from staff around here, about
cars being broken into. We heard what happened to Rand Paul's
staffer the other weekend, which was tragic in what I think
most people would say is a safe neighborhood.
The second thing that concerns me, and you are not alone in
this for a city of this size, depending on how you do the
measuring, your public schools are third or fourth or second
worst in the country as far as test scores are concerned. I
know both Bill Clinton and Barack Obama, as well as Joe Biden's
grandchildren, would not attend the public schools, the
government schools in Washington. They had to attend private
schools. And, like I said, looking at the test scores you can
see why.
And I know that Vladimir Putin makes fun of our homeless
population, which is somewhat of an embarrassment. I mean, if I
walk back at night down Pennsylvania Avenue from the White
House to the Capitol, as I do sometimes, or down Pennsylvania
Avenue, you see all the tents there. And you have got to admit
that is kind of an embarrassment for what should be the
greatest city of the world, a city that is attracting people,
tourists from all over the world. And whether you look at the
homelessness, or the schools, or the crime rate, you have got a
problem.
I will ask you, Chairman Mendelson, as an example, and
maybe there are some different schools. But if I have a visitor
come here from another country--Taiwan, France, wherever--how
do you respond, is there anywhere that I shouldn't be walking
tonight that I have to look out? If they are going to stay here
for an extended period, would you attend the Washington public
schools? And what would you say about these tents of
homelessness that, if Washington were a state, as I understand
it, looking at the internet--it is always kind of dangerous to
say I read it on the internet--but, if I look on the internet,
it would say that if Washington was a state we would have the
highest percentage of homelessness in the country. So, I would
like you to respond those three things.
Mr. Mendelson. Thank you, Congressman. So, if somebody is
visiting and they ask if there is any place that they cannot go
that is not safe, I cannot think of a neighborhood I would say
that they cannot go. U Street, the Wharf, Capitol Hill, you
know, I live 12 blocks from here, and I feel safe. So, my
answer would be no, there is not a place I would say that you
cannot go.
With regard to schools, you know, I was thinking before
this hearing I would like to say that I am a public-school
parent, but she graduated from Duke Ellington High School, but
went to the D.C. public school system. Councilmember Allen's
kids are in D.C. public schools.
And the homelessness, what comes to mind is that as
Chairman of the Council, I often will meet with presidents of
city councils from other cities and we are seeing a problem
with homelessness around the country. And it is challenging.
Homelessness has gone down in the district, but these tents are
very concerning, and we are trying to find housing for those
individuals.
Mr. Grothman. I don't know if you really believe what you
just told me. I mean, I talk to the staff around here, and
without going a mile from the Capitol, there are all sorts of
places they would recommend me not walking at night. I assume
they know what is going on, and the murder rate is an
indication.
Mr. Mendelson. Well, I would be happy to take you out to
dinner on the Hill.
Mr. Grothman. I will make one other comment. I would not
get that carried away. I think you have got to decide how many
times the person has done something before, how in-public it
is, but I am not sure if public urination should be criminally
charged. OK. Just don't let me tell you how to do your job.
Mr. Mendelson. I am sorry. Was there a question there?
Mr. Grothman. There wasn't a question.
Mr. Mendelson. OK.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Casar, is recognized for five
minutes for questioning.
Mr. Casar. Thank you. I ran for the U.S. Congress here in
the last year, but now I am back on the city council and the
question for me is why, and I think the answer is pretty clear
in this Committee hearing. There is a strategy from the
Republican Majority to try to mischaracterize civil rights
policy, overwhelmingly pushed by Democrats, as bad for public
safety, to try to create this impossible choice between civil
rights and public safety.
But I humbly submit that Americans deserve both civil
rights and public safety. And I know, as a former
councilmember, how important that is to us who are trying to
represent our constituents, that when our constituents are in
trouble and call 911, that we want them to get help, and that
we do not want constituents getting harmed or shot in that
process by anyone, including police.
But in my time in Texas, I know that I have had many
constituents who have had terrible experiences, including a
young teenager named David Joseph in my district, who was
having the worst day of his life when 911 was called to help
David, who was in mental health crisis. He was supposed to be a
graduate of Premier High School just a few months later. When
police showed up, he was shot and killed within moments, not
only unarmed but naked in the street.
No one should die in mental health crisis like David. No
one should be killed over a $20 bill, like George Floyd, or
sleeping in their home like Breonna Taylor, or unarmed and
fleeing like Mike Ramos in Austin, or shackled like Joshua
Wright in Hays County, Texas, or playing video games with her
nephew like Atatiana Jefferson in Fort Worth, or shot by police
while eating McDonald's burger like Eric Cantu in San Antonio.
It is clear that our communities need and deserve both
public safety and police accountability because both of those
lead to more safety to our constituents. I hope that this
Committee and our body does not try to nullify D.C. reasonable
efforts to protect Americans.
So, I have some questions here for the members of the D.C.
Council.
Another story in Austin was one of Breaion King, who was a
teacher who was allegedly speeding. She was pulled over and
then shortly thereafter body-slammed onto the ground. Our
police chief wanted to discipline in the case, but because of
things in our negotiated police contract and the fact that the
incident had passed many months ago, he was not able to be
disciplined until he was caught committing violence later
against an innocent person.
So, my question to you, we tried to negotiate and change
that, but were not able to negotiate and change those terms in
the contract. Do things in your policy create the opportunity
for there to be more safety for people like Ms. King so that
there can be discipline in cases of police violence and that
the police contract doesn't get in the way of police chiefs
using discipline when they are trying to protect safety in
their community?
Mr. Allen. Thank you. I will take that first, if you do not
mind.
Mr. Casar. Yes. Go ahead.
Mr. Allen. I think at the heart of the legislation, our
comprehensive reform to improve accountability and
transparency, is to improve public safety, improve the trust
between officers and the communities in which they serve.
Every chief that I can recall has also asked for the
ability to have powers to be able to hold officers who break
that trust, who break that faith, who create misconduct, to
have the ability to discipline, and that is what this
legislation does. The powers that we want to give our Police
Department to be able to hold officers accountable.
We talked about the officers that had to be rehired at the
tune of millions of dollars, of taxpayer dollars. Think about
the morale that creates as well for the fellow officers, to see
that officer come back on the force, to get hundreds of
thousands of dollars in back pay, when that good officer is
trying so hard to build the trust, to build the faith with
community, and to serve that community.
So, I believe at the heart of this legislation would not
only improve transparency and accountability, but we also are
improving public safety overall.
Mr. Casar. Thank you for that.
Mr. Mendelson. If I could add, so, I think--this is just
because it was my amendment to the bill--that the prohibition
on bargaining discipline is arguably the most important
provision, and it speaks to what you were saying. When there is
a cop who has done something bad enough that the chief wants to
fire that cop, the chief ought to be able to fire rather than
being hamstrung by a union-negotiated disciplinary process,
which research has shown actually works to the favor of bad
cops.
Raped a college student visiting D.C. area on a study
abroad program, DUI accident, termination reduced to 35 days
suspension. An off-duty shooting in Maryland of individual near
his truck in the early morning hours, termination reduced to
suspension. Criminally convicted of purchasing stolen property
from a cooperating witness while member was also assigned to
the vice unit, termination rescinded.
Mr. Casar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Because our time is
about to expire, I want to thank each of you for your work,
recognizing that civil rights can be and must be public safety.
Thank you.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
General Scott Perry, for five minutes of questioning.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the members
of the Council for coming.
Folks in the audience, while I certainly respect and agree
with your interest in dealing with the affairs of your
community and your life, that is to understand that we share
the Nation's capital with the people of the country. It is
their capital as well. And while we have the pleasure and the
freedom to live anywhere in the United States of America, this
is their capital, and if they want to come to the capital to
address their concerns with the people that represent them, it
is dissuading to them if they are worried that they are going
to be assailed on the street by some criminal element.
Ladies and gentlemen, property crime is up 27 percent
compared to 2022. This is 2023 now. Motor vehicle theft is up
105 percent during the same period of time. Total crime, up 22
percent. Homicides increased 19 percent, and sexual abuse
crimes up 100 percent. I mean, not only do the people that live
here and work here recognize that and know it, but people
around the country know it too.
And so, if the Council and the governance of D.C. cannot
address this problem adequately--and that does not seem
adequate to me--then it is entirely appropriate, and I think
that my colleagues on the other side of the aisle would agree,
constitutional, it is our duty to not only recognize and
acknowledge that these occurrences are present, but to do
something about it. Our constituency across the country, who
wants to visit their capital, demands this action, and I am
concerned.
Mr. Allen, we probably have a difference of opinion about
how law enforcement should be treated, but it is my
understanding that you proposed cutting $15 million from the
police force, and now that the actual cut is about $61.5
million, while Mr. Pemberton is telling this Committee that we
literally don't have, that you literally don't have, the forces
necessary to safeguard the population of this city, and that is
exceptionally concerning.
And there are bad actors across the board. Not every single
group is 100 percent perfect. But to point out the ones, the
few that are imperfect, certainly we are concerned about that.
But to paint with a broad brush and say that our police forces,
our law enforcement forces, as a whole, work against the people
of this community, or any community, I think is very corrosive
to our society and is ill-founded.
So, I think it is appropriate to have this hearing so that
we get to the facts, and so we all understand what our role
here is and what works and what doesn't, so that we can have a
safe city and a safe place to operate.
And I would just remind everybody that just a couple of
days ago, in broad daylight, around five o'clock, a staff
member for the U.S. Senate was attacked with a knife and nearly
killed. Stabbed in the head, went through his skull, stabbed in
the side by someone who got out early, released early from his
maximum sentence. And those are the kinds of policies, and that
is the result of those kinds of policies. And if it can happen
to him--minding his own business--nobody in their right mind
wants to come to D.C. and address their government under those
circumstances.
But let me ask Commissioner Lee this. You have a shortfall.
I don't know exactly what it is. But would you say that we have
traffic rules, traffic laws, stop signs for what, to encourage
safety and efficiency. Is that what you would say? Well, you
tell me what you think they are for.
Mr. Lee. That is my understanding.
Mr. Perry. For safety.
Mr. Lee. In general, traffic controls are for safety
purposes.
Mr. Perry. For safety, because that is what I am always
told, yet the Mayor has proposed increasing automated traffic
cameras to bring in $578 million. So, is it about safety or is
it about money? Which one is it about?
Mr. Lee. I can't speak for the Mayor.
Mr. Perry. What do you think it is about?
Mr. Lee. Our best estimate, I can't speak for the Mayor----
Mr. Perry. What do you think? I didn't ask you that. What
do you think it is about? You have a shortfall, right? You are
the financial guy. You need money, right, because the Mayor
shut down the city and everybody is gone. Crime is up. Nobody
wants to come and spend any money. Restaurants are closing.
$578 million is a lot of money for cameras. What do you think
it is about? I am asking you.
Mr. Lee. Yes, I appreciate that.
Mr. Perry. I know you do. Tell me the answer, because I
have got 10 seconds and you do not want to answer. So, tell me
what the answer is, please. What do you think it is about?
These citizens want to know if you are going to be collecting
all the money from them. Visitors to this capital want to know
if you are going to use this to collect money from them, or is
this about safety, knowing that there is fraud, knowing that
the CEO of one of the companies in Chicago went to jail for
fraud for misusing this program. Is it about money or is it
about safety? What is it about?
Mr. Lee. I think in the end it is about safety.
Mr. Perry. Not about money. That is your testimony. That is
your answer.
Mr. Lee. It is the Mayor's choice to----
Mr. Perry. What is your answer?
Mr. Lee. My answer is that more public devices that
discourage unsafe driving behavior will have an effect.
Mr. Perry. And they just happen to collect $578 million.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentlelady from South Carolina, Ms. Mace, is recognized
for five minutes for questioning.
Ms. Mace. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to my
colleagues for having this hearing today.
It is sort of surprising but not shocking, or maybe a
little shocking even, but from my friends across the aisle some
of the things that I heard them say today that they are not
sure what our objective is here today, that this entire hearing
is a waste of time. It is really unbelievable that an increase
in crime in our Nation's capital would be a waste of time to my
colleagues across on the other side of the aisle.
Americans from all across the country travel to the capital
of the United States of America to see our Nation's founding
and its history, and an increase in crime is a waste of time.
It is crazy that that is where we are today, and I want to flip
the script and talk about D.C. Statehood, which is not the
purpose of this hearing. And crime has increased not just in
D.C.--and I am saying D.C. exponentially. What I witness myself
has been pretty wild--but it is a problem across the country as
well.
Mr. Mendelson, did I hear you earlier today, just a few
moments ago, say that D.C. is safe and that there is nowhere
that is unsafe in D.C.? Did I hear you correctly?
Mr. Mendelson. I said that D.C. is safe. I feel safe. You
know, I am an at-large representative and I am around all parts
of the city, and I feel safe, and I typically travel alone.
Ms. Mace. Homicides are up 40 percent from last year. Arson
is up 400 percent. Car theft is up over 100 percent. How many
cars have been stolen so far this year?
Mr. Mendelson. Well, in my opening statement----
Ms. Mace. How many cars have been stolen so far this year
in D.C.?
Mr. Mendelson. I don't have the exact number.
Ms. Mace. Right, you know what? It is over 1,300 vehicles
have been stolen in Washington, DC, so far this year.
Mr. Mendelson. A lot of that has to do with TikTok, you
know, and that is a challenge around the country.
Ms. Mace. Oh, so you want to blame TikTok for the crime.
That is fine.
Mr. Mendelson. For the Hyundais, and what is the other one?
Kias? Kias and Hyundais. We are seeing that around the country.
Ms. Mace. It is an increase in crime. It is a huge problem.
You don't even know the number of car thefts, over 1,300 so far
this year. In some cases, some people say over 1,500.
Mr. Mendelson. So, Congresswoman, as I pointed out in my
opening statement, crime compared to 10 years ago is down 45
percent. Crime last year----
Ms. Mace. 1,300 vehicles, which you didn't know the number,
that had been stolen in D.C., 1,300 so far this year.
I am done with you. I want to go on to Mr. Charles Allen.
You Stated earlier, when you were talking to my other colleague
from South Carolina, Congressman Fry, you said that you don't
support defunding the police. Is that correct?
Mr. Allen. Correct. That is not my position.
Ms. Mace. Do you committed perjury up here by making that
statement?
Mr. Allen. The Council did not defund the police.
Ms. Mace. Well, have you seen your tweets?
Mr. Allen. Yes.
Ms. Mace. Do you know what you have put on Twitter?
Mr. Allen. Yes.
Ms. Mace. Because I have seen some of your tweets and I
would argue that you absolutely--you, personally, support
defunding the police.
Mr. Allen. Can you find a tweet for us?
Ms. Mace. Yes. I am going to read you some right now. So,
on June 28th of 2020, you tweeted that ``our strategy is to
reduce our force size''--force size--``in a responsible way by
turning off the spigot plus adding a natural attrition.'' What
do you mean by ``reducing our force size'' if you don't mean
defunding the police?
June 28, 2020, you also said that ``not everyone disagrees
where we landed, but this is the biggest reduction to the
Metropolitan Police Department I have ever seen.'' You don't
believe that that is--the largest reduction in MPD, that that
is defunding the police? Does that not count for that?
Mr. Allen. Correct. So, the reduction was $9.6 million,
which is one percent of a half-a-billion-dollar budget.
Ms. Mace. Right. Is that defunding? Is that reducing
funding for our police force? Is that what that means?
Mr. Allen. Redirecting any amount of dollars to our other
public safety priorities, that is not defunding.
Ms. Mace. Well, reducing the police force size, which is
what you advocated for, would be defunding the police. Being
proud of this being the biggest reduction to Metropolitan
Police Department, I would argue falls into that category.
You said, on June 28, 2020, you also said, ``The district
needs to be committed to a sustained effort of funding and
defunding''--you literally used the word ``defunding'' in your
own tweets--``and that aligns with our priorities and puts our
public dollars where they can do the most good.'' Defunding.
So, what are you talking about?
You also said on the same day, that this was important to
do, and, you know, there is an effort to recall you in D.C.
because of what your statements have been over the last couple
of years.
May I ask, my last question of you, how many hearings have
you had on violence in D.C., violent crime, so far this year?
Mr. Allen. I am not the Chair of Judiciary and Public
Safety.
Ms. Mace. OK.
Mr. Allen. I held 250 hearings and dozens and dozens on
public safety and violence in our city.
Ms. Mace. The last one was about eBikes. Do you think
electronic bikes are more important than violent crime?
Mr. Allen. I don't think you need to put them against each
other.
Ms. Mace. I mean, why is an eBike a priority over violent
crime in Washington, D.C.?
I personally have seen my own property vandalized up here,
so Mr. Mendelson, I would argue this is not a safe place. Crime
is up exponentially.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Higgins. The gentlelady yields.
The gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Crockett, is recognized for
five minutes for questioning.
Ms. Crockett. Thank you, Mr. Chair. This has been such an
eye-opening day for me, especially as someone who has practiced
criminal defense law for almost two decades, in multiple states
as well as Federal courts.
So, let us talk about the fact that we are here today
hearing lots about scare tactics and not anything about
solutions. So very quickly, there was mention of a police in
pursuit act. I believe that is what you called it. Is that
correct?
Mr. Pemberton. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Crockett. OK. And you took issue with that. Correct?
Mr. Pemberton. Well, one of the things, yes.
Ms. Crockett. That was one of the things. And just to be
clear, I have not read this act, but I am curious. I would
imagine that that was something that talked about when you
should pursue someone who potentially has committed a crime,
and it most likely was a bill of some sort that was actually
about public safety, making sure that law enforcement or, say,
someone who was in pursuit, hot pursuit, did not kill innocent
bystanders. That is my guess. I am telling you I have not read
it. Can you correct me if I am wrong?
Mr. Pemberton. It prevented vehicle pursuits, so they
wouldn't be able to chase criminals. That is what it did.
Ms. Crockett. OK. And for some reason you felt like that
was a bad idea. Let me be clear. I also did civil rights work.
There was a 15-year-old, Jordan Edwards, that was killed by law
enforcement in Dallas. It was the first officer that was
convicted of murder in almost 30 years, on duty. He shot at a
vehicle because he felt like they were fleeing with an AR-15
and killed that 15-year-old child. And while we are talking
about convictions, while he was convicted, unfortunately, the
way things are set up in D.C., qualified immunity while we are
going through a civil suit, is still something that they are
believing should cloak this officer.
But I am going to move on to some other issues. We talk, or
at least my colleagues on the other aisle, are consistently
talking about how they want to prevent crime and how they have
issues with criminals. But for some reason, the majority of the
media and the country is sitting around waiting on multiple
indictments for the twice-impeached former President, and I
haven't really heard any of them say anything against Trump and
the allegations.
So, when we talk about crime in D.C.--because I am getting
there with it, right?--when we talk about crime in D.C., let us
talk about what happened on January 6. If we are going to talk
about violent criminals, let us talk about the fact that the
person that was occupying the White House is the one that
caused an insurrection, and we had well over 1,000 folks so far
that have been arrested, and that was here. I am sure that that
is affecting the numbers for crime in D.C., when we are looking
at that overall number.
Any councilman, can you help me out? Do those numbers
factor into y'all's numbers, the insurrectionists?
Mr. Allen. If there are arrests that were made, that would
show up in the MPD reporting data, if that is what you mean.
Ms. Crockett. OK. Yes, sir. Thank you very much.
In fact, you know, it seems like they want to be so hard on
crime because they are saying we need to make sure we increase
penalties. We have been doing that for a long time in this
country. And for some reason the United States leads in
incarcerated, but we also lead in gun crimes. I know somebody
didn't want to talk about gun crimes, but that is what they
are. That is what happened in Tennessee. Just to be clear, we
had a gun crime in Tennessee. I am from Texas. Unfortunately,
we have lots of gun crimes that happen there. And these state
legislatures, as we talk about if you could bring somebody in
and legislate for them, they continually give out more guns,
which law enforcement testified, at least in my state of Texas,
and said that would make the streets less safe.
Nevertheless, I digress.
So, this is the party that says that they care about making
sure criminals stay locked behind bars, but we went on a little
field trip on Friday, led by one of my Republican colleagues,
to check on the insurrectionists and make sure their tablets
were working just fine. I don't really understand why we are
playing this game.
The reality is that the Republicans talk a lot. They talk a
big game. But I need people to pay attention to what the
Republicans do. And when it comes to lawlessness, they are all
for it, so long as it is one of their little friends. But when
it comes down to Black and Brown, which we have already talked
about, the city of D.C. having so many Black folk, there is a
problem.
Now, Councilman, I am sure you have had an election since
the institution of some of these policies. Is that correct?
Mr. Allen. Absolutely.
Ms. Crockett. And they reelected you. Correct?
Mr. Allen. Yes, Ma'am. I was just reelected a couple of
months ago.
Ms. Crockett. OK. So, seemingly, your constituents are good
with you, right?
Mr. Allen. I didn't even have an opponent.
Ms. Crockett. OK. All right. So, I am from Texas. So, your
people can't vote for me. But for some reason people think that
it makes sense that I should be running your city. I am just
trying to make sure I understand what is going on today.
Thank you so much. With that I will yield back.
Mr. Higgins. The gentlelady yields.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Fallon, is recognized for
five minutes for questioning.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, Article 1,
Section A, Clause 17 of the United States Constitution grants
Congress to exercise exclusive legislation in all cases
whatsoever over D.C. So, what are we doing here today? We are
exercising our constitutional duty of oversight, and the
founders designed it that way. If you don't like that, then
there is a process to change the U.S. Constitution. You can
file an amendment and try to get it passed through Congress and
kick it out to the states.
The D.C. Council ultimately answers to Congress, and
Congress ultimately answers to the American people because, as
some of my colleagues have said, this is our capital city.
Every American, White, Black, Brown, it doesn't matter the
color. It is our city.
All things haven't been going all too well in our capital
city lately. Mr. Allen, are you currently the Chair of the
Public Safety Committee?
Mr. Allen. No, sir. I am not. I am the Chair of the
Transportation and Environment Committee.
Mr. Fallon. OK. Were you, in June 2020, Chair of the Public
Safety Committee?
Mr. Allen. Yes, sir.
Mr. Fallon. OK. And then in June 2020, did your Committee
unanimously approve a plan to cut $15 million from the city
police budget?
Mr. Allen. About one percent of the half-a-billion-dollar
MPD budget, yes.
Mr. Fallon. So, yes? OK. So, the D.C. police chief at the
time said, when asked about the plan, said it would probably
force a hiring freeze and would ultimately result in a net loss
of 200-plus officers.
So, Mr. Allen, yes or no, if you could. Do you believe that
it is a good or bad idea to reduce the overall size of the D.C.
police force?
Mr. Allen. Well, I am not going to pretend that in the
summer of 2020 there was a large conversation taking place
about what is the appropriate size.
Mr. Fallon. But now----
Mr. Allen. And have a D.C. auditor----
Mr. Fallon. Respectfully, now, do you think it is a good or
bad idea? Yes or no?
Mr. Allen. I am sorry. To what?
Mr. Fallon. To reduce the size of the D.C. police force?
Mr. Allen. Right now, the auditor is trying to tell us what
do we think the actual size should be.
Mr. Fallon. I don't care what the auditor thinks. What do
you think?
Mr. Allen. Right now, we are growing the police force. We
are trying to grow it.
Mr. Fallon. OK. So, do you think it is a good idea to grow
the D.C. police force?
Mr. Allen. I agreed----
Mr. Fallon. Yes or no.
Mr. Allen. Yes, and I have funded----
Mr. Fallon. OK. So, it is a pretty simple--and, you know, I
think it is a good idea to grow it because, do you recall how
many officers you had in June 2020?
Mr. Allen. I can get you that exact number. I don't have it
exactly on the top of my head.
Mr. Fallon. It was 3,800. Do you know what it is today?
Mr. Allen. I could get you the exact number. I don't have
it off the top of my head.
Mr. Fallon. Three-thousand-four-hundred. OK. So, it is 400
fewer police officers. So, we didn't grow the force, regardless
of claims that the budgets would magically increased. In fact,
the police chief currently said that his goal is 4,200, and
that it will take, if it ever occurs, will take a decade.
Mr. Allen. The police chief also said that it is not an
issue of budget, that we have----
Mr. Fallon. The policies--sir, the policies that you all
have set in place have set public safety back in our city, the
capital city, back over a decade. And this is the first time in
20 years we have seen 200-plus murders in D.C. We haven't seen
that in two decades.
Do you believe that D.C. is a dangerous city?
Mr. Allen. No, but hiring police officers is something our
entire country is going through. I funded----
Mr. Fallon. OK. No, I--sir----
Mr. Allen [continuing]. For example----
Mr. Fallon [continuing]. Respectfully, I just asked you one
simple----
Mr. Allen [continuing]. In Juneau, Alaska----
Mr. Fallon [continuing]. Sir, I asked you a specific
question. This is not your time. It is our time. So, you do not
believe that D.C. is a dangerous city. You know, and I do not
want to get into anecdotes, so let us just look at statistics,
because I think that is a really healthy way to do things.
According to your own Police Department, the murder rate is
33 per 100,000.
Mr. Allen. I could not hear that. I am sorry.
Mr. Fallon. According to your own Police Department, the
murder rate is 33 per 100,000 in the city. OK. The national
average is 6.9. It is 478 percent higher in Washington.
Robberies, 296 per 100,000. National average is 61. 485 percent
higher. Total violent crime, 597 per 100,000. National average
is 395. 151 percent higher. So empirically and statistically,
it is a dangerous city. It is more dangerous.
And you know, if people want to say, well, because it is a
city, comparable cities like--and I just picked these out
randomly--Fort Worth and Oklahoma City, murder rate is 13 per
100,000, and 12 per 100,000. So, 2.5 times more likely to be
murdered in D.C. than those cities.
So, it is clearly a very dangerous city, and Mr. Chairman,
I would like to enter into the record, submit for the record,
an article that was written by The Washington Post where ``U.S.
attorney declined to prosecute 67 percent of those arrested.''
Mr. Fallon. Mr. Pemberton, according to The Washington
Post, 67 percent of crimes weren't important enough to
prosecute. How do you think that affects your officer morale?
Mr. Pemberton. It is frustrating. The officers who patrol
these neighborhoods, they are looking for the people who are
committing crimes, who are committing violence against others,
who are terrorizing neighborhoods. They are building probable
cause. They are arresting them. Our detectives are doing
investigations. They are getting probable cause for warrants.
They are arresting them. And then when we bring those folks
down to the U.S. Attorney's Office those cases are getting what
we call ``no papered,'' means they are getting dismissed at
intake.
Mr. Fallon. Yes, and we need to protect the people of this
city, not only the tourists that come here but the people that
live here.
Mr. Raskin. Will gentleman yield?
Mr. Fallon. Well, my time is out.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Mr. Mendelson. Can I just point out that the charging
decisions are made by the Federal attorney?
Mr. Fallon. No----
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman's time has expired, but I will
allow the gentleman to respond.
Mr. Mendelson. Thank you. These charging decisions are made
by the Federal United States Attorney. He is the one who
prosecutes. He is the one who decides whether to paper these
cases. It is enormously frustrating to us.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, sir.
The Chair recognizes--Representative Andrew Clyde has asked
to be waived onto the Committee. Without objection,
Representative Andrew Clyde of Georgia is waived onto the
Committee for the purpose of questioning witnesses at today's
Committee hearing.
And the Chair recognizes the Ranking Member.
Without objection, so ordered. Does the Ranking Member wish
to be recognized?
Mr. Raskin. No.
Mr. Higgins. The Chair recognizes Mr. Sessions for five
minutes for questioning.
Mr. Sessions. I thank the Chairman. I believe what happened
there is they looked at me and they didn't see me, and they saw
you, so thank you. Thank you very much.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here. In fact,
despite what you think you are looking at there is a huge
interest in the success of Washington, DC, and what you have
Members of Congress here doing is questioning your idea of
success and the things which you initiate, the things which you
do then turns into an action that is called result or what
happened. And that is what we are attempting to do.
My parents lived here. My father served as the fourth
director of the Federal Bureau of Investigations. That is known
as the FBI. And my parents lived in Washington, DC, full-time
from 1987 forward until their death several years ago. And I
always felt like that they were entitled to being in a safe
place and doing safe things, but I likewise feel like that
Members of Congress, people who visit Washington, DC, should be
aware of that this is not home, it is a different place for
them, and they needed to take that into account.
But we are intensely interested in success, and so I think
the argument that is taking place that is misunderstood by our
Democratic colleagues, and perhaps by you, is we are trying to
figure out what you consider to be success. And success many
times comes from policy, and policy leads to some conclusion,
whether it is in our state and whether we lead the Nation in
uninsured people, no doubt we are right next to Mexico and the
law does not allow non-citizens some of the provisions that
they are talking about. So, you know, there are reasons behind
things--results, actions, numbers.
Mr. Lee, I note that you came on board in June 2022. Thank
you for doing this.
Mr. Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Sessions. A study that was done on all 50 states and
Washington, DC, a 2022 study of drug use by state, compared all
50 states and the District of Columbia, and found that D.C.
ranked dead last in drug abuse and addiction. OK, we can handle
that. We are hoping that you will go back and say, ``Is this
what we aim for?'' and if not, what are those natural
characteristics of success in states that may be first through
20, what are those characteristics of things that they did to
avoid this addiction problem?
Mr. Lee, I want to ask you about money. Washington, DC,
years ago, received a good bit of money, and a high percentage
of that was simply for health care from the Federal Government,
and a high percentage of that was used for drug overdose in the
emergency room. Can you tell me, of the money that you put into
the D.C. hospital system--for surgery, taking care of
patients--what percent of that now is consumed with emergency
room drug overdose?
Mr. Lee. I cannot tell you, but I can research that and
provide you an answer.
Mr. Sessions. OK. Mr. Lee, these the kinds of things that
this Committee, and I think Members of Congress if we were to
admit to it, on both sides, we need to actually look at how
D.C., Washington, DC, the District of Columbia, how it is
looking at itself and how it wants to be seen, and what those
success markers are.
And so, I would like for each of you to know that you are
the elected representatives, or that you serve, whether you
live in D.C. or adjacent to it, whether you--Mr. Lee, I didn't
ask where you lived. I am not going to. But you serve there,
and this Committee is after an issue and a result, an issue and
perhaps corresponding money and then where the result it.
And I think Mr. Allen makes a good point about criminals
and prosecution. And so, I would like for Mr. Allen to know we
will be writing the U.S. attorney. We will, in the Majority,
tell them that we have strong interest in the safety here, and
we believe that his effective law enforcement to enable this
city to have a better standing, needs to be debated and
discussed. And I want to help bring each of you back to what I
consider to be a civil success model to where we can then say,
OK, a little bit of crime is OK, but at some point we recognize
that we have thrown in the towel and the criminals are better
able to operate in our city than a safe citizen.
So, thank you. I appreciate you being here. Mr. Lee, I am
going to write you a letter. You get it ahead of time, but that
is what we are doing. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for including me in
today's hearing, and to the Ranking Member, as we always try
and work together, thank you very much.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Biggs,
for five minutes for questioning.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I found it very
interesting. This has been an interesting hearing. I thought it
was intriguing to actually hear one of my colleagues across the
aisle express their dismay at the Federal Government
interfering with local and state government. That is, like, the
first time I have ever heard a Democrat say that. It was
awesome.
But what makes this unique? Article 1, Section 8. That is
what makes it unique--exclusive legislation, authority belongs
to the Congress. But we can delegate it. Somebody cited a
Supreme Court case. They kind of misinterpreted it a little
bit. They wanted to say that is kind of hands-off. It is not
hands-off. We can delegate it, and we have delegated a lot of
authority to the District of Columbia.
But I want to just tell you how dangerous this place is. A
good friend of mine, just a couple of months ago, walking down,
just right over here, just off the Capitol, over by where a lot
of us go eat, gets mugged. He is a little bit crazy. He
literally chased the guy down to get his wallet back. I would
not recommend that, but he did.
But then I got this from a former coworker of mine. It
says, in case you needed--this is just less than a month ago,
just a few weeks ago--``In case you needed another example of
D.C. crime, I was part of a potential carjacking. I was
driving. A teen jumped out,'' and then she goes and explains
what is happening. A knife comes out. They are banging on her
windows, trying to get her to open the car. Where did it
happen? Two blocks from the Senate, right by her office. It
happened over lunchtime, in broad daylight. No, there is no
crime crisis here, not in this city.
Mr. Lee, has your office analyzed the impact of recent
business departures or business closures on the city's tax
revenues?
Mr. Lee. Not specifically. Our responsibility is to
forecast revenues, and so we look at the macroeconomic and
regional economic conditions that lead to our----
Mr. Biggs. And one of those conditions is that the
population of D.C. has fallen by 2.6 percent since 2020.
Mr. Lee. But it has rebounded. The last census shows that
there are people--the population is beginning to increase. And
our understanding----
Mr. Biggs. So, what is your net? I mean, have businesses
been closing?
Mr. Lee. We are still down.
Mr. Biggs. You are still down. Is it going to go down or
up?
Mr. Lee. We are estimating very slow growth moving forward,
to reflect past history.
Mr. Biggs. Any of that due to crime, or how do you
attribute it? Is it just--how do you attribute closures and
people having left?
Mr. Lee. Many major cities in the country saw a population
decline as a result of the pandemic and the new working from
home labor market.
Mr. Biggs. And that is what Mayor Bowser has said that is
one of her problems is that the Fed has continued with a
teleworking program that has impacted your economy because
people aren't coming in. Do you agree with her assessment?
Mr. Lee. Yes.
Mr. Biggs. So over that same time period, from 2020, direct
appropriations to the District of Columbia have increased by
almost $90 million, which does not include funding that D.C.
receives through formula or competitive grant programs at
Federal agencies. Can you discuss for us, generally, how the
district utilizes that Federal funding?
Mr. Lee. I am sorry. I didn't hear. Which Federal funding?
Mr. Biggs. The $90 million that it has grown by in the last
two years.
Mr. Mendelson. If I could interrupt----
Mr. Biggs. You cannot interrupt. This is a question for Mr.
Lee. Mr. Lee?
Mr. Lee. What is complicated in understanding Federal
funding is the COVID relief resources that every jurisdiction
has received.
Mr. Biggs. How about you? How about the D.C. jurisdiction?
Mr. Lee. Right.
Mr. Biggs. If you can't answer just say, ``I can't
answer.''
Mr. Lee. I cannot answer that specifically.
Mr. Biggs. Fair enough. I mean, I appreciate that.
Mr. Lee. Yes.
Mr. Biggs. I am going to ask you then if you would please--
maybe we could get in contact and get more specific, and you
can give me that information----
Mr. Lee. Please.
Mr. Biggs [continuing]. And I would be happy to share it
with the rest of the Committee.
Mr. Lee. Please.
Mr. Mendelson. Congressman, I can give some information if
you want me to answer.
Mr. Biggs. Why don't you get with Mr. Lee, and we will get
together. I have got other questions I want to ask.
Mr. Mendelson. It is up to you, but our discretionary
Federal funding is $100 million, which is 0.08 percent of our--
excuse me----
Mr. Biggs. That is beautiful, OK. I get it. You have got
your story. You have got your narrative you want to get out. I
really did want to ask about additional crime statistics, but
you have taken my time. Way to filibuster. We had already
arranged to get that information offline.
Mr. Mendelson. I just thought I was being helpful.
Mr. Biggs. Yes. Well, that is what happens when we do not
have order and decorum in here, and you just think you can
speak and say whatever. It is rude. It is rude.
Mr. Raskin. OK. The gentleman's time has long since
expired.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Goldman is recognized for questioning for five minutes.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am probably one of
the few, if only, Members of this Committee who grew up in
Washington, DC, and I grew up at the time that it was
considered the murder capital of the world. And the city has
actually shown tremendous progress in the 30 years since I last
lived here. In fact, since 1991, when it was at its peak, the
murder rate in D.C. was 60 percent higher than it is today. In
2022, violent crime in the district dropped seven percent, and
property crime also decreased.
So, there is no question that crime is a problem in this
city, as it is in cities across the country. But the fact that
my colleague from Arizona has a few anecdotal examples of crime
does not mean that this topic is worth an entire hearing for
this Oversight Committee. We are going on hour four of a
hearing focused on a city of a population of 712,000 people.
There are 332 million people in this country, and yet, we are
spending hours and hours intruding on the home rule of a city
that is very capable of governing itself.
Now I have a question for Mr. Pemberton. In the last 20
years, do you know which states in the aggregate have higher
murder rates--traditionally blue states or traditionally red
states?
Mr. Pemberton. I don't know the answer to that, sir.
Mr. Goldman. OK. The answer is red states. Red states, over
the last 20 years, and certainly in more recent times, have had
significantly higher murder rates than blue states. But we are
not here focusing on the murder rate around the country. We are
not focused on red states around the country where the murder
rate is higher per capita than it is in blue states. No, we are
focused solely on Washington, DC, and we are frankly wasting
our time trying to intrude on the governance of a small city.
Now, I get Congress has jurisdiction over it. It is not a
question of whether or not we have jurisdiction. It is a
question of what is the best use of our time.
Since 2011, at least seven states that voted for Donald
Trump were among the top 10 states with the highest murder
rate. And from 2000 to 2020, for each year, the murder rate in
the 25 states that voted for Donald Trump is higher than the
murder rate in the 25 states that voted for President Biden.
Now, I would like to ask for unanimous consent to introduce
a report published by the Third Way, dated January 27, 2023,
that is titled, ``The Two-Decade Red State Murder Problem.''
Mr. Higgins. Without objection.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you.
Mr. Goldman. I want to ask, Mr. Mendelson, since you have
been very involved in the governance of Washington, D.C. for
quite some time, how the city compares today to 30 years ago.
Mr. Mendelson. Oh, it is very, very, very different, and
better, better managed. I said that in my opening statement. We
are financially healthy. Our ratings reflect that. Wall Street
ratings reflect that. Economic activity is very, very different
and better than it was 30 years ago. Crime is much, much, much
down. As I said in my opening statement, there is a perception
and the reality, and the reality is what you indicated in your
own comments about crime, that it is down. I could go on, but I
don't----
Mr. Goldman. No, no, I think that is certainly my
impression having been away in New York for a long time where
crime is also a problem. Crime is a problem. It is generally up
post-pandemic around the country. And we ought to be fighting
crime, but we ought to not be picking on Washington, D.C. when
we are two days removed from another mass shooting where three
nine-year-olds were murdered in their school. And here we are
talking about Washington, D.C. and what Congress needs to do
about Washington, DC, when we really ought to be focused on the
gun violence epidemic that is torturing our children around
this country. That should be the focus of the next four-hour
hearing of this Oversight Committee, and I yield back.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields. The gentleman yields.
The gentleman, my colleague from Arizona, Mr. Gosar, is
recognized for five minutes for questioning.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, you can make
statistics tell you anything you want. That is how they
operate, so you have to be very, very careful in that, but I am
going to be a little redundant. The District of Columbia was
granted limited autonomy in 1973 by Congress, who at the time
did not wish to intervene in the day-to-day governance of the
city. This grant of limited autonomy can be revoked by Congress
at any time. Article I, Section 8, Clause 17 of the United
States Constitution provides Congress with the exclusive
jurisdiction over the District of Columbia.
Recently, the District is experiencing rising crime across
the board, from sexual abuse, to motor theft, to homicides. It
might not be 30 years from now, but it has been over the last
couple of years. D.C. is a mess, and its leaders have proven
incapable of governance. The crime in our Nation's Capital is
out of control. It is time for Congress to reassert itself as
D.C.'s proper constitutionally mandated sovereign. That is why
I am reintroducing the D.C. Home Rule Improvement Act which
will further empower Congress to overturn reckless D.C. laws.
Now, Mr. Mendelson, I have got a series of things for you.
The D.C. Council voted in 2020 to permanently rename a street
adjacent to the White House ``Black Lives Matter Plaza.'' I
would like to convey some anecdotes and some information about
the organization, Black Lives Matter. In 2016, BLM protestors
injured 21 police officers in St. Paul, Minnesota. On September
10, 2020, a group of BLM protesters attempted to storm a
hospital in Los Angeles in order to attack two police officers
having emergency surgery after suffering gunshot wounds in an
unprovoked attack near a train station.
Black Lives Matter is violently anti-police. They are a
race-baiting cartel that has racketeered billions of dollars.
As of recently, that is estimated to be $90 billion. Mr.
Mendelson, do you know how many deaths and billions of dollars
in damages were caused as a result of Black Lives Matter and
the Antifa protest in 2020? Yes or no.
Mr. Mendelson. I don't know, but it wasn't named after the
organization. It was named after the concept of Black lives
matter.
Mr. Gosar. Well, I mean, it is hard to configure, but the
actual amount was $2 billion and 18 deaths. What kind of
message do you think that commemorating a group with such a
vicious and violent history sends to the people of Washington,
D.C.? Now, I heard your, you know, your comment--it is not
about the group, it is about its theoretical prospects. Now,
would you name a plaza after a group that contributed to the
deaths of 18 people and $2 billion in damages?
Mr. Mendelson. No, but we did not.
Mr. Gosar. Well, I get it, but, I mean, there is a
synonymous problem here. Mr. Pemberton, how does BLM violence
and threats against police affect morale?
Mr. Pemberton. Well, I don't care who is bringing the
violence.
Mr. Gosar. Yes.
Mr. Pemberton. If people are being violent against police
officers, it doesn't really matter to me what kind of flag they
are waving. If they are committing violence against police
officers, they need to be held accountable.
Mr. Gosar. I appreciate that comment. Now, Mr. Allen, this
year you sponsored the D.C. ACHIEVES Establishment Act,
correct?
Mr. Allen. I am sorry, Congressman. I didn't hear which
bill you said.
Mr. Gosar. Sorry. I lost my voice this weekend. You
sponsored the D.C. ACHIEVES Establishment Act, correct?
Mr. Allen. I am going to assume that you are correct.
Mr. Gosar. Yes. This bill requires the Mayor to establish a
fund to provide grants to undocumented students. Did I read
that correctly?
Mr. Allen. I was a co-sponsor of this bill, I believe----
Mr. Gosar. OK.
Mr. Allen [continuing]. Is the one you are referencing.
Mr. Gosar. We will keep going.
Mr. Allen. OK.
Mr. Gosar. Now, and these grants would cover tuition and
non-tuition expenses for illegal aliens, true?
Mr. Allen. I am having trouble hearing you, sir. You trail
off at the end. I just couldn't hear you.
Mr. Gosar. These grants would cover tuition and non-tuition
expenses to illegal aliens.
Mr. Allen. I believe that for individuals that are coming
to the District of Columbia, it helps provide education.
Mr. Gosar. No, it is for that population base.
Mr. Allen. For undocumented----
Mr. Gosar. So, under this bill, while American citizens
across the country are facing student loan crises, illegal
aliens would get their school paid for without the expectation
that they would even have to pay it back. This seems very
contradictory. I mean, it is very offensive. Now, I have got
one more last thing that I want to look at. Mr. Mendelson--I
hope I said it right--and Mr. Allen, a question was asked about
sentencing and you got upset about, you know, this is up to the
U.S. attorney, right?
Mr. Allen. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Gosar. So how am I supposed to believe this? So, you
are upset at the sentencing from the U.S. attorney, but yet,
you put forward a sentencing package that was very different.
How do we validate or how do we reconcile those?
Mr. Mendelson. Well, actually, the issue of sentencing is
what the U.S. attorney asks for.
Mr. Gosar. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Mendelson. The issue of charging is whether the U.S.
attorney chooses to charge, and my response to the Congressman
was that he was lamenting that prosecutions. Nobody prosecutes,
I think he said something like that. Well, that is up to the
U.S. attorney whether to charge, and actually, the sentencing
is the function of the court----
Mr. Gosar. Right.
Mr. Allen [continuing]. And what the U.S. attorney asks
for, and, of course, what the court ultimately decides.
Mr. Gosar. But they are all interrelated.
Mr. Allen. Well, they are interrelated, but, you know, let
me just--because I have this in front of me. You know, the
Senate staffer who was seriously assaulted last week--which
very, very unfortunate, and I hope he fully recovers--under the
current Criminal Code, he would be charged with assault with
intent to kill. That is a 15-year maximum. Under the Revised
Criminal Code, the soft on sentencing bill, he would be charged
with attempted murder, and that is a 22-and-a-half year penalty
plus enhancements, because I think he was armed, which means 27
years. Current Code is 15 years. The Revised Code that was soft
on crime is 27 years, but the decision to charge is not ours.
It is not the District Government. It is the U.S. attorney, and
the sentencing decision is by the court, which is federally
appointed.
Mr. Gosar. I got you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Mendelson. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. [Presiding.] The Chair recognizes Mr.
Moskowitz for five minutes.
Mr. Moskowitz. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and, you know, I
want to thank the Majority for finding the time to fit this
hearing in between attending former President Donald Trump's
memorial service to David Koresh just last week, who was a real
advocate for young girls in this country.
So, my first question to anyone on the panel is do you
think parents in this country, as they are putting their young
kids into pajamas at night and they are tucking them in to bed,
do you think they are worried about public urination in
Washington, DC, or do you think they are worried about sending
their kid to school and their kid not coming home?
Mr. Allen. As a father of two kids, who packed them up this
morning and sent them to school, I care about making sure they
are coming home.
Mr. Moskowitz. Thank you. You know, I voted with the
Majority on the disapproval because I am consistent. You guys
want to talk about D.C. public schools and crime. I don't want
to burst your bubble over there, but mass murder in schools is
crime. That is a crime. You want to talk about 1,300 cars being
stolen? 550 people have been murdered in school. Who cares
about the cars? What about the kids? No hearing for them.
Three-hundred-thirty-eight-thousand kids have experienced gun
violence in this country. The No. 1 killer of school-age
children in this country? Gun violence.
How do you think, for the parents who have had to bury
their kids, who have had to decide what kind of clothes to put
their kids in when they bury them, or what kind of box they
have to pick out for their child, or for when they come home
and that room in their house is empty, what do you think about
for the parents who have all of their kids' stuff, and they
don't know what to do with it? What do you think about the
parents--no high school graduation, no college graduation, no
wedding, no grandkids, no future. What do you think those
parents who have buried their kids think that we are holding a
hearing to talk about D.C. public urination?
You know, speaking of crime, Republican-on-Republican
crime, former President Donald Trump held a rally in Waco,
Texas with his Rasputin, Ted Nugent. He said the No. 1 national
security threat to this great Nation isn't Russia, or China, or
D.C. crime, but is an 81-year old slip-and-fall survivor in
Minority Leader Mitch McConnell. I am just wondering if, you
know, we are going to find time in between, you know, some
folks here attending the next rally celebrating Timothy
McVeigh, if we are going to find time to hold a hearing on mass
murder in schools. When are we having that hearing?
We want to talk about crime and murder. Let us have a
hearing on murder in schools. It is murder. Is there any
question? I will yield to anyone on this Committee who
disagrees that murder in schools is not murder. I yield.
Ms. Greene. Will you yield?
Mr. Moskowitz. Oh, I will yield. Yes, please.
Ms. Greene. Yes, when I was in 11th grade and Joe Biden
made our schools gun-free school zones, one of the students in
my school brought three guns to school, and our entire school
went on lockdown because he was the only person with a gun.
There was no good guy with a gun to protect us kids at school.
You want to know why the shooter is dead in Nashville, the
trans shooter? You want to know why? Because a good guy with a
gun killed that woman. She identified as a man. She was
mentally ill, probably taking hormones, and she went in and
murdered children and adults in this Christian school in
Nashville. So, if you want to have a good talk about schools
and protecting children, we need to talk about protecting our
children the same way we protect our President, we protect our
celebrities, we protect this building----
Mr. Moskowitz. Yes, reclaiming my time.
Ms. Greene. OK. I will yield.
Mr. Moskowitz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, there are
six people that are dead in that school, including three
children, because you guys got rid of the assault weapons ban,
because you guys made it easy for people who don't deserve to
have weapons, who are mentally incapable of having weapons of
war, being able to buy those weapons and go into schools. I
voted for SROs in my schools in Florida after Parkland. We have
SROs in every school. Did the good guys with the guns stop six
people from getting murdered? No, but you know what? AR-15s.
Have you ever seen what those bullets do to children? You
know why you don't hunt with an AR-15 with a deer? Because
there is nothing left, and there is nothing left of these kids
when people go into school and murder them while they are
trying to read. You guys are worried about banning books. Dead
kids cannot read.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes Mr. Langworthy for five minutes.
Mr. Langworthy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and first off, I
would like to thank the witnesses for being here today.
America's law enforcement officers keep our community safe.
However, even in the face of a steep rise in crime throughout
the city, the D.C. Council has made it impossible for the
Metropolitan Police Department to adequately fulfill its duties
to serve and protect.
Mr. Pemberton, organizations for police officers
overwhelmingly oppose the Revised Criminal Code Act and
supported our Resolution of Disapproval, including the D.C.
Police Union, the National Fraternal Order of Police, the
National Association of Police Organizations, and the Federal
Law Enforcement Officers Association. Did the D.C. Council
consult with any of these groups before passing the Revised
Criminal Code?
Mr. Pemberton. No. As far as I am aware, there were no
sworn police officers that were involved in the rewrite of the
Criminal Code.
Mr. Langworthy. Why do you think that the Council failed to
consult with these groups?
Mr. Pemberton. Like they do in most of their legislation, I
don't think they want police officer involvement, or they don't
want to hear police officers' perspectives in exactly how these
policies are going to unfold on the ground.
Mr. Langworthy. The proposed D.C. crime bill would have
lowered penalties for a number of crimes, including
carjackings, which have seen a steep rise in recent years. Do
you believe that the D.C. Council was considering how this
crime bill impacts the day-to-day work of D.C. police officers
or potentially strains D.C. police resources?
Mr. Pemberton. No, quite the opposite. I am pretty sure
that if they realize that it was going to impede police
officers, or reduce police officers, or drive police officers
out of the department, I think they would have been pleased
with that information.
Mr. Langworthy. The D.C. Council has voted to cut funding
for the D.C. police in the past. In 2020, the Council and Mayor
Bowser publicly disagreed over the Council's plan to cut $15
million in police funding, a move the Mayor suggested would
harm public safety. Mr. Pemberton, as a professional police
officer, what effect does a $15 million cut have on police and
public safety in general?
Mr. Pemberton. Well, from the rank-and-file perspective,
when you hear that your elected leaders are trying to take away
funding for your police department, the perception is that they
don't want you doing your job or they don't want you out
policing these neighborhoods, and they are not looking to
retain or hire the right people.
Mr. Langworthy. Have you noticed a problem in retention
within the Metropolitan Police Department?
Mr. Pemberton. Yes. We have lost almost 1,200 officers in
the past three years.
Mr. Langworthy. Now, where have the officers gone that have
left the force?
Mr. Pemberton. Many of them have found other agencies in
which their elected officials and their employers don't treat
them as deplorably as the City Council treats their police
officers. Many of them have just left law enforcement in
general because they have been so disheartened with the way
they were treated.
Mr. Langworthy. Now, how long and what would it take for
the police force to get back to full strength at this point?
Mr. Pemberton. That is an impossible question to answer
because right now we are running a deficit of 15 to 20 people
per month, so I can't even plot a trajectory on a graph as to
how long it would take us to increase the number right now. If
you drew the timeline out, the number of police officers would
eventually get to zero if we don't do something.
Mr. Langworthy. Now, Mr. Mendelson and Mr. Allen, I would
like to ask either of you, why you believe over 600 officers
have left the police force since you passed ``emergency police
reform.''
Mr. Mendelson. Thank you for the question. Every major
police department in this country is suffering with a drop in
applicants for police. I was just looking at an article, New
York City, 900 officers they lost last year. Our Metro police,
which are not subject to this bill that is before you, they
have 25 percent vacancy right now. This is a national problem.
It does not correlate, and the union cannot provide evidence
that shows that it correlates, with the legislation. It is a
national problem that right now, people are not attracted to
working in the police departments, whether it is here, or New
York City, or other cities.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Congressman. I will echo that what we
are seeing across the entire country--police work is incredibly
hard. It is incredibly hard work. It is also incredibly hard to
recruit a lot of folks into it. In the District, part of what I
helped move forward are signing bonuses, which a lot of the
jurisdictions have done around the country. We have passed
legislation to protect our officers if they are injured in the
line of duty. We have found ways, which I think is most
important, is to try to help grow our own. Right now, only
about 18 percent of our police force actually live in the
District of Columbia, so with housing incentives and other ways
to help them be able to call D.C. home.
But our biggest tool is actually our MPD cadet academy, and
I helped grow that from 15 slots per year to 150. That is D.C.
high school students that can start a pathway to become an
officer. And I think that is a great way to make sure that you
have officers that are of and from the communities in which
they serve, and it creates a built-in pipeline for our officers
and for the police department to be able to grow the numbers
that we need.
Mr. Langworthy. This is one of the greatest cities of the
world, and it deserves to be safe. Its citizens deserve to be
safe. Its visitors deserve to be safe, our staff members. You
know, we saw what happened to Senator Paul's staff this week. I
had a member of my own staff here on Capitol Hill jumped while
he was trying to pump gas. I mean, these can be life or death
situations, and we invite the world to visit us here in our
great Nation's Capital, and our police officers deserve to be
supported. The three most dangerous words that have ever been
uttered are ``defund the police,'' and this culture needs to
stop. So, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes Mrs. Greene for five minutes.
Ms. Greene. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Today, here in the
Oversight Committee hearing, Chairman Mendelson said there is
not a crime crisis in Washington, D.C. An hour later on the
D.C. Police Department Twitter alert, ``Shooting investigation
in the 3000 block of 30th Street, Southeast. Look for a Black
male wearing all black clothing, last seen fleeing from the
3000 block of 30th Street, Southeast.'' There has been a double
homicide, I believe this is being investigated right now here
in D.C. Chairman Mendelson, do you stay with your statement
that there is not a crime crisis in Washington, D.C.?
Mr. Mendelson. Absolutely, and as I said in my opening
statement, it is concerning, and there are folks who believe
that crime has gotten worse. But when you look statistically,
10 years ago, crime is down 45 percent. Year to year, crime is
down seven percent. Go back to the 1990's, 400 homicides per
year----
Ms. Greene. Chairman Mendelson, this is 2023. We aren't
back in the 1900's. This is 2023 in Washington, DC, and there
is a crime crisis in Washington. Now, I would like to also talk
to you. Mr. Allen, this is your tweet where it shows here that
the D.C. City Council is more interested in renaming streets
than doing anything about crime, and that is a shame that that
is your focus. I would also like to point out the Rand Paul
staffer was stabbed in the head--stabbed in the head--in broad
daylight here in our Nation's Capital. I am from Northwest
Georgia, and when visitors come to our Capitol, I have to warn
them about the amount of crime and how dangerous the city
streets are here in Washington, D.C. because it is completely
out of control.
I would also like to point out that it is completely
shocking to me that this bill you all had was going to
eliminate all mandatory and statutory minimum sentences other
than first-degree murder, regardless of whether the offense is
committed while armed or unarmed. It was going to reduce
mandatory minimum for first-degree murder from 30 years to 24
years, eliminates life sentences, eliminates a compliance
liability for felony murder prosecutions, and reduces the
maximum sentence for first-degree sexual assault and first-
degree sexual abuse of a minor from life in prison to 30 years.
Obviously, I can not even comprehend that. That is hard for
me to even consider, but maybe the problem is that the D.C.
City Council is not worried about crime. You know, lying about
how insane crime is not a problem here doesn't cover it up, and
saying that you support the police or funding the police
doesn't change the fact that there is a lack of police officers
here because they don't feel the support here in the city.
Mr. Pemberton, over the past six years, plummeting numbers
of police homicides have increased 75 percent. Carjackings have
increased 227 percent. Armed robberies have increased 46
percent, and most tragic and alarming, these are your words,
juvenile homicide rates doubled. Can you expand on that please,
sir?
Mr. Pemberton. Yes, absolutely. So, this all relates to the
number of police we have on the Department. We cannot fulfill
the demand. We cannot respond to the 911 calls. We cannot get
to the people who are requesting assistance from us, and when
we get to the scene, there are not enough officers to properly
handle it. We do not have enough detectives to investigate
these cases, and then when we are, the criminal justice system
is failing us. And all of this can be traced back to the
policies that the City Council has passed, and, in addition to
that, the rhetoric that they have used.
Police officers do not want to work in an environment where
their elected officials are treating them like garbage, and
that is why they are leaving. They are going to other
jurisdictions. As everyone has said here today, there is a
crisis in law enforcement. These officers can go anywhere. I
would be surprised if you told me about a law enforcement
agency somewhere in this country that was not hiring. So, these
officers are phenomenal officers. They have a resume. They can
literally go anywhere they want.
You know, to that extent, you have heard Mr. Mendelson and
Mr. Allen both say that this is a national issue. Well, the
reason it is a national issue is because the same rhetoric and
the same types of legislation have been passed all over the
country, which is why all of these major cities are having the
same problems. And the fact is until they start respecting
their employees and start treating police officers correct, we
are not going to get ourselves out of this mess any time soon.
Ms. Greene. That is right, Mr. Pemberton, and I will go
back to one thing. While a shooting occurred while we are
sitting here having this hearing, your strict gun control laws
are not protecting residents here in D.C., but they are
allowing criminals to run rampant in the streets murdering
people. I yield back.
Chairman Comer. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Kansas, Mr. LaTurner, for five
minutes.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here today. Our country is in the midst of a surging
crime wave. The brick-and-mortar retail industry has lost
hundreds of billions of dollars to organized theft these past
few years. Gang and cartel networks are fueling a drug
epidemic, ravaging the country and killing our youth. Between
2019 and 2022, American cities witnessed a 50-and 36-percent
increase in homicide and aggravated assault, respectively. The
crime wave sweeping across our Nation has engulfed its Capital
City, too, and how have Washington Democrats responded? By
pushing for an across-the-board weakening of our criminal
justice code.
Their recent proposition, which was fortunately defeated by
my Republican colleagues in Congress, would have fortified
legal and procedural protections for petty thieves, eliminated
a litany of mandatory minimum sentencing standards, and even
reduced maximum penalties for heinous crimes, like armed
robbery and carjacking. The President's refusal to veto
Congress' condemnation of the D.C. City Council's efforts to
weaken the criminal code despite 173 congressional Democrats
throwing their weight behind the measure is tacit
acknowledgement of a fact that has been widely apparent to
anybody with an ounce of sense. Soft-on-crime policies endanger
the public.
The most fundamental function of government is maintaining
public order and safety, establishing justice, and ensuring
domestic tranquility, are mandates our founding fathers wrote
into the first line of our Constitution. But progressive
lawmakers seem to have forgotten this prime directive of public
service. Law enforcement officers in Kansas and across this
country put their lives on the line to keep our community safe.
Instead of pushing dangerous anti-police rhetoric and weakening
penalties for violent crimes, Congress should be laser focused
on ensuring our police officers have all the resources that
they need to do their job.
Councilman Allen, we are less than 90 days into this year,
and according to self-reporting by D.C. police, there has
already been approximately 150 incidents of carjacking, 72
percent of which have involved a firearm. Mr. Allen, when the
vast majority of these incidents are being carried out with
potentially lethal intent, how can you morally justify your
efforts to relax minimum sentencing standards for carjacking by
16 years?
Mr. Allen. Thank you for the question, Congressmember. The
revised criminal code that you are describing as soft on crime
had penalties for armed carjacking that are greater than most
of the states that are represented here in this room. It was
not soft on crime. What we have is 120-year-old----
Mr. LaTurner. There wasn't a reduction of 16 years for the
penalty?
Mr. Allen. You are speaking about the maximum?
Mr. LaTurner. For the minimum sentencing standards for
carjacking by 16 years.
Mr. Allen. The maximum is what you are talking about. The
maximum was set at 40 years, and the proposed reduction was to
go to 24 years, which is a stronger and tougher than most of
the states represented in this room right now. It still would
cover almost 98 percent of all sentences that are handed out in
the court. We have a problem with 120-year old criminal code
that makes us less safe today because it is unclear. It is
unproportional. It makes it hard for prosecutors to be able to
do their job. It makes it hard for juries to fine. It makes it
hard for judges to be able to render decisions. It is also
unfair for victims who are unable to get accountability.
Our problem is our old criminal code, and that needs to be
revised. That isn't going to happen now, and we are going to
have to figure out how to move forward with that, but that is a
significant problem.
Mr. LaTurner. But the people you represent are safer today
by reducing the maximum standard. Is that what you are saying?
Mr. Allen. You would not really see changes from the
penalties in the courts because the proposal you are talking
about was entirely consistent with the ways in which courts and
judges are handing out sentences today, which is also stronger
and longer sentencing than most of the states that are
represented in this room.
Mr. Mendelson. The average sentence in court for the last
10 years has been 15 years for carjacking.
Mr. LaTurner. I will ask the questions for the individual
that I want to answer them. Officer Pemberton, my home
district, much like Washington, DC, is struggling with an
epidemic of drugs and opioids. Are there any policing
strategies you found particularly effective in combatting crime
stemming from substance abuse?
Mr. Pemberton. Well, our department has had quite the
opposite problem. Going back to 2014, they have eliminated all
of our vice units. Those were the District-based units that
were dedicated to investigate drugs, and guns, and gang crime,
and prostitution. They dismantled all those units in 2014,
maybe 2015. They tried to centralize our narcotics unit and
shrunk it considerably, and over the years, they repurposed
those individuals away from investigating drug crimes. I think
we probably have less than 25 people investigating narcotics
offenses in this entire city, so we have had quite the opposite
problem.
I think your question is have I found anything that is
effective. We certainly had an effective and robust anti-
narcotics effort, but the city has done away with that over the
past five or six years, and we have almost zero officers, as
close to zero as you can imagine, investigating narcotics or
narcotics enforcement. And I know that the number of fentanyl
overdoses and opioid overdoses has skyrocketed as well.
Mr. LaTurner. What the city has done is gotten rid of
common sense when making these important, critical decisions. I
will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from North Dakota, Mr. Armstrong, for
five minutes.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I would like to
yield my time to Mr. Timmons.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, my friend. We seem to keep having
the same conversation, and you are trying to use all these
different statistics and all these different comparisons to all
these other states where the criminal penalties that you
imposed have similar or disparate effect, so you are missing
the point. We have a problem. We have a real problem. It
doesn't matter what you think you intend to do, what you wrote.
The problem is that in the last two hours, there has been
shooting in Southeast, three miles from here, where someone was
killed and someone was taken the hospital; multiple carjackings
in the last two hours. It is 2:00 in the afternoon. I mean,
this is out of hand.
So, instead of talking about how what you did was not bad
when, again, 250 Members of Congress, 81 senators, and the
President disagree with you, let us talk about what we are
going to do. What can you do to tell the people of Washington,
D.C. that we are safe, that if somebody commits a crime, they
are going to be held accountable, and it is going to be in a
manner that will deter future people? So, what is the plan?
Yes, Councilman Allen or Councilman Mendelson.
Mr. Allen. I really appreciate the question,
Congressmember. As part of this conversation, I think it is the
first time, and I really appreciate it, saying what are the
steps we can take, what are actions we can take, so thank you.
As I talked about in my opening statement, we have one of the
most poorly designed, dysfunctional criminal justice systems in
the District of Columbia. We do not have control over a Federal
U.S. attorney who makes charging decisions. We do not have any
control or accountability for a Federal Bureau of Prisons. We
don't have any accountability for supervision agencies----
Mr. Timmons. Real quick. I appreciate those issues. Instead
of saying things you don't control, what do you control because
you control how many law enforcement officers are being forced
out because of your policies, and he is saying 400 this year
will be forced out. They will resign because they don't want to
deal with it. So, what do you control that you can actually
create a safer D.C.? What is within your purview?
Mr. Allen. We are continuing to fund the hiring of police
officers, for example. What we would like to be able to do,
which I think is the spirit of the conversation today, is how
are we trying to solve problems together. And in that, because
we have such a system that is dependent upon Federal agencies,
that we have no accountability for, we are unable to control.
They won't even show up to our hearings when we talk about
safety. Those are actions in your hands.
Mr. Mendelson. So, let me put a little flesh on that. There
is a Criminal Justice Coordinating Council. I sit on that. That
is all the law enforcement agency heads, Federal and D.C. I
have several times presented to them my proposal for what we
can do to reduce violent crime, gun crime in particular, and
that is that the U.S. attorney establishes a gun prosecution
unit, that the Superior Court establishes a gun court. We have
seen that there is a higher success rate and quicker
prosecutions and convictions when there is a gun court and a
gun prosecution unit. We have no control over the U.S. attorney
or the Superior Court.
Mr. Timmons. I am happy to address structural changes, but
that is----
Mr. Mendelson. But that would reduce----
Mr. Timmons. That is a longer conversation.
Mr. Mendelson [continuing]. But that reduce gun violence.
Mr. Timmons. You can publicly and openly support law
enforcement, fund them, and facilitate environment that they
actually want to be a part of.
Mr. Mendelson. Well, I do support them, and Mr. Allen does,
and the Council does. We have funded their budgets fully for
the last couple of years.
Mr. Timmons. The chair of the Police Union disagrees with
everything you have said and is taking a completely different
position. I want to talk about one more thing. Homelessness in
Washington, D.C. is out of control. Vagrancy facilitates a
higher degree of criminality. If you are down on your luck and
you are sleeping in the street, you have a higher propensity to
commit a crime. That is just the way it works, and it has been
shocking the degree and how widespread homelessness has become.
What can you do to help these people? They need help. They
don't need to sleep in a park for months and years. They need
opportunity. They need to be able to get out of the position
they are in. What can you do to address that?
Mr. Allen. The best answer to homelessness is safe and
stable housing, and so we have been working to create vouchers
to get people into safe and stable housing. That is going to be
the solution to help you. And if I can answer one quick
question that you also asked about policing, please keep in
mind the Revised Criminal Code that we passed increased the
criminal penalty for assaulting a police officer from 10 to 14
years. This body overturned that.
Mr. Timmons. You have got three main issues: murders, armed
robberies, carjackings. If anybody commits any of those, you
should tell everybody in D.C. that you are going to go to
prison for a very, very long time. That is the solution. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Mendelson. I agree, but the cases don't get charged,
and that is the U.S. attorney's decision.
Mr. Armstrong. So, I have got 10 seconds and running
between a bunch of things, but I just would like to point
something out from my side of this. I spent 10 years as a
criminal defense attorney. I think if you ask everybody in this
town, I am one of the Republicans who believes significantly in
serious, smart criminal justice reform. You all are making it a
lot harder to do that. With that, I yield back.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes Mr. Clyde for five minutes.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Chairman Comer, for allowing me to
participate in this hearing today, and thank you to our
witnesses. It is nice to actually see some of the City Council
in person.
For far too long, our Nation's Capital, which is supposed
to represent a beacon of freedom, patriotism, and prosperity
for all Americans, have been beleaguered by violent crime. Like
many Democrat-run crime-ridden cities, Washington is now
notoriously unsafe. Over 19 million people visited D.C. in
2021. Our Nation's Capital City must be safe for all
constituents to visit their elected officials and learn about
our Nation's history and government, just as it must be safe
for residents, local, businesses, D.C., and D.C. commuters.
However, this is simply just not the case.
While local Democrat officials claim otherwise, the data
doesn't lie. According to the Metro Police Department, so far
this year, in less than three months, there have already been
more than 50 homicides, 40 cases of sexual abuse, more than
1,600 incidents of motor vehicle theft, 600 robberies, 220
burglaries, nearly 1,900 cases of theft from auto, over 1,700
cases of theft, assaults, assaults with a deadly weapon, and
the list goes on.
Crime is clearly on the rise in our Nation's Capital city,
yet local leaders have utterly failed in their duty to protect
residents and visitors as well as to provide MPD officers with
the resources and political backing--and I emphasize that--
needed to effectively defend D.C. from rising crime.
Mr. Mendelson, do think there is a crime problem in D.C.? A
``yes'' or ``no'' is sufficient.
Mr. Mendelson. Crime problem?
Mr. Clyde. Yes.
Mr. Mendelson. Yes.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you. And do you believe as the Chairman of
the D.C. City Council, your role and the Council's should be to
protect the residents and visitors in Washington?
Mr. Mendelson. Yes.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you. So, given the troubling crime crisis
here in Washington, which in just the last week led to numerous
crimes, including the horrific stabbing of one of Senator Rand
Paul's staffers, and a half dozen juveniles shot in the last 48
hours, and the assault of Democrat Congresswoman Angie Craig in
the elevator in her own apartment complex in the morning, the
very morning of the vote in the House to take down the Revised
Criminal Code Act, you know, given the crime crisis, isn't it
the Council's responsibility to ensure Americans in our
Nation's Capital are safe?
Mr. Mendelson. It is our responsibility to do everything we
possibly can, yes.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you. I appreciate that. Now, when the
House voted to strike down the D.C. Revised Criminal Code Act,
one of the things I believe that you said, Mr. Mendelson, was
you were going to pull the bill back so that you could continue
working on it. Is that correct?
Mr. Mendelson. Yes.
Mr. Clyde. Wouldn't it have been the appropriate time to
take back and continue to work on it after Mayor Bowser vetoed
the misguided bill instead of overturning her veto and sending
it to the Congress?
Mr. Mendelson. I pulled it back because it was clear that
we didn't have the support in the Senate, and as many of us do
as legislators, when we see that we are losing, we pull it back
to work on it.
Mr. Clyde. Mr. Chairman, I would like to request unanimous
consent to submit for the record a copy of Mayor Bowser's
letter to Mr. Mendelson, dated January 4, 2023, where she
wrote, ``This bill does not make us safer,'' when referring to
the Revised Criminal Code Act of 2022.
Chairman Comer. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you.
Mr. Clyde. Mr. Allen, in 2020, did the D.C. Council pass a
budget slashing $15 million from the Metro Police Department?
Mr. Allen. The Council passed a budget that redirected $9.6
million to other public safety efforts. That is about one
percent of the----
Mr. Clyde. Did they strip it from the Metropolitan Police
Department?
Mr. Allen. $9.6 million was redirected from the
Metropolitan Police Department to other public safety efforts.
It represented about one percent of a half-a-billion dollar
budget.
Mr. Clyde. So, I recently introduced a resolution of
disapproval to block the implementation of the D.C. Council's
so-called Comprehensive Policing and Justice Reform Emergency
Amendment Act of 2022, and I am thankful that my commonsense
resolution has the support of the D.C. officers and the D.C.
Police Union, because, in reality, this is a backdoor defund
the police. Though you may not take a whole lot of money from
them from the front end, what you do is you reduce their morale
and you make them quit so they don't really want to work for
D.C. anymore.
Mr. Pemberton, as a police officer in the District of
Columbia, can you tell me about the impacts that the Council's
bill would have on policing in our Nation's Capital city?
Mr. Pemberton. You would see that the number of officers
continue to leave. Now, keep in mind this bill has actually
been in effect since June 2020. They have passed it on an
emergency basis.
Mr. Clyde. Correct.
Mr. Pemberton. This is the No. 1 reason that we see the
best of the best officers leaving this agency.
Mr. Clyde. Over 1,200, am I correct, or about that numbers?
Mr. Pemberton. That is right, at least over a thousand
since this bill has been passed. That is correct.
Mr. Clyde. OK. And you haven't been able to replace them
either.
Mr. Pemberton. No, we can hire almost no one. I think we
are still running a deficit of 20 to 25 officers a month.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Mr. Pemberton. Do you believe the
Council's bill would increase public safety for D.C. residents,
visitors, and small businesses, or would it have the opposite
effect? And I have run out of time, so you----
Mr. Pemberton. I think it would be catastrophic. I think
would be an absolutely catastrophic situation for the city
based on crime and the police department.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you very much, and I yield back.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman yields back. That concludes
our question part of the hearing today, and at the request of
the Ranking Member, he and I will each give five-minute or less
closing statements. At this time, I yield to Ranking Member
Raskin.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you kindly, Mr. Chairman, and I was
interested in the passionate statement of the gentleman from
Georgia. I wish I had seen equal passion on behalf of public
safety in the District of Columbia on January 6 when 150 of our
officers were violently assaulted by a mob that he came to
describe as engaging in a normal tourist visit.
Mr. Chairman, today has been a great lost opportunity. In
the wake of the brutal violence in Nashville, which took the
lives of three children and three adults, we have had the
opportunity to try to unify the country around concrete,
practical action in order to reduce and end the bloodshed
across America that we are suffering in these mass murders, and
yet, we punted on it. We decided not to do anything on it, and
that is sad because it is not red states versus blue states.
Some of my colleagues pointed out that the homicide rate is
higher in red states. I take no joy in that. These are all
Americans. These are all our people who are dying in the
epidemic of gun violence sweeping across the country, and there
should be no red states or blue states, just the United States
when it comes to trying to preserve the public safety of our
people. And it is the same thing with democracy. Our commitment
to democracy, and voting rights, and representation should not
be determined by who we think people are going to vote for. I
am an American, and I want every American to be represented in
the Congress of the United States. I want every community of
taxpaying, draftable citizens, like the ones in Washington, DC,
to have representation, and I consider that a matter of basic
civic respect and democratic pride.
Now, this has been a degraded, tawdry discourse today with
obsessive questioning about public urination. I hope the public
doesn't see this hearing and regard all of it as an episode of
public urination in which the people of Washington are the ones
getting rained on. What are we really here to discuss? Well, it
is not defunding the police, which has nothing to do with it.
And, of course, Mr. Allen pointed out they were talking about
one-half of a one percent of the overall budget cut, but that
has nothing to do with it. This is not budgetary in any way.
We are not here to talk about carjacking, as much as we
have heard about carjacking, and we are not here to talk about
anecdotes. The anecdotes are indeed grim, lurid, shocking.
Here, I will give you a few more: ``Man Arrested After Pistol
Whipping, Carjacking;'' ``Man in Custody After Carjacking Woman
at Gunpoint;'' ``Police Arrest Two Juveniles on Suspicion of
Carjacking after Pursuit;'' ``Eighteen-Year-Old Arrested in
Carjacking Mother at Gunpoint in Front of a Child;''
``Searching for a Person of Interest in a Double Homicide;''
and a police department lookout tweet: ``Conducting a shooting
investigation. Please avoid the area. Have been placed on
lockdown due to a shooting in the area.''
Terrible, all of it. We should disenfranchise the people in
this community, right, the people of Bakersfield, California,
where I just took all these headlines from just by going
online, which is represented by Speaker Kevin McCarthy. What an
absurd way to think about legislating to read a bunch of
headlines and then think that that is some kind of principled
analysis of a problem.
What are we talking about? The Comprehensive Policing and
Justice Amendment Act of 2022. They want to build on their
success in overthrowing the Criminal Code revision by now
overturning this, and why? Well, Chairman Mendelson explained
it. It is because the union doesn't like the fact that they can
no longer have, as a subject matter of collective bargaining,
discipline of officers, which is controversial around the
country. So, my colleagues said they were surprised to see
Democrats standing up so strong for democratic self-government.
I am surprised to see so many Republicans standing up so strong
for whatever a union says, because this is purely a police
union agenda to say that they should be able to bargain their
own discipline.
And as Chairman Mendelson said, you have got people who are
assailants, robbers, rapists, who are able to get back on the
force because they have made that a matter of collective
bargaining. Now, you might agree with it. You might disagree
with it. This is the choice of the people of Washington, DC,
and this is going to come onto the Floor now, and they are
going to engage in all of this hysterical anti-crime rhetoric.
They are so tough on crime, well, except for January 6 and
violent insurrection, and those thousand cases that are
clogging up the courts of the District of Columbia. But they
are so upset about crime, they to overturn this police reform
legislation. Ridiculous. Everybody should vote against this. I
yield back.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman yields back, and let me
conclude by again reminding my friend, the Ranking Member, what
the purpose of this Committee hearing is, and that is to
discuss crime and to try to come up with the solution to the
escalating, out-of-control crime in this city. This Committee
has legislative jurisdiction over Washington, D.C. The fact
that the President of the United States and a majority of
Democrat senators voted with us on our resolution shows that
crime is a bipartisan issue.
The concern to reduce crime is of the utmost importance to
every American, and we take that role seriously on the
Committee. And I would like to remind the Ranking Member that,
when his party was in control of this Committee over the past
two years, to my knowledge, the last three hearings that this
Committee had on Washington, D.C. all pertained to the
Washington Commanders football team and had nothing to do with
the crime in Washington, D.C.
I want to quote The Washington Post editorial board from
the article that I submitted to the record. ``Washington could
become a more dangerous city if the D.C. Council votes Tuesday,
as currently planned, to override Mayor Muriel Bowser's veto of
a bill that decreases punishment for violent crimes, such as
carjacking, home invasion, burglaries, robberies, and even
homicides. The far-reaching rewrite of the Criminal Code will
further tie the hands of police and prosecutors while
overwhelming courts. With the Capital City awash in handguns,
the measure would also scale back penalties for convicted
felons illegally carrying firearms as well as for using them to
commit crimes.'' I also want to quote the D.C. police chief,
Robert Contee, and he said, ``We need to keep violent people in
jail. Right now, the average homicide suspect has been arrested
11 times prior to them committing a homicide. That is a
problem.''
Now, I want to thank our witnesses who are here today, and
we want to be very clear. We want to work with you to solve
this crime crisis we have in our Nation's Capital, but we can't
work with you if you don't work with us. Your position, it
seems like, has been hands off our city, and that is not going
to fly with the Republicans in the House Oversight Committee. I
have explained what our legislative jurisdiction is with
respect to the District of Columbia, and we take that very
seriously. Reducing crime is a centerpiece of our legislative
platform in this new Majority.
So, I will close by, again, making the point that we want
to work with you, and you are going to have to work with us, or
we are going to continue to do and pass legislation like the
bill that Representative Clyde passed and was signed into law
by President Biden--the only law that President Biden has
signed into law this whole Congress, which, again, shows the
sense of urgency among both parties to do something about the
escalating, out-of-control crime in Washington, D.C.
Now, with that and without objection, all Members will have
five legislative days within which to submit materials and to
submit additional written questions for the witnesses, which
will be forwarded to the witnesses for their response.
Chairman Comer. If there is no further business, the
Committee stands in recess for five minutes, and then we will
start back with our business meeting.
The Committee stands in recess.
[Whereupon, at 1:58 p.m., the Committee recessed, to
reconvene at 2:13 p.m. the same day.]
