- THE POWER STRUGGLE: EXAMINING THE RELIABILITY AND SECURITY OF AMERICA'S ELECTRICAL GRID

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE POWER STRUGGLE:
EXAMINING THE RELIABILITY
AND SECURITY OF AMERICA'S
ELECTRICAL GRID

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC GROWTH, ENERGY POLICY, AND REGULATORY AFFAIRS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

U.S.HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 12, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-93

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov
_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-180 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Michael Cloud, Texas                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Ro Khanna, California
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Katie Porter, California
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Cori Bush, Missouri
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Shontel Brown, Ohio
Byron Donalds, Florida               Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Robert Garcia, California
William Timmons, South Carolina      Maxwell Frost, Florida
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Greg Casar, Texas
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Dan Goldman, New York
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
Nick Langworthy, New York            Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Eric Burlison, Missouri
Mike Waltz, Florida

------

Mark Marin, Staff Director
Jessica Donlon, Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel
Jeanne Kuehl, Senior Professional Staff
Kim Waskowsky, Professional Staff Member
Mallory Cogar, Deputy Director of Operations and Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5074

Julie Tagen, Minority Staff Director
Contact Number: 202-225-5051
------

Subcommittee On Economic Growth, Energy Policy, And Regulatory Affairs

Pat Fallon, Texas, Chairman
Byron Donalds, Florida               Cori Bush, Missouri, Ranking
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania                Minority Member
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Shontel Brown, Ohio
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida               Columbia
Nick Langworthy, New York            Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Mike Waltz, Florida                  Ro Khanna, California
Vacancy

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on March 12, 2024...................................     1

Witnesses

----------
James P. Danly, Partner, Energy Regulation, Skadden, Arps, Slate,
Meagher & Flom LLP and Affiliates
Oral Statement...................................................     5
Travis Fisher, Director of Energy and Environmental Policy
Studies, Cato Institute
Oral Statement...................................................     6
Jonathon Monken (Minority Witness), Principal, Converge
Strategies
Oral Statement...................................................     8

Opening statements and the prepared statements for the witnesses
are available in the U.S. House of Representatives Repository
at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

* Article, Wall Street Journal, ``EPA and Its Biden
Administration Critics''; submitted by Chairman Comer.

* Article, Houston Chronicle, ``TX had most power outages in
five years''; submitted by Rep. Casar.

* Article, New York Times, ``Plug In Renewables''; submitted by
Rep. Donalds.

* Letter, December 20, 2023, to Administrator Regan from FERC;
submitted by Rep. Fallon.

* Letter, August 8, 2023, to Administrator Regan from FERC;
submitted by Rep. Fallon.

* Letter, November 8, 2023, to Barrasso and Capito from FERC;
submitted by Rep. Fallon.

* Report, FERC, ``Winter-Storm Elliot''; submitted by Rep.
Langworthy.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Danly; submitted by Chairman
Comer.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Danly; submitted by Rep.
Fallon.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Danly; submitted by Rep.
Perry.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Danly; submitted by Rep.
Langworthy.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Danly; submitted by Rep.
Waltz.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Fisher; submitted by
Chairman Comer.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Fisher; submitted by Rep.
Fallon.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Fisher; submitted by Rep.
Perry.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Fisher; submitted by Rep.
Waltz.

The documents listed above are available at: docs.house.gov.

THE POWER STRUGGLE:
EXAMINING THE RELIABILITY
AND SECURITY OF AMERICA'S
ELECTRICAL GRID

----------

Tuesday, March 12, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Oversight and Accountability

Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Energy
Policy, and Regulatory Affairs

Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Pat Fallon
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Fallon, Donalds, Bush, Brown,
Stansbury, and Norton.
Also present: Representative Casar.
Mr. Fallon. This hearing of the Subcommittee of Economic
Growth, Energy Policy, and Regulatory Affairs will come to
order. I want to welcome everyone for coming today and thank
you for your time. Without objection, the Chair may declare a
recess at any time. I recognize myself for the purpose of
making an opening statement.
Today's hearing focuses on an issue that is critical, of
course, to all Americans, and that is the reliability and
security of our Nation's power grid. When we flip on the
switch, plug in your phone charger, or put groceries in the
fridge, you expect electricity will be flowing. In fact, we
take it for granted.
When I was in the military, I remember horror stories of
fellow servicemembers that were stationed overseas, in other
countries, and that was not always the case. In fact, it was
sometimes regular that they could expect a power outage for up
to 3, 4 hours daily. And as Americans, we know when it happens
for an hour once or twice a year we get absolutely furious, and
our heads want to explode.
An elaborate network of power plans, transmission lines,
and distribution nodes work every day to delivery electricity
where and when it is needed. However, as demand grows so do the
risks for that reliability to fail. In 2023, the North American
Electric Reliability Corporation, or NERC, which serves as the
watchdog for grid reliability, released its long-term
reliability assessment, and that assessment warned regulators
and utilities that more reliable capacity was needed to
mitigate the challenges presented by growing electricity
demand. That is why it is urgently needed, and it is urgently
important for Congress to engage in serious discussions to
identify the risks to this reliability and safeguard our grid
against threats.
Many of these threats do not come from within the network.
So, where do they come from? Weather, of course, poses a
significant risk to the grid. We have also seen foreign
adversaries, or entities sponsored by them, use cyberattacks to
cripple the grid, and that is something they can do from afar,
half a world away.
But many of these risks are caused by the Federal
Government. New regulations proposed under this Administration
will strain the system and the grid, and the grid is really
just not prepared to handle it. Regulations including attempts
to force car companies to only--and that is the key word here--
only manufacture electric vehicle create a significant new
demand on the grid, one that many experts say is completely
unsustainable. Regulations attempting to rid all fossil fuel
power plants, despite the necessity in providing consistent
power generation; regulations forcing more electric appliances
onto the market despite the fact that, under the new standards,
many of them will not work; not to mention this
Administration's radical push for renewables while ignoring the
need for power generation around the clock, not just when the
sun is shining and, of course, the wind is blowing.
What is the cumulative impact of all these regulations?
Well, and you have to ask this question too--is our existing
grid system even remotely prepared to deliver the volume of
electricity these rush-to-green policies require? What do we
need to do to ensure the American people have the reliable and
affordable power that they need, and quite frankly, that they
have become accustomed to? That is what we are here to find
out.
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, or FERC, oversees
our Nation's bulk power system, including generation
transmission and distribution of power needed to maintain grid
reliability. We offered FERC the opportunity to appear at
today's hearing. Unfortunately, FERC declined to participate.
Luckily, we have the next best thing, which is former
Commissioner James Danly, who can speak to the inner workings
of FERC and how they should respond to these challenges. We
also are going to hear today from Mr. Travis Fisher, and expert
with significant experience at FERC and in the private sector.
I hope our conversations here today will be insightful and
help us better look into how we can prepare for the challenges
ahead and what Congress should consider when debating issues
impacting the security of our power grid.
I want to thank all the witnesses for coming today, and I
yield to Ranking Member Bush for her opening statement.
Ms. Bush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. St. Louis and I are here
today to address the safety, security, and sustainability of
the Nation's electrical grid. Decades of pollution and overuse
and overreliance on fossil fuels have disproportionately harmed
Black and Brown communities in St. Louis and throughout the
world.
Black children in St. Louis are ten times more likely to
visit the emergency room for asthma than White children. Air
pollution billowing from coal plants makes it harder to
breathe, especially for Black communities already burdened with
decades of systemic and structural racism and environmental
inequities. Too many children in my community suffer from
asthma. Too many parents, siblings, and friends die from
preventable cancers.
The time for change is now. This is quite literally a
matter of life and death. Soot pollution from coal-burning
power plants is responsible for 3,800 premature deaths in this
country every year, according to a new Sierra Club report. Just
17 coal plants are responsible for over half of those deaths,
and Missouri is home to 2 of those 17. According to the report,
94 Missourians die prematurely every year due to burning coal.
A separate report last year ranked St. Louis one of the ten
worst places in the U.S. for air pollution.
Throughout my time in Congress, I have proudly worked
toward climate-friendly policies. I continue to fight for a
Green New Deal, including my own Green New Deal for Cities bill
which would provide funding directly to city, state, local,
tribal, and territorial governments to respond to the climate
crisis and create hundreds of thousands of green jobs in the
process.
One other fundamental step to mitigating the climate crisis
is building a clean and renewable power grid. In the last
Congress, Democrats made significant progress toward
environmental justice and a sustainable power grid, including
passing the Inflation Reduction Act. The IRA is the largest
investment in green energy in American history, yet, we still
have much more work to do. Congress must support Federal
regulators who step up and do their part, expand clean,
affordable, and safe energy transmission, including FERC. The
people of St. Louis sent me here to make sure they had clean
and affordable energy that was not making them sick. I want to
work with regulators to make that a reality.
Republicans might sit here and tell you that renewable
energy is a threat to our power grid, that it jeopardizes its
security. This assertion is simply untrue. You know what
threatens the grid depending on fossil fuel? Climate change
exacerbated extreme weather events. In December 2022, Winter
Storm Elliot struck St. Louis, bringing bitter cold and snow
that strained the power grid. While St. Louis' fossil fuel-
based infrastructure froze over and failed, its wind power
facilities made up the shortfall. Far too many of my
constituents suffered in the bitter cold. Coal and natural gas
let them down. But wind power exceeded expectations.
We also cannot ignore the actions of domestic extremists,
including white nationalists and white supremacists who have
violently attacked electrical grids to stoke chaos and fear.
In 2022 alone, DOE reported 163 electrical emergency
incidents and disturbances, including physical attacks, a 71
percent increase from 2021. In December 2022, a hate group
attacked the power grid in North Carolina, leaving 45,000
people without electricity, shutting down a school for 5 days,
and leading to one person's death.
In February 2023, the Federal Bureau of Investigation filed
charges against two domestic extremists who conspired to
destroy power stations around Baltimore. Then, again, in 2023,
in April, Federal courts sentenced two more white supremacists
for their scheme to destroy critical infrastructure to spark
civil unrest.
These incidents can no longer be considered isolated, you
know, outliers. Last year, Ranking Member Garcia, Ranking
Member Raskin, and I sent a letter to the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission and the Department of Homeland Security
on extremism and energy terrorism. I am pleased that FERC is
taking these threats seriously. Our government must ensure
these attacks do not happen again.
The people of St. Louis should be able to trust that the
Federal Government takes every action to secure the power
infrastructures that connect their homes, their schools, their
offices, and their hospitals. Access to these basic utilities
is a human right.
That is why I have introduced the Recognizing Access to
Utilities as a Human Right resolution. My bill would recognize
access to water, sanitation, electricity, heating, cooling,
public transit, and broadband communications as basic human
rights, and public services that must be accessible, safe,
acceptable, sufficient, affordable, justly resourced and
sustainable, climate-resilient, and reliable for every single
person.
People should not have to risk their health, safety, and
well-being in order to keep the lights on. My constituents need
to know that when they flip a switch the lights and the heat
will go on, and it will not cost them a fortune. We need to get
renewable energy onto the grid to reduce emissions. We need a
power grid that can endure the extremes of the climate crisis.
Thank you.
Mr. Fallon. I ask unanimous consent for Representative
Casar from Texas to be waited onto the Subcommittee for today's
hearing for the purposes of asking questions. Without
objection, so ordered.
I am pleased to welcome our witnesses for today's hearing,
Mr. James Danly, Mr. Travis Fisher, and Mr. Jonathan Monken.
James Danly is currently a Partner for Energy Regulation at
Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP and Affiliates.
Previously he served as the General Counsel Commissioner and
Chairman at FERC. Travis Fisher is the Director of Energy and
Environmental Policy Studies at the Cato Institute, and
Jonathan Monken is Principal at Converge Strategies. We look
forward to hearing your testimony and hearing from you all on
today's important topic.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 9(g), the witnesses will please
stand and raise their right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
[Chorus of ayes.]
Mr. Fallon. Thank you. Let the record show that the
witnesses answered in the affirmative. Please take your seats.
We appreciate you all being here, as I just mentioned, for
your testimony. Let me remind the witnesses that we have read
your written statements, and they will appear in full in the
hearing record. Please limit your oral statements to 5 minutes.
As a reminder, please press the button in front of you, the
little red one, so we can hear you. When you begin to speak
there will be a light. It will be green for 4 minutes and then
1 minute yellow, and then when it is red, if you are in the
middle of a statement, if you could just kind of wrap it up,
that would be great. The runway is real short at that point.
I now recognize Mr. Danly for his opening statement. Thank
you, sir.

STATEMENT OF JAMES P. DANLY

PARTNER, ENERGY REGULATION

SKADDEN, ARPS, SLATE

MEAGHER & FLOM LLP AND AFFILIATES

Mr. Danly. Chairman Fallon, Ranking Member Bush, and
Members of the Subcommittee, it is an honor to be here today to
talk about an important topic that really is of immediate
interest to every American, and I appreciate the chance to
share some of experiences from having been General Counsel and
Chairman at FERC.
It is impossible, as has already been stated, to exaggerate
or overstate the importance of a stable bulk power system.
Virtually every aspect of American life depends upon having
affordable and continuous electricity. And this need that the
United States has for its welfare, dependent upon continuous
and stable electricity at reasonable prices, is at a time when
load requirements are growing. The demand is going up, and it
is going up in accelerating pace.
So, the problem is that we are also, at the same time,
experiencing a greater number of threats to the bulk power
system. Among them are the physical and cybersecurity threats.
There is also another threat to it, which is that of resource
adequacy. And so, I just want to spend 2 seconds before we get
to questions, as I did in my written testimony, drawing a bit
of a distinction between two different concepts: resource
adequacy and reliability.
Reliability is that aspect of the bulk electric system that
allows it to function and recover from predictable
interruptions and problems quickly and without interruption of
service. This is primarily driven by the NERC reliability
standards, the standards that FERC oversees the promulgation of
by NERC, and they are technical requirements. They are things
like vegetation management protocols and proper operation of
balancing authorities.
There are also, for cyber purposes, the CIP standards that
require certain types of minimal activities to be taken to
ensure that critical assets are protected from cyber threats.
Resource adequacy is something quite different. That is
something that basically sounds in economics and regulation.
Resource adequacy is the ability of the bulk power system to
ensure that it can meet demand at all times, and you can have a
perfectly reliable system--that is that if there were power to
get to a place that needs it, it could get there, but if you do
not have a sufficient quantity of power then you may have a
reliable system, but you do not have a resource-adequate
system.
Resource adequacy comes down to a matter of either planning
for the future properly and having accurate expectations for
what the demand is going to be down the road, and
administratively determining it and then building it. This
usually happens in vertically integrated utilities or states
that have vertically integrated utilities through the
Integrated Resource Plan, or in the case of the FERC
jurisdictional markets, the ISOs and RTOs, by having market
rules that properly incentivize the development of needed new
generation.
One of the problems that the markets have had over the
last, I do not know, let us say 10, 15 years, is that they have
not always properly valued the new capacity that is required.
And every market is different. The tariffs are different region
to region. But there have been problems in properly
incentivizing the arrival of new generation to meet load
growth.
This problem becomes all the more difficult when the
markets have to operate and create those price signals upon
which we rely to ensure resource adequacy when they are
operating in the context of widespread and lucrative subsidies,
which have the inevitable effect of warping price signals, and
that means that you either over-or under-value the various
types of resources that will ultimately come to the
marketplace. And when resources are undervalued, you do not
have enough of them, or you do not have enough of the right
type of them.
So, I just want to make that distinction so that it can
inform the discussion going forward. The word ``reliability''
does not apply to both resource adequacy and the technical
requirements that come from NERC standards. Reliability has a
narrow meaning, and resource adequacy has a different meaning,
but the two of them are obviously interrelated concepts, and
both are worthy of discussion today.
With that I look forward to your questions, and thank you
again for having me up here.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, sir. I now recognize Mr. Fisher for
his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MR. FISHER

DIRECTOR OF ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES

CATO INSTITUTE

Mr. Fisher. Good morning, Chairman Fallon, Ranking Member
Bush, and Members of the Subcommittee. I am Travis Fisher. As
the Chair said, I am the Director of Energy and Environmental
Policy Studies at the Cato Institute, a nonpartisan public
policy research organization in Washington, DC. It is an honor
to be invited to speak with you today about the reliability and
security of America's power grid.
At the turn of the millennium, the National Academies of
Engineering ranked the electric grid the greatest engineering
achievement of the 20th century. The power grid should be an
asset to American prosperity, but policymakers, through a
multitude of subsidies, regulations, and mandates, have wounded
it, to the point that it is now becoming a dangerous liability.
The stakes are high. A weakened power grid puts lives at
risk. Reminders of this fact include the tragic loss of lives
during Winter Storm Uri and the growing frequency of grid
reliability events across the country. During extreme weather,
Americans need reliable electricity to survive. Day-to-day we
need reliable and affordable electricity to thrive and grow the
economy.
As I see it, there are two distinct paths forward regarding
electricity policy. The first, which I support, is to embrace
American values and foster an electric industry that harnesses
free market competition to best serve the interests of
consumers. This path recognizes the fact that most Americans
are simply unwilling to sacrifice their well-being on behalf of
a forced energy transition.
The second path, which I fear is what we are on presently,
is to force a transition to politically favored technologies
that consumers do not want. Taking the second path is unwise. I
want to highlight three major Federal policies that lie along
this path and the harmful impacts they will have on the
reliability and affordability of electricity in the United
States.
First is the Inflation Reduction Act, or IRA. The
production tax credits in the IRA alone could cost American
taxpayers $3 trillion by the year 2050. These tax credits
reward electricity production from unreliable sources and
distort the market signals that keep reliable power plants
running. The result will be a weaker grid over time, not to
mention a deepening fiscal crisis in the country.
Second is the tailpipe emissions rule from the
Environmental Protection Agency, or EPA. This proposal seeks to
ensure that by 2032, two-thirds of new vehicles sold will be
electric. Beyond taking away basic freedoms like the freedom to
choose what kind of car to buy, this rule will place immense
stress on the power grid by adding substantially to the overall
electricity demand, which is already growing because we find
new ways to use electricity all the time.
Third is the power plant rule from the EPA. The proposed
rule mandates two technologies that are not adequately
demonstrated--carbon capture and green hydrogen. The EPA heard
from White House reviewers that the technologies are not ready
for prime time, but the EPA seems to be establishing a new
standard for its mandates. It claims carbon capture and green
hydrogen are adequately demonstrated because they are
adequately subsidized by the IRA.
Take these two rules together and it means significantly
more demand on the grid and less supply. The result is
increased prices and, unfortunately, a growing number of energy
shortfalls. What that means for electricity customers is higher
power bills and increased risk of blackouts. California has
become the poster child in the United States for an aggressive
energy transition. It is also the only state that mandates
electric vehicles while asking people not to plug them in at
certain times of day because the grid cannot handle it. This is
not the American way. We should be able to buy the vehicles we
want, fuel them when we want, and not be stuck with a $3
trillion tab for an unreliable grid.
Economist Frederic Bastiat was correct when he wrote, and I
am quoting, ``Treat all economic questions from the viewpoint
of the consumer, for the interests of the consumer are the
interests of the human race,'' end quote. The American people
want reliable electricity at low costs, and policymakers should
listen.
In living rooms across the country, having low-cost
electricity can make the difference between light and darkness.
During emergencies, having reliable electricity can make the
difference between life and death.
It is not too late to stop the coming energy crisis because
it is a crisis caused by unwise policies, and we can reform
them. The power grid can be an asset to the American economy if
we let it. I urge you to choose the path that will lead to a
bright future for America. Thank you.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, sir. I now recognize Mr. Monken for
his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JONATHON MONKEN

PRINCIPAL

COVERAGE STRATEGIES

Mr. Monken. Good morning, Chairman Fallon, Ranking Member
Bush, and distinguished Members of the Committee. Thank you for
the opportunity to speak with you today on the vital subject of
our Nation's electricity grid.
My name is Jonathon Monken, and I am a Principal at
Converge Strategies, where I advise clients at the Federal and
state government level as well as the private sector, on the
development and implementation of strategies designed to
improve the energy resilience of critical infrastructure
systems, with an emphasis on the U.S. Department of Defense.
Often referred to as the world's largest machine, the North
American grid is a vast network of assets designed to deliver
electricity to all of its customers in a safe, efficient, and
reliable manner. Today's hearing is timely for two reasons: the
grid is undergoing an unprecedented transition related to the
ways we generate and use electricity, and the reliable delivery
of service to customers is under threat by natural and manmade
risks that demand our collective attention.
The issue of grid resilience must be understood as an issue
of national security. Just as we would not leave the defense of
our country to chance, the energy system that underpins our
collective economic and reliability needs must be supported
through targeted planning, investment, and policy. In my
testimony I will provide context to both issues and highlight
the importance of grid planning and oversight to address the
risks that they represent.
The grid transition is driven by two primary factors
including unprecedented increases in customer demand, known as
``load growth,'' and the transition to Carbon Free Energy
sources of electricity generation. The Federal Government plays
an essential role in developing policy, supporting technical
standards, and collaborating with the private sector to ensure
the grid is prepared to meet the energy needs of all citizens.
Over the past year, grid planners nearly doubled their 5-
year load growth forecasts, with the nationwide demand for
electricity expected to rise sharply from 2.6 percent to 4.7
percent over the next 5 years, as outlined in 2023 FERC
filings. This increased consumption is a reflection of more
than $630 billion in private sector investment in new
manufacturing, industrial, and data center facilities.
Meeting this demand is essential to domestic economic
growth, and requires deliberate action to deploy and sustain
energy resources. Across all grid regions of the U.S., 2
terawatts of new generation, more than 94 percent of which are
renewables and battery storage, are queued up to meet this
demand. Large-scale wind and solar power plants are competitive
with existing conventional generation, and offer cheaper power
than fossil fuel facilities. A recent analysis found that 99
percent of U.S. coal plants are now more expensive to run than
new solar, wind, and battery storage assets.
The rapid deployment of new resources must be matched with
a corresponding investment in electric transmission
infrastructure to ensure these generation assets are connected
to the growing demand in all regions of the country. The U.S.
Department of Energy estimates that the transmission system
will need to expand by up to 60 percent by 2030, to maintain
reliable electric service, and that transmission investment may
need to triple by 2050.
This transition is occurring at a time when the grid is
under threat from climate-driven changes in severe weather
patterns, as well as targeted attacks on grid infrastructure
from homegrown violent extremists conducting physical attacks
and foreign adversaries utilizing cyber capabilities. There
were 1,665 physical and cybersecurity incidents involving the
U.S. and Canadian power grids in 2022 alone, including 60
incidents that led to outages, representing a 71 percent
increase over 2021.
FBI Director Christopher Wray recently testified to
Congress that, ``China's hackers are positioning on American
infrastructure in preparation to wreak havoc and cause real-
world harm to American citizens and communities if and when
China decides the time is right to strike.'' Exacerbating these
security risks is the trend of increasingly frequent and severe
weather events impacting the grid across the country.
These risks highlight the importance of actively managing
and assessing the balance and diversity of resources supplying
the grid to avoid worst-case outcomes during adverse operating
conditions. Recent Winter Storms Uri and Elliott highlighted
the risks associated with the heavy dependence of a grid
service territory on generators of a single fuel type within a
limited geography. While all generators of all types
experienced outages due to the cold weather and operating
conditions, the outages were far more pronounced with natural
gas generators. In the case of Winter Storm Uri, ``From
February 8 through February 20, 2021, of the 1,293 unplanned
generating unit outages, derates, and failures to start that
were due to fuel issues, 1,121, or 87 percent, were due to
natural gas supply issues.'' This resulted in more than 4.5
million people losing power for as long as 4 days.
Winter Storm Elliott saw a similar outcome, where 63
percent of all generation outages, by megawatt, were from
natural gas-fired plants. More comprehensive evaluations of
fuel security are needed to identify the optimal mixture of
generation types to reduce the risk of disruptions caused by
fuel availability. This should include transmission planning to
prioritize connecting regions with a greater diversity of
resources to those regions with a high dependency on single
fuels that could suffer from these common-mode failures.
Expanded interregional transmission would help alleviate
reliability issues associated with, for example, the forced
outage rates of generation that far exceeded grid operator
planning criteria during these recent cold weather events.
Thank you again for the opportunity to discuss this
important matter with the Subcommittee, I look forward to your
questions.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, gentlemen. I appreciate it. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Danly, you spent numerous years at FERC, including as
General Counsel, Commissioner, and as Chairman. Last year, the
EPA proposed a rule commonly referred to as the Clean Power Act
2.0, which targets emissions from fossil fuel-fired power
plants. On August 8th of last year, you sent a letter to the
EPA Administrator Regan stating, and I quote, ``While the
proposed rule could, by itself, significantly impair
reliability, the Commission must also consider the proposed
rule amidst the numerous other public policies that
increasingly jeopardize the reliable operation of the bulk
electric system.''
Just how severely could the Clean Power Act 2.0 rule, in
your opinion, impair grid reliability simply on its own?
Mr. Danly. As the process was going forward my concern was
that the EPA had not taken into consideration what the
reliability consequences of the rule were going to be, and on
top of that, and more specifically, there was no inquiry done
at the time, and this was educed on the record during a hearing
in front of the Commission during our Reliability Tech
Conference. No specific inquiry was made into the effect on the
markets.
One of the biggest problems with these sorts of external
effects on the power generation system is that the market
mechanisms in which generators have to offer in, and it is on
the basis of those offers that are then accepted through this
bid stack that clears that the generators ultimately are going
to be called upon to deliver power.
When you have a very expensive regulatory system that is
imposed that changes all of the pricing that the generators are
going to be subject to or going to require in order to remain
solvent. And if you do not have a clear view of what is going
to happen in the markets, it is going to be very difficult to
be certain that you are not going to suffer catastrophic
consequence for resource adequacy down the road.
So, by itself, I think that the Clean Power Plan could
potentially create extraordinarily expensive prices in the
markets, and what I am really concerned about is not that,
because that is a public policy decision. What I am concerned
about is that it seems to be undertaken without full knowledge
of the consequence.
Mr. Fallon. How much more could the other public policies
to which you referred to, like the EPA's EV mandate and large
government-funded subsidies for renewables, how could that
impact the cost and reliability?
Mr. Danly. So, there are a couple of ways. One is the more
demand you have, the higher the price goes. That is Econ 101.
There is another problem, which is that in order to get hold of
the power that would come from the large deployment of
renewables that a lot of public policymakers want and expect to
have happen, there needs to be a huge buildout of transmission.
I am skeptical that that buildout of transmission is even
feasible given the cost. It is an extremely capital-intensive
proposition to build out that amount of transmission.
And given the regulatory risk that attends any large
infrastructure project in the United States, it is very hard to
site and construct long linear infrastructure projects. The
likelihood of being defeated on appeal from NEPA if this were
ever a matter of siting and permitting by FERC would be very
high.
And there is a reason why many of the transmission projects
that have been proposed and talked about before have failed. It
is either because they are unpopular and the citizens of the
jurisdictions in which they are proposed simply do not want
them, or we have problems with cost allocation in which they
may be meritorious from an engineering standpoint, but they do
not actually reduce the cost to the consumers.
So, the more of these policies that are implemented, the
more expensive the transmissions system is going to be, and
that is going to result ultimately in a higher all-in build to
end rate payers.
Mr. Fallon. Let me ask you this, too. Your August letter
stated that the EPA's assertions, that the EPA did not, in
fact, consult the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission in its
analysis of the proposed rules', quote/unquote, ``potential
reliability effects.''
Mr. Danly. I am sorry. I did not understand the question. I
did write that in the letter, yes.
Mr. Fallon. So, can you clear this up? What are the
potential implications of the EPA's failure to properly solicit
the Commission's counsel, especially on a rule which targets 60
percent of our Nation's power generation?
Mr. Danly. Well, I would have thought that it was fairly
clear. If you engage in a large rulemaking that has profound
effect on an entire segment of the economy without a clear
understanding of what the reliability consequences are, not
only do you fail to undertake the duties that are assigned to
you, but you could potentially be engaging in policy that has
unforeseen consequences that could be quite deleterious.
These are the sorts of things where you probably ought to
satisfy yourself that the consequences are known before you
embark upon them fully.
Mr. Fallon. OK. Thank you. And without objection I would
like to request unanimous consent to enter into the record Mr.
Danly's letters from August 8, 2023, November 8, 2023, and
December 20, 2023, which outlines his concerns with this issue.
Without objection, so ordered.
I now yield to Ranking Member Bush for her 5 minutes of
questions.
Ms. Bush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. St. Louis and I are here
today for this convening on threats to our Nation's power grid
and to elaborate on the real, actual attacks it faces by white
nationalists across our country. For years, law enforcement and
researchers have been monitoring violent white supremacist
groups and their targeting of our country's power grid. Many in
these groups call themselves accelerationists. They have put
out how-to manuals to make it easier to attack critical
infrastructure, like the electric grid, and are convinced that
the best way to achieve their goal of a white supremacist
future is to cause a societal collapse by plunging it into
darkness.
Mr. Monken, I briefly spoke during my opening remarks, but
are domestic terrorist groups a current threat to the United
States energy infrastructure?
Mr. Monken. Yes, they absolutely are.
Ms. Bush. Thank you. Unfortunately, those with hate in
their hearts do not want to see all communities of people
succeed, especially our Black and Brown communities. Over the
last 2 years, the FBI arrested three different groups of white
supremacists for attacking, or plotting to attack, our power
grid.
Mr. Monken, what steps have the Federal Government and
Federal energy regulators taken to address the risk of physical
attacks on the electric grid?
Mr. Monken. Currently, I believe they are insufficient,
frankly. There are some existing standards known as CIPs, or
Critical Infrastructure Protections, specifically designated
CIP 14 for physical security of critical installations or
critical substations within the bulk electric system. But right
now, it is still insufficient for what we need.
Ms. Bush. Thank you. And then, Mr. Monken, what can
Congress do better to ensure that the national electric grid
system is safe from physical attack? What can we do?
Mr. Monken. Having a clear understanding of what the most
effective mitigation strategies really are, from a physical
security standpoint, I think is hugely important. And then
placing a significant priority on how those projects are
ultimately introduced, reviewed for their just and reasonable
costs, and then ultimately approved to make sure that those
facilities are secure enough that we have confidence that they
will deliver that reliable power that the people need.
Ms. Bush. OK. Thank you. The people of St. Louis currently
face high utility bills, extreme weather, and air that is
unhealthy to breathe, and on top of all of that, white
supremacists want to sabotage the power grid and foment chaos
and fear in our communities. We must invest in and foster the
growth of green energy and the infrastructure needed to deliver
power to the people of St. Louis. I look forward to working
with FERC to make this happen as quickly as possible. My
constituents do not have time to wait.
Now on the issue of our clean energy transition, according
to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's chief
scientist, quote, ``Not only was 2023 the warmest year in
NOAA's 173-year climate record, it was the warmest by far,''
end quote. That is scary, and it is unacceptable. It is
unacceptable for our children and for our grandchildren who
will inherit this mess if we do not address the horrors of
climate change.
So, Mr. Monken, very briefly, how does climate change
affect the communities' need and demand for energy?
Mr. Monken. Well, in a very significant way, recognizing
the fact that not only are these climate-driven events a
significant exacerbator of existing challenges that we have for
grid reliability, meaning they are more likely to cause the
types of outages at both the scale and the duration that are
going to have those very human consequences, they also
disproportionately affect communities of low economic status,
recognizing they disproportionately affect these minority
communities that do not have the financial wherewithal or the
ability to avert the worst case impacts of those particular
disasters.
So, it is something that we really need to address through
a delivered action toward energy equity, recognizing that the
ability to pay is not the prerequisite for the ability to
receive the reliable power that you need.
Ms. Bush. That is a quote. In my opening statement, I spoke
of my constituents in marginalized communities who bear the
brunt of the high cost of burning fossil fuels for power
generation. These costs can be both physical and monetary. Mr.
Monken, can you briefly explain how investing in clean power
grid enables economic growth?
Mr. Monken. Absolutely. The aggregated economic impacts of
the clean energy transition are dramatic and significant, and
when we look at where jobs can be really built and sustained in
support of the green energy transition, it is a much more
equitable distribution of where those jobs can really be built,
and then again, sustained as we get through the transition
itself.
So, recognizing that this is a necessary driver, we should
not be in the back seat for the clean energy transition and let
even global adversaries take a pole position on how this
transition occurs. We really need to enforce our right to be
able to be the first movers in this space and harness the full
economic value of it.
Ms. Bush. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Fallon. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Donalds from
Florida for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Donalds. Thank you, Chairman. Let us talk blackouts for
a moment. Every minute, every blackout, money is lost to the
American national economy. National security is also put at
risk. According to the Uptime Institute, in 2022, their outage
analysis, more than 60 percent of significant power outages
result in at least $10,000 worth of economic loss.
Mr. Fisher, do you agree with this statistic?
Mr. Fisher. I do agree with it, and, in fact, I am
concerned that that is going to keep going.
Mr. Donalds. OK. Thank you. A couple of examples. You have
the East Coast blackout in 2003. The power outage blacked out
eight states, 50 million people were blacked out for 2 days,
approximately $10 billion were lost in economic output, $1
billion worth of losses in New York City alone. I remember that
one because my mom told me she had to walk back across the
Brooklyn Bridge from Manhattan because everything was shut
down.
Example No. 2, Winter Storm Uri in Texas in 2021. Extremely
low temperatures caused blackouts resulting in deaths of 200-
plus people, cost tens of billions of dollars in economic
damage.
Mr. Danly, on a day-to-day basis, what is the No. 1 cause
of power outages in the United States?
Mr. Danly. I am not sure what the No. 1 cause is. They
range from unexpected outages of transmission lines to
maintenance issues with the generators.
The thing is when you talk about outages there are two
different types. There is the outage for the bulk power system,
which is the wholesale power system that FERC regulates, and
then there are the much, much, much more common outages, which
are at the distribution level. That can be caused by somebody
running a car into a pole.
Ninety-nine percent, I would guess, of the outages that
people experience are distribution-level outages and do not
ever implicate the fundamental stability of the bulk electric
system. Those are inconvenient, and they do cause real economic
harm, but they can be repaired with relatively minor fixes. I
mean, we are speaking in relative terms here.
It is when the bulk electric system itself has a blackout
that you have real problems because bringing the system back
online or bring up generation to meet demand can be very
challenging. So, there has to be a distinction made between
distribution-level events, 99 percent of the problems we have,
and the more profound and serious cases for the bulk electric
system.
Mr. Donalds. All right. So, let us dig into bulk electric
system outages. Currently, roughly 60 to 75 percent of the grid
is what we would call fossil fuels and/or energies like nuclear
that are consistent in output. Roughly 20, 21 percent is now
solar panels and wind turbines. What is the issue with solar
panels and wind turbines in terms of being a part of the
overall bulk power portion of the electric grid?
Mr. Danly. So, I do not actually know if the statistics you
quoted there are for name plate capacity capacity or actually
delivered energy. I am not sure which of the two it is. So, I
think it is a little high if you are talking about actual
delivered energy.
But the dispatchable resources you are talking about--
thermal resources like coal and gas, hydro power, and nuclear--
are capable of being, unless there is some unexpected
maintenance problem or the like, are capable of being
scheduled, and you can be certain that they are going to be
there when required. You choose them based upon what the least
cost unit is to dispatch, but the one thing you know is that if
prices rise you will still have those to rely upon.
Wind and solar, intermittent resources, unless they have
some kind of a battery backup do not have the ability to
deliver power at any time. It is only when the resource is
available--the sun is shining, or the wind is blowing--they are
intermittent.
They also have another problem which is that they are not
as easily able to offer the ancillary services to the
transmission system that the transmission system relies upon. I
am talking about things like voltage support. These are
ancillary services that are absolutely required by the
transmission system, and inverter-based resources historically
have not done that. They are working on what they call grid-
forming inverters, but they are not widespread.
Mr. Donalds. I want to just cleanup.
Mr. Danly. Sure.
Mr. Donalds. So, in other words, when you are dealing with
natural gas, nuclear, hydro power, thermal, et cetera, those
are consistent deliveries to the overall grid. There is never
really any downtime in those. But wind and solar have
downtimes, like if the wind is not blowing or the sun is not
shining. Correct?
Mr. Danly. For the most part you are able to predict the
downtime of the thermal and dispatchable resources, yes.
Mr. Donalds. OK. Secondary question, and actually, Mr.
Chairman, for the record, I want to submit an article, ``The
U.S. has billions of wind and solar projects, good luck
plugging them in,'' written by the New York Times, February 23,
2023.
Mr. Fallon. Without objection, so moved.
Mr. Donalds. All right. So, Mr. Danly, a quick followup on
all of this. With all of these solar and wind projects that are
trying to come online, if they are not consistent flows like,
say, nuclear, is battery technology sufficient to capture the
generation of these energies so that they can be applied to the
grid?
Mr. Danly. Not in any way that would be affordable or
widespread, no. Not right now, and probably not for the
foreseeable future.
Mr. Donalds. Thank you. I yield.
Mr. Fallon. The Chair now recognizes Ms. Brown from Ohio.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is one topic where
we can all agree, our power grids are critical to the Nation.
Unfortunately, the grid is under threat from multiple
directions. Climate change is straining our aging grid and
stressing the system during increasing heat, cold, and other
extreme weather systems. In the worst-case scenario, grid
failures can mean no air conditioning during a heat wave, no
lights during a late-night thunderstorm, or a skyrocketing heat
bill in the winter.
As a Member of the Select Committee on Strategic
Competition with the Chinese Communist Party, I have also heard
firsthand about the CCP's hacks of our electric grids and the
danger it poses on our national security. And echoing Ranking
Member Bush, the power grid has become a new target for
domestic extremists attempting to destabilize our country and
foster fear and chaos, particularly in the Black community.
This is absolutely unacceptable, and I applaud the Department
of Justice for holding these bad actors accountable.
The Biden-Harris Administration and Democrats in the 117th
Congress made unprecedented and historic investments in our
Nation's power grid by passing laws like the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law and the Inflation Reduction Act. These laws
provided billions of dollars for hardening the grid against
severe weather, preventing electricity outages, and promoting
green energy infrastructure.
So, turning to you, Mr. Monken, how would you characterize
the impact of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law's nearly $15
billion electric grid reliability, resilience, and
cybersecurity investment?
Mr. Monken. Frankly, it is transformative. So, essentially,
it provided a level of funding that had not been seen
previously when it comes to making targeted investments that
directly support the types of grid reliability and critical
infrastructure availability that we are discussing in the panel
here today. So, being able to make that type of investment is
foundational to making sure that not only are we successfully
making the clean energy transition, but we are also trying to
put the infrastructure and security measures in place to really
avoid the types of worst-case outcomes that we are describing
here. So, it is an essential contributor to what we need to do.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. And Mr. Monken, how do you see these
Biden-Harris investments in our energy grid lowering costs for
all of us in the long term and promoting a cleaner environment?
Mr. Monken. Yes, the low-cost component of this, I think,
is essential to the discussion because it really needs to be
emphasized that when we are talking about what is the most
competitive and what is the lowest-cost form of electricity
generation, it is really stabilizing investments in those
particular areas. So, it really is going to have a stabilizing
effect overall across the country on making sure that we have
affordable and clean power.
It also really sets the conditions for success of being
able to make the scale of investment in infrastructure like
high voltage transmission that can continue to lower overall
costs for consumers across the country.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. And lastly, Mr. Monken, how do
problems with our energy grid disproportionately harm low-
income and Black and Brown communities, and how does Biden's
Justice40 Initiative to ensure 40 percent of benefits from
Federal investment reach marginalized communities come into
play?
Mr. Monken. It is really central to what needs to be done
when we look for long-term reliability of the grid, recognizing
when we look at areas with really either low economic activity
or disproportionately affected communities that are harmed by
these severe weather events that we see. Those are populations
that do not have the independent financial means to be able to
just address these on their own.
So, while people that have the economic means can either
move out of the area or go somewhere else or they can buy an
expensive generator or a set of solar panels to put on their
house or a battery to put on their house that is not readily
available in the open market, these are communities that cannot
go and do those types of things. So, trying to understand what
needs to be done proactively to address that in advance of an
event, that has that type of disproportionate effect, is
essential to making sure that we do not have to deal with it
after the fact, after the people that lost that reliable power
suffer as a result.
Ms. Brown. Thank you so much. The Biden-Harris
Administration is making the largest ever investment in our
Nation's power grid, thanks to the funding from the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law and the Inflation Reduction Act. These
investments all across the country are protecting the grid from
climate change and advancing equity for Black and Brown
communities. And with that I yield back.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Ms. Norton
from Washington, DC.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Monken, in July
2023, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission issued a final
rule to more quickly integrate facilities generating renewable
energy into the U.S. electric grid system. This effort to
expedite power sources into the grid includes wind and solar
power sources. This rule is a long time coming and aims to help
mitigate a nationwide backlog of clean energy suppliers seeking
interconnection to the national power grid in ways that create
cleaner energy at lower cost with greater reliability.
So, Mr. Monken, why is it crucial for renewable energy to
be a lasting, sustainable part of the national power grid?
Mr. Monken. As I mentioned in my opening comments, it is so
important to have both geographic and fuel type diversity
within the bulk electric system. This is especially relevant
for D.C., because there are no bulk electric system generations
within the boundaries of the District of Columbia. So, being
able to make these types of targeted investments and setting
policy that makes it easier for those types of resources to
come online has a tremendous impact on the populations that
they ultimately serve.
So, in this particular instance, being able to clear some
of these roadblocks that allow more of these resources to enter
into the system really opens up these additional opportunities
to make sure that there is adequate energy to meet everybody's
needs.
Ms. Norton. Well, Mr. Monken, how does adding more
renewable energy to our national power grid help make it more
secure from both cyber and physical threats?
Mr. Monken. So, the nature of renewable energy itself, it
does not require the same level of control systems that are
necessary for both spending reserves of fossil-burning plants,
just in general, and just understanding that if you can co-
locate a lot of these renewable energy resources, because the
difference between living close to a coal plant, as was raised
the Ranking Member, and the difference between living next to a
clean-burning renewable energy resource really makes a
significant difference in how far that electricity has to
travel in order to serve the loads that are nearer to it.
So, I think you have a couple of different opportunities
here, from a security standpoint, to really deploy renewables
in a much more secure manner. These are really modern resources
that we have the ability right now to build security in as we
deploy them, recognizing that they are more distributed in
nature, they are more closely located to the loads that they
serve, and they give us better opportunities to ensure that
they are protected when they go in.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Monken, right now renewable energy sources,
like onshore wind, have lower energy generation costs than new
coal and natural gas plants. These renewable energy sources
offer less expensive power options for renewable energy
sources, offer less options for consumers than existing fossil
fuel facilities provide, according to a recent International
Energy Agency report. These energy sources are more affordable
today than they have ever been in the past, greasing the
economic wheels of a clean power grid.
Moreover, failing to upgrade the U.S. electrical grid
system limits the potential transformative possibilities of the
Inflation Reduction Act landmark legislation Democrats passed,
and the Biden-Harris Administration is breaking ground on
Inflation Reduction Act projects in communities across the
Nation.
So, Mr. Monken, how does the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission's new rule dovetail with the Inflation Reduction Act
to transform communities?
Mr. Monken. I think this is FERC taking the opportunity to
recognize that this is a volume game, and I think we have
agreed in the way that we have communicated how we need to try
and address reliability issues is with large-scale deployment
of energy resources. So, going back to a question around, or a
comment around resource adequacy, this is the opportunity to
make sure that we can deploy the scale of power generation--in
this case, clean power generation--to try and meet the growing
demand that we have on the system.
So for FERC, I think it really comes down to making sure
that there is a clear understanding of the ways in which we can
facilitate things like investment in transmission to supplement
the investment in clean energy that we are making right now,
and I think that is central to the issue that needs to be
addressed, is making sure that the grid is able to receive all
of that power that needs to come onto the system and deliver it
to the people who need it.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Monken.
Mr. Donalds [presiding]. The Chair recognizes Ms. Stansbury
of New Mexico.
Ms. Stansbury. All right. Well, good morning, everyone. I
am excited to talk about grid modernization and transition here
today because I happen to be one of those grid nerds, like some
of the others who are here in this hearing today.
And, you know, I think it is actually great to use this
Committee and other committees to talk about this important and
revolutionary transition that is happening both to our economy
as well as our infrastructure because much of our grid was
built over the last 100 years, is coming to the end of its
design life, we are bringing on all these new, different
sources of energy, and our planet is undergoing this massive
transformation.
And I am particularly excited to talk about the huge, huge
investments that the Biden Administration has made in this
transition. In fact, the Biden Administration, as has been said
here in this hearing this morning, has made once-in-a-
generation investments in our grid, in technology, in reshoring
manufacturing through the bills that we have been talking about
and that we passed here in this body, the Congress before this.
So, that includes the Inflation Reduction Act, as we have
been talking about, the Infrastructure Investment Act, as well
as the CHIPS and Science Act. And this represents, in total,
the largest single investment in the clean energy revolution,
not only that the United States has ever made, in America, and
our economy, but that any country ever in the history of the
planet has made, in any country.
So, it is really, I think, an exciting moment but also a
perilous and frightening moment, in part because we know
climate change is real, it is happening. We already are seeing
the warmest winter ever in history on record this winter and
the largest increase in temperature this last year across the
country. And we know that this transition has to happen
quickly, and that if we do not use public policy to incentivize
that transition we are going to end up in a really bad
situation.
So, you know, in particular, I represent the state of New
Mexico, and New Mexico is really at the forefront of this
energy transition. We have two national laboratories which are
at the forefront of research. We actually passed some of the
most forward-leaning renewable portfolio standards in 2019. And
when I was in the State House, I collaborated with our Governor
to literally write and pass bipartisan grid modernization
legislation to address many of the issues that have been raised
here today.
But what we are seeing is that in states that have good
policy, like New Mexico, they are really poised to take
advantage of the massive investment that we are making through
President Biden and Democratic investments in the clean energy
revolution.
Just this last year in New Mexico, we cut ribbon, about 8
months ago, on literally the largest wind farm in North
America, which is in my district. And it will be providing
electricity all across the West. We just cut ribbon on the
largest wind turbine manufacturer, for the actual turbines
themselves, in my district just a few months ago, made possible
by the Inflation Reduction Act. We just cut ribbon in my
district, just a few months ago, on the very first reshoring of
solar arrays back to the United States from overseas since the
passage of the Inflation Reduction Act. And Intel Corporation
is putting in its largest chip manufacturing expansion in the
United States in my district.
Now, if anyone has any question about whether or not these
bills are helping to accelerate and turbocharge the clean
energy revolution and address the issues that we are talking
about here today, I can tell you, unequivocally, they are
creating thousands of jobs in my district, they are helping
modernize our grid, they are creating opportunity in
communities that have long struggled with economic challenges,
and it is transforming our energy economy across the West. And
New Mexico is poised to do that because we had forward-thinking
politicians who sat in seats like we are sitting right now, to
help pass laws to help this transition happen.
So, Mr. Monken, I do want to ask, you know, we have heard a
lot of sort of fear mongering and scary stuff about the grid,
but what can we do at the Federal level to really accelerate
the grid modernization and clean energy transition? What are
the three main things that Congress can do?
Mr. Monken. Thanks for the question, and I think first and
foremost being able to recognize the fact that this needs to be
a holistic strategy that includes access to all of the
technologies that are potentially available. I think a
continued investment in the onshoring of production
capabilities for essential components that we need as part of
this transition is hugely important to the process, to make
sure that everything that we need to build this system is
available to us. So, that is certainly helpful.
Economic stability and predictability are essential. We
have seen an incredible amount of investment in response to the
amount of money that has been made available by the Federal
Government so that people have more predictability about the
potential success of their investments. That is reflected in
the $680 billion that has been invested in clean manufacturing,
industrial capacity, and data centers in the United States
since the passage of both of the pieces of legislation you
described.
And I think the last and possibly the most important
component right now is to include transmission in the next
round of legislation, that is actively targeting how we really
incentivize infrastructure investment in the country, to make
sure that all of those pieces fit together. We have addressed
it from the technology standpoint and the consumer standpoint.
Now we need to make sure we can make those two pieces meet.
Ms. Stansbury. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Donalds. The gentlelady's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes Mr. Casar from Texas.
Mr. Casar. Thank you, Chair. Today, I want to talk about
Texas, and I want to submit into the record an article from
today's Houston Chronicle that states ``Texas had the most
power outages in the country in the last 5 years, new report
finds.''
Mr. Donalds. Without objection.
Mr. Casar. Thank you, Chair. Texas has had severe power
outages. We have been talking about them today in Committee,
especially how Winter Storm Uri took hundreds of lives and left
millions and millions of people without power.
And my first question is actually for you, Mr. Fisher. It
is not news that the Cato Institute, where you are at, is on
the right end of the political spectrum. It would not shock
anybody to find out I am a progressive's progressive. But there
have been areas of important agreement that we have discovered
in some of these Committee hearings. For example, having a more
free and fair and legalized system of migration is a place
where many progressive, and your organization, have actually
found some common ground. And I have questions for you on this
issue first.
So, my first question for you is actually not about the
electric power grid but about, for example, Texas exports oil,
famously exports LNG. And I would assume that your organization
would frown upon Texas not being allowed to export or import,
say, liquid natural gas or oil and gas.
Mr. Fisher. Yes, I see that as a free market, a free trade
issue.
Mr. Casar. Exactly. We have an issue for 90 percent of
Texas, where we actually are not able to export electricity
when we generate more electricity than it is that we are going
to buy. And we also cannot import it when we can find lower
prices from other states or other generations or when there is
scarcity, like we had in Winter Storm Uri. And so, would your
organization see it as important for regulators to not prevent
the export or import of electricity if Texas is, in fact,
generating quite a bit of that?
Mr. Fisher. So, my take on this is actually that there is
no explicit limit to trade. There are DC ties, so there are
direct current ties that go from ERCOT to outside of ERCOT.
However, the thing that I would note, as free market as we
are, one of the issues that--I will speak for Cato and for
myself--federalism matters, especially in this area where the
grid is so complicated, that if we do not have a patchwork of
experiments that the states offer we lose out on crucial data
on what works and what does not.
Mr. Casar. Understood. And I would assume that whether the
Federal Government mandates connections or not or subsidizes
them or not might be areas of disagreement. But I actually am
genuinely looking for areas of agreement here.
And so, if the private industry were interested in
interconnecting ERCOT to be able to sell power back and forth,
and wanted to do that of their own accord, but regulators were
to say, ``No, we do not want to do that,'' would that be an
area where you and I would agree, potentially, that private
actors should be allowed to interconnect between Texas and
other areas to reduce prices for Texans, increase
competitiveness, and increase reliability? Again, the method of
getting there we might disagree, just like in other areas. But
I am just trying to figure out, because frankly, in other
Committee hearings I have been surprised to find that there are
areas where we are trying to get to a similar policy goal.
Mr. Fisher. As I view this issue, in fact, it is a state
policy issue, so it is not up to me. It is up to the state of
Texas. I have never lived in Texas, but I know that you do not
mess with Texas, and that is kind of the approach that I take
to this. It is a state policy issue, and I do not believe it is
the Federal Government's job to come in and tell Texas what to
do.
Mr. Casar. I understand, and again, I am not asking you
that question. I am asking would you support regulators saying,
``No, you cannot sell power in and out of Texas''? And it is
OK. You can think about it and maybe next time less of a----
Mr. Fisher. No, it is entirely up to Texas. The folks of
Texas who want to make that policy, it is entirely up to them.
Mr. Casar. Well, the policy decisions of folks in Texas
have left 90 percent of people isolated on ERCOT, but some
parts of Texas are not, whether you are in Chairman Fallon's
district up in north Texas, significant parts of his district
not on ERCOT, Ms. Escobar's district in El Paso, in the western
part of Texas, or Mr. Weber's out in Beaumont, that are not in
ERCOT. Those areas suffered way fewer outages, much fewer
outages. They still suffered outages but much less blackouts
than those folks that were on ERCOT.
So, Mr. Monken, I have a question for you. You have been
talking about how important it is to build out transmission. In
your view, is it the best thing for energy competitiveness in
the country, for electric reliability across the country, and
for preventing these blackouts for us to allow interconnections
in and out of Texas?
Mr. Monken. Yes. I think the proof is in the data, in
recognizing that areas that are not subjected to that level of
isolation, from a transmission standpoint, are historically
lower cost for the consumer and higher reliability for those
consumers, as well.
Mr. Casar. Thank you, Chair, for the time. I look forward
to working across the aisle, if we can, on this issue. I yield
back.
Mr. Donalds. The gentleman yields. Seeing no other Members
are here in the hearing today, the Chair recognizes the Ranking
Member for her closing statement.
Ms. Bush. Thank you. The price of energy poses a real
problem for the people of St. Louis, but so does smog and
greenhouse gasses, climate change, exacerbated superstorms.
Thankfully, one solution can bring energy prices down and lower
greenhouse gas emission--fortify the power grid with renewable
energy options. Renewable energy sources like solar and wind
provide both cleaner and cheaper power.
Energy issues are complex, but I came to Congress to take
on hard challenges. The people of St. Louis know from personal
experience that coal, the fuel of the 19th century that clouded
their lungs for generations, is not the best way to power 21st
century communities. Families and children in my district have
suffered enough from the mistakes of the past, and I cannot
allow harmful practices to continue.
Democrats in Congress are doing the hard work to catalyze
new climate-friendly solutions. Last Congress, we made the
largest investment in green energy in history with the
Inflation Reduction Act, and I will keep fighting for the Green
New Deal, including my new Green New Deal for Cities.
My colleagues may complain that investment in renewables in
the power grid is interfering in private industry, but they
always seem to forget that taxpayers pay about $20 billion
every year in subsidies to fossil fuel companies. I thank our
witnesses today for your testimony about the future of FERC,
but we all know the problem.
Currently, there are two terawatts of power sitting in a
bureaucratic queue, more than half of the current power in use
in the entire United States, just waiting to join the power
grid. Roughly 95 percent of that new power has no emissions.
The new FERC rules should tackle that backlog, but we need to
incentivize clean energy entrepreneurs to take prudent risks on
these new projects. So, we need to let them know that we are
ready for their contribution.
I know my colleagues have concerns about the consistency of
sun and wind, but new smart grids can help share the load and
make up for when the sun shines in one area and freezes over in
another. But in Texas, St. Louis, New Mexico, we learned that
fossil fuels are not the right energy solution. That is the
proof we need more energy options to weave a resilient power
grid.
While we are trying to build a reliable power grid, there
are also those here and abroad who plot to plunge us into
darkness. I appreciate the robust and necessary discussion
surrounding the need to secure our power grid from white
supremacists, physical attacks, and foreign government
cyberattacks. Our energy infrastructure faces foreign and
domestic threats each and every day, and Congress must work
with Federal agencies and state and local governments to secure
our infrastructure from potential attacks.
The people of my community need to know their lights will
turn on and the heat will kick in when they need it, and they
need to know the methods generating that power are not hurting
their lungs. It is clear--renewable energy will lower the cost
and increase the reliability of power, as long as we in
Congress continue to invest in clean, healthy energy solutions.
Thank you, and I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Donalds. The Ranking Member yields back. I yield myself
time for a closing statement.
First of all, to the witnesses, thanks so much for being
here. I really appreciate your time. One of the things as we go
through this conversation and these hearings about the national
grid and the energy components of the grid, we must realize
that the electric grid has transformed dramatically over the
last several decades. Coal, obviously, used to be the dominant
portion of our energy grid. That is no longer the case. The
massive shift to natural gas in our energy grid has actually
led to massive decreases in greenhouse gasses being emitted
from electricity generation. That is how we have been able to
lower our carbon emissions in the United States over the last
15 years.
Currently, U.S. electricity grid by source is 43.1 percent
natural gas, 18.6 percent nuclear, 16.2 percent coal, 10.2
percent wind, 5.7 percent hydropower, 3.9 percent solar, 2.3
percent other. The electric grid is shifting all the time, and
where we have to get focused in the United States is making
sure that the most efficient and readily available abilities to
power the grid so that consumers can get readily available
power at cheap costs is the priority, not climate change.
As we have heard here today, our Nation's power grid is
facing a serious reliability crisis. Grid planners anticipate
that power demand is expected to rise while power generation is
expected to simultaneously decrease at an alarming rate. How
are we expected to make up for this disparity when the Biden
Administration continues to demonize our most reliable sources?
Federal regulations and renewable subsidies are distorting our
resource mix in ways that will make our electricity less
reliable and less affordable to consumers everywhere,
regardless of their politics, regardless of their income
levels.
Rules such as the EPA's rule on power plants, which have
been wisely scaled back, would still directly impact the amount
of additional capacity able to come online in the coming years.
Electric vehicle mandates and other initiatives that would
radically increase electricity demand would create additional
strain on the system while further increasing our dependence on
China for critical minerals. Essentially, if we go to more
renewable energy we are going to need more batteries. If we use
more batteries, the critical minerals for batteries are not
mined in the United States. They are mined by the People's
Republic of China. And we will be relying on China to expand
and maintain our electric grid.
I do not know about you, but that is not very smart.
Simply put, the Biden Administration's never-ending quest
for green-at-all-cost policies is making America's electric
grid less stable. Even NERC's 2023 ERO Reliability Risk
Priorities Report named the changing resource mix as the No. 1
threat to electric reliability.
Congress has a responsibility to oversee the massive
Federal initiatives straining the system and impacting the
reliability and resiliency of our grid. Americans rightfully
expect electricity to be flowing, even when external factors
such as severe weather events create strain on these systems.
And while unforeseen risks to the electric grid are
certainly a cause for concern, there are steps we can take to
mitigate as many of the known liabilities as possible. This
includes ensuring policies and procedures do not add
unnecessary stress to our existing power capacity. Just as so
many sectors depend on bulk electrical systems to function, the
grid itself relies on an intricate resource supply chain to
operate effectively. Delays in the permitting process of
everything from natural gas pipelines to transmission lines add
unnecessary uncertainty and costs to utilities, and ultimately
costs to the consumers.
As we look to build out the bulk electric system in time to
meet growing demand, I urge my colleagues in Congress and the
White House to recognize the limitations of a renewables-only
agenda and implement policies that will safeguard, not
jeopardize, Americans' access to power.
I thank all our witnesses for being here today and for
sharing their insights on these issues.
In closing, I want to thank our panelists for today's
testimony. With that, and without objection, all Members will
have 5 legislative days within which to submit materials and to
submit additional written questions for the witnesses, which
will be forwarded to the witnesses for their response.
If there is no further business, and without objection, the
Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:16 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
