- A HEARING WITH THE PRESIDENT OF ECOHEALTH ALLIANCE DR. PETER DASZAK

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A HEARING WITH THE PRESIDENT
OF ECOHEALTH ALLIANCE
DR. PETER DASZAK

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SELECT SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

MAY 1, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-107
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-548 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Michael Cloud, Texas                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Ro Khanna, California
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Katie Porter, California
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Cori Bush, Missouri
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Shontel Brown, Ohio
Byron Donalds, Florida               Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Robert Garcia, California
William Timmons, South Carolina      Maxwell Frost, Florida
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Greg Casar, Texas
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Dan Goldman, New York
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
Nick Langworthy, New York            Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Eric Burlison, Missouri
Mike Waltz, Florida

------
Mark Marin, Staff Director
Mitchell Benzine, Subcommittee Staff Director
Marie Policastro, Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5074

Miles Lichtman, Minority Staff Director
Contact Number: 202-225-5051
------

Select Subcommittee On The Coronavirus Pandemic

Brad Wenstrup, Ohio, Chairman
Nicole Malliotakis, New York         Raul Ruiz, California, Ranking
Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa           Minority Member
Debbie Lesko, Arizona                Debbie Dingell, Michigan
Michael Cloud, Texas                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
John Joyce, Pennsylvania             Deborah Ross, North Carolina
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Robert Garcia, California
Ronny Jackson, Texas                 Ami Bera, California
Rich Mccormick, Georgia              Jill Tokuda, Hawaii

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

Page

Hearing held on May 1, 2024......................................     1

Witnesses

----------

Dr. Peter Daszak, Ph.D., President, EcoHealth Alliance
Oral Statement...................................................     8

Written opening statements and the written statements of the
witnesses are available on the U.S. House of Representatives
Document Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

Interim Report, Majority staff; submitted by Rep. Wenstrup.

Documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

A HEARING WITH THE PRESIDENT
OF ECOHEALTH ALLIANCE
DR. PETER DASZAK

----------

Wednesday, May 1, 2024

House of Representatives

Committee on Oversight and Accountability

Select Subcommittee on the Coronavirus Pandemic

Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Brad R. Wenstrup
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Wenstrup, Malliotakis, Miller-
Meeks, Lesko, Cloud, Joyce, McCormick, Comer (ex officio),
Ruiz, Dingell, Ross, Robert Garcia, Tokuda, and Raskin (ex
officio).
Also present: Representatives Griffith and Castor.
Dr. Wenstrup. The Select Subcommittee on the Coronavirus
Pandemic will come to order.
Welcome, everyone.
At the discretion of the Chair and pursuant to an agreement
with the Committee on Energy and Commerce, the Chairman and
Ranking Member of the Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Mr. Morgan
Griffith and Ms. Kathy Castor, are permitted to participate in
today's hearing for the purposes of questions and give 3-minute
opening statements.
Without objection, pursuant to clause 4(a)(3)(A) of House
Resolution 5 and clause 2(j)(2)(C) of House Rule XI, the Chair
may recognize staff of the Select Subcommittee for questions
for equal periods of time, not to exceed 30 minutes per side.
Finally, without objection, the Chair may declare a recess
at any time.
I now recognize myself for the purpose of making an opening
statement.
Good morning.
The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the debate regarding the
risks and benefits of a type of high-risk research,
specifically what is known as gain-of-function research.
Prior to the pandemic, the public was largely unaware of
the existence of this area of research, let alone the fact that
they were funding it. I know I first heard of it during our
COVID lockdown while researching how we might treat patients
suffering from this unique and deadly virus.
In 2014, the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, NIAID, awarded EcoHealth Alliance, Inc., a grant
entitled ``Understanding the Risk of Bat Coronavirus
Emergence.''
This grant included the collecting of novel coronaviruses
from bats and conducting research on those novel viruses using
laboratory mice.
The laboratory work where this research was actually
occurring was outsourced by EcoHealth Alliance to the Wuhan
Institute of Virology in China.
Dr. Daszak, who is here before us, is the president of
EcoHealth.
Today, the Select Subcommittee released a report regarding
EcoHealth and the evidence surrounding its research activities.
This report highlights the Select Subcommittee's concerns with
EcoHealth as an organization and Dr. Daszak's interactions with
Federal agencies and foreign entities, such as the Wuhan
Institute of Virology.
We have found that EcoHealth was nearly 2 years late in
submitting a routine progress report to NIH; that EcoHealth
failed to report--as required--a potentially dangerous
experiment conducted at the Wuhan Institute of Virology; that
EcoHealth used taxpayer dollars to facilitate risky gain-of-
function research; and that Dr. Daszak omitted a material fact
regarding his access to unanalyzed virus samples and sequences
at the WIV, the Wuhan Institute of Virology, in his successful
effort to have his grant reinstated by NIH.
These are only a few of our findings, which are detailed in
our interim report issued today and will be further explored in
the Select Subcommittee's final report.
Dr. Daszak has been less than cooperative with the Select
Subcommittee, and he has been slow to produce requested
documents and has used semantics with the definition of gain-
of-function research, even in his previous testimony.
Dr. Daszak maintains that EcoHealth never conducted gain-
of-function research by shifting definitions of this area of
research put forth by regulatory agencies.
I believe Dr. Daszak either cannot or will not distinguish
between the common understanding of gain-of-function research
and the more technical definitions provided under various and
narrowly defined regulatory frameworks.
But facts are facts. Research can be gain of function
without meeting these somewhat convoluted and often hard to
understand frameworks that only regulate a very minute subset
of research, so minute that HHS has only ever reviewed three
proposals out of thousands it receives every year.
Using highly technical definitions in order to assert that
a certain project really isn't ``gain-of-function'' research,
when most others would suggest, as well as confirm in their
testimonies before the Select Subcommittee, that it absolutely
is gain of function, comes across disingenuous, comes across as
a disingenuous attempt of avoiding questions and
accountability.
The fact is that, as most people understand it, EcoHealth
was absolutely conducting gain-of-function research,
specifically in Wuhan, China.
Unfortunately, Dr. Daszak's problematic behavior is not
limited to his less than fulsome cooperation or the risky
research that he conducted.
Recently released documents display Dr. Daszak
communicating with Dr. David Morens, who was Senior Advisor to
then-NIAID Director Dr. Fauci, and doing this through private
channels to avoid FOIA, Freedom of Information Act.
Dr. Daszak and Dr. Morens shared information, ideas, and
strategies about how to best proceed to re-obtain funding for
this risky research after Dr. Michael Lauer had terminated Dr.
Daszak's grant.
Dr. Morens provided Dr. Daszak with internal NIH
deliberations and discussions concerning the suspension of
EcoHealth's grant, along with assurances that Dr. Fauci and
NIAID would seek to mitigate the damage done to EcoHealth.
On April 16, 2024, I announced a subpoena to Dr. Morens for
documents in his email relating to the origins of COVID-19.
Yesterday, Dr. Morens produced 30,000 pages of emails,
emails from his Gmail account which he said he had used to
avoid FOIA.
So, this investigation does not end today.
Dr. Daszak told Dr. Morens in these private communications
that he still had 15,000 samples, quote, ``in freezers in
Wuhan,'' end quote, and had not yet analyzed more than ``700''
coronaviruses he had identified in those samples.
EcoHealth has lamented, quote, ``the negative impact on . .
. U.S. national security,'' end quote, posed by their inability
to sequence all the samples at the WIV.
But EcoHealth's actions themselves are a threat to national
security. Dr. Daszak has displayed a disregard for the risks
associated with gain-of-function research, the congressional
oversight process, and the Federal grant process.
Dr. Daszak has proven that he's not a responsible steward
of the American people's tax dollars. We see no reason that the
American people should be paying for EcoHealth's research, or
any other work Dr. Daszak conducts.
Dr. Ruiz, I believe we agree on this, and there may be a
path forward.
Let me be clear. I support global health research. I
support work that will make the world safer. That's why we are
investigating all of this.
Our concern is that this research and research similar does
the opposite--it puts the world at the risk of a pandemic,
something even Dr. Fauci addressed as far back as 2012 in an
interview.
Dr. Daszak, before I close, and as someone who has been
shot at and someone who has received threats, I want to tell
you that we unequivocally condemn all threats to you--to you,
any public health official, scientists, anyone else. That is
wrong and intolerable.
I look forward at this point to an engaging and on-topic
discussion.
Thank you.
And I would now like to recognize Ranking Member Ruiz for
the purpose of making an opening statement.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
When I was named Ranking Member of the Select Subcommittee
last February, I made a commitment to follow the facts in
objectively analyzing the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic.
I made a promise to keep an open mind about how the
pandemic started, because understanding whether the novel
coronavirus emerged from a lab or from nature is essential to
better preventing and preparing for future public health
threats and to better protecting the American people.
And as the origins of the novel coronavirus still remain
inconclusive, I stand by these commitments to this day. But as
we approach the year-and-a-half mark of the House Republican
majority, it's important that we take stock of what the Select
Subcommittee has accomplished so far, and the extent to which
we have fulfilled our obligations to the American people.
For more than 14 months, under the guise of investigating
COVID's origins, the Select Subcommittee has relentlessly
probed the relationship between the Federal Government and our
Nation's scientific community to prove--without evidence--
Republican accusations that Dr. Daszak and EcoHealth Alliance
created the COVID-19 pandemic.
We have pored over more than 425,000 pages of documents
provided to us by HHS, the State Department, the Department of
Energy, the Government Accountability Office, universities, and
private citizens; we have conducted more than 100 hours of
closed-door interviews with more than a dozen current and
former Federal officials and scientists; and we have held
multiple hearings--all in what has appeared to be an effort to
weaponize concerns about a lab-related origin to fuel sentiment
against our Nation's scientists and public health officials for
partisan gain.
And while the Select Subcommittee's probe has uncovered
questionable conduct about Dr. Daszak's commitment to
transparency and professional integrity, I want to be clear
that it has not substantiated allegations that EcoHealth
Alliance used taxpayer dollars to fund research that created
the COVID-19 pandemic.
No evidence provided to the Select Subcommittee has
indicated that the work performed under EcoHealth Alliance's
grant, including at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, led to the
creation of SARS-CoV-2.
These viruses are too genetically distant from SARS-CoV-2
to be its progenitor virus, and the majority has uncovered no
tangible proof of other viruses included in work pursuant to
the EcoHealth Alliance grant leading to the creation of the
COVID-19 pandemic, and this distinction is critically
important.
Today we will hear from both sides that there are serious
concerns regarding EcoHealth Alliance's failure to comply with
reporting requirements for Federal grantees, concerns that draw
into question whether you, Dr. Daszak, sought to deliberately
mislead regulators at NIH and NIAID.
And while the majority's probe has not meaningfully
advanced our understanding of the pandemic's origins, internal
documents and testimony do suggest that Dr. Daszak potentially
misled the Federal Government on multiple occasions in both
their transparency obligations and reporting requirements as
recipients of Federal grant funding.
Transparent and forthcoming communication with Federal
Government agencies is expected at all times, and this
potential misconduct raises serious questions about EcoHealth
Alliance's commitment to the responsible stewardship of
taxpayer dollars.
We will also examine whether Dr. Daszak, beyond his
obligations as an employee of a federally funded grantee, acted
with integrity in his engagement with the possibility that
COVID-19 resulted from a research-related incident.
But at the end of the day, this is not the same as
uncovering COVID-19's origin, nor is it evidence that our
scientific community caused and has sought to cover up the
origins of the pandemic, and to cast it as such would be
misleading to the American public, damaging to already
declining confidence in science and public health, and
ultimately harmful to our Nation's pandemic preparedness.
So, as we look to the future of fortifying our Nation for a
future public health crisis, it is my hope that we can broaden
our focus to the forward-looking policies that will better
protect our constituents.
Strengthening oversight of potentially risky research
domestically and abroad is an essential part of this
conversation, but so is closing pathways for zoonotic transfers
of viruses in nature and investing in our public health
infrastructure to ensure that when future viruses hit our
shores we are ready.
When Democrats were in the majority, we made important
strides in these objectives by passing the Consolidated
Appropriations Act of 2023, which strengthened protections
against undue influence in our biomedical research, improved
training and transparency for the handling of select agents,
paved the way for the interagency collaboration to fortify
zoonotic disease prevention, invested in our infectious disease
work force, and enhanced our supply chain preparedness and
ability to rapidly develop and deploy medical countermeasures.
It is my hope that in the remaining months of the Select
Subcommittee we can work together to build on this legacy and
make objectively examining the origins of the novel coronavirus
a part of this forward-looking work.
I stand by the commitments I mentioned earlier, Mr.
Chairman, to take a serious, balanced look at all possibilities
for the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic, and I stand ready to
work with you on this critically important mission so that we
can save future lives.
Thank you. And I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Dr. Ruiz.
I would now like to recognize Mr. Griffith for the purpose
of making an opening statement.
Mr. Griffith. Good morning.
I want to thank Chairmans Comer and Wenstrup, Ranking
Members Raskin and Ruiz, for having this hearing today and
inviting relevant Energy and Commerce chairs and ranking
members to it.
For over a year now we've been working together to
investigate the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic and the role
that the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
NIAID, headed by Dr. Fauci, and EcoHealth, headed by Dr.
Daszak, may have played in it by funding research and
facilitating the transfer of technologies to the Wuhan
Institute of Virology, which I will refer to henceforth as
Wuhan.
It is critical that we understand what went wrong at NIAID
and EcoHealth's relationship with Wuhan. Frankly, it's been
alarming to discover that NIAID's approval and oversight of
risky experiments involving potential pandemic pathogens is
lax.
My hope is that when we are finished we have a package of
legislative proposals and other recommendations on biosafety
and biosecurity. I increasingly think that means taking final
approval authority for these experiments away from NIAID and
other funding in favor of an independent entity.
With many lives lost and disrupted by what I believe was a
research-related accident, we need transparent, effective
oversight and tight regulation of gain-of-function research of
concern. We certainly do not have that now.
I participated in Dr. Daszak's transcribed interview. It's
clear to me that neither NIAID nor EcoHealth have a complete
picture of what Wuhan was up to with it's coronavirus
collection or with their gain-of-function research trajectory.
But what we do know from EcoHealth's NIAID grant and
EcoHealth's DEFUSE proposal, and the private musings of
virologists who collaborated with Wuhan, is not comforting.
We don't have this critical information in large part
because NIAID's review and oversight was a farce. NIAID and
EcoHealth were asleep at the switch. In my opinion, they were
grossly negligent.
I find it incomprehensible that NIAID continues to fund
EcoHealth's collaboration with Wuhan to this very day.
EcoHealth's grant was reinstated so they could process virus
samples and sequences that had been previously collected.
It turns out many of these viruses and sequences are held
by Wuhan. NIAID didn't even think to ask them where the samples
were stored before restarting their funding.
Even after COVID-19, at NIAID it's just business as usual.
It's absurd, and it's got to change, or we risk having perhaps
yet another high-consequence accident.
We have to put some adults in place to independently review
proposed gain-of-function research of concern that NIAID and
other agencies want to fund.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to continuing
working together. And I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I would now like to recognize Mrs. Dingell
for the purpose of making an opening statement.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Ruiz and Chairman Griffith, who I sit on Energy and Commerce
with as well.
I want to echo the thoughts of my colleague, Ranking Member
Ruiz, in that we must focus our attention on the future and how
we can best protect all Americans from and against future
pandemics. Sowing distrust in the scientific and medical
communities is not a way to accomplish this goal.
While I agree--and I think most of us on this dais, both
sides, today do--that EcoHealth Alliance has proven to be
careless and imprecise with their Federal funding, contrary to
what we expect and demand of any Federal grantee, this does not
mean we should throw out the baby with the bathwater, as my
Republican colleagues seem to be suggesting.
The National Institutes of Health and the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases serve important
functions in medical and scientific research--to advance the
health of all Americans in the world--and they have done good
work in the past, and we want that good work to continue in the
future.
The EcoHealth Alliance grant did reveal some weaknesses in
the reporting systems that were in place at NIAID, but it's
important to note that, in conjunction with their Office of
Inspector General, NIAID has already taken steps to rectify
these issues.
The investigation detailed how EcoHealth was not able to
secure underlying documents from its subgrantees about
important coronavirus research happening in China and that this
limited NIAID's ability to determine if EcoHealth was compliant
with its grant terms.
NIH and NIAID have already implemented recommendations from
the OIG, including ensuring subaward agreements contain all
required terms and guaranteeing that prime awardees can access
all research records conducted at the subrecipient locations.
These changes apply to all grantees.
This investigation has not looked into these policy changes
and how they will improve the information sharing between
grantees and the NIH and NIAID going forward. It's only focused
on the past.
Throughout this investigation, my Republican colleagues
have been trying to cast blame for the COVID-19 pandemic on
Drs. Collins and Fauci, and as we have seen time and time
again, it's contrary to the evidence. So, now they're shifting
to blame a wider swath of dedicated public servants at NIH and
NIAID based on the bad actions of a single grantee.
We should be holding today's witness accountable, of which
we have bipartisan agreement, but this should not distract us
from our ultimate goal: future pandemic preparedness.
Strengthening our scientific community to prepare for any
future pandemic is our best course of action.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
Our witness today is Dr. Peter Daszak. Dr. Daszak is the
president of EcoHealth Alliance, Inc.
Pursuant to Committee on Oversight and Accountability Rule
9(g), the witness will please stand and raise his right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony that you
are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
Dr. Daszak. I do.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
Let the record show that the witness answered in the
affirmative.
The Select Subcommittee certainly appreciates you for being
here today, Dr. Daszak, and we look forward to your testimony.
Let me remind the witness that we have read your written
statement and it will appear in full in the hearing record.
Please limit your oral statement to 5 minutes.
As a reminder, please press the button on the microphone in
front of you, so that it is on and the Members can hear you.
When you begin to speak, the light in front of you will
turn green. After 4 minutes, the light will turn yellow. When
the red light comes on, your 5 minutes has expired, and we
would ask that you please wrap up.
I now recognize Dr. Daszak to give an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DR. PETER DASZAK, PRESIDENT, ECOHEALTH ALLIANCE
INC.

Dr. Daszak. Chairman Wenstrup, Ranking Member Ruiz,
distinguished Members of the Select Subcommittee on the
Coronavirus Pandemic, it is a privilege to come before you
today to discuss the vital research that EcoHealth Alliance
conducts globally and to answer your questions about our work.
I respect and appreciate the critical mission of your
Select Subcommittee, which is why I volunteered to testify
before you today and similarly volunteered to participate in a
full-day transcribed interview with the Subcommittee last
November.
I am Peter Daszak, president of EcoHealth Alliance, a
501(c)(3) nonprofit based in New York, founded in 1971, with a
mission to conduct research on emerging disease threats to the
U.S., to identify the underlying causes of pandemics and
develop solutions to prevent them, and to benefit conservation.
EcoHealth Alliance scientists have worked in partnership
with U.S. Federal agencies since the early 2000's with
significant funding support from dozens of leading government
and philanthropic donors.
With funding from the National Institutes of Health, we
mapped the global spread of high path avian flu and showed its
potential to enter the U.S. via trading partners in Canada,
information that the Government Accountability Office used to
recommend better targeted strategic surveillance by the USDA.
With support from the Department of Homeland Security, we
mapped the likely introduction of emerging diseases via air
travel and trade and the threat they represent to U.S. public
health and agriculture.
With funding from the National Institutes of Health, we
identified the origins of the highly lethal Nipah virus and
discovered bats are the wildlife reservoirs of MERS, SARS, and
a new viral disease that threatens global swine production.
In all of our federally funded projects, we have maintained
an open, transparent communication with agency staff, rapidly
provided information critical to public health and agriculture,
uploaded data and genetic sequences into the U.S.-based NIH
GenBank data base, and published our analyses in scientific
journals, so that scientists everywhere can use this
information.
EcoHealth Alliance's mission has taken us to places around
the world where viruses originate, in countries that represent
our first line of defense against novel diseases.
Our work in foreign countries can only happen with the
approval of the U.S. funding agency and of the host country
government.
In China, with approval from NIH and the State Department,
we partnered with the country's leading virology lab in Wuhan
to do this work, just as many other U.S. government-funded
institutions have done.
Our 15 years' work in China provided direct public health
benefits to the American people, with Chinese scientists
publishing their papers in U.S.-based journals and uploading
critical China viral genetic sequences into NIH's GenBank data
base.
The viruses that we identified in bats in China were used
by U.S. labs throughout the COVID pandemic--and continue to
be--to test drugs, vaccines, and therapies that saved countless
lives.
EcoHealth Alliance's work is a matter of the public record,
via dozens of scientific publications, media interviews, and
public lectures given before, during, and after the emergence
of COVID-19.
For years, we repeatedly briefed the U.S. Government and
international agencies and spoke to the press and public about
the risk of a coronavirus outbreak emerging in China from bats.
Unfortunately, in 2019, just as we predicted, a bat-origin
SARS-related coronavirus emerged and spread in the city of
Wuhan, leading to the global COVID-19 pandemic.
The public nature of our work and our longstanding
collaborations with Chinese scientists have made us a target
for misinformation about the origins of COVID, beginning in
early 2020 and continuing to this day. We have repeatedly and
publicly refuted the many myths and false allegations about
EcoHealth Alliance's research.
However, at a time when the COVID-19 pandemic seemed out of
control and emotions were running high, our organization, our
staff, and even my own family were targeted with false
allegations, death threats, break-ins, media harassment, and
other damaging acts.
Our organization has gone to great lengths to address any
allegations head-on, checking our records and stating the facts
publicly.
We estimate over 15 million pages of EcoHealth Alliance
documents have been shared with Federal agencies, House and
Senate committees, and with the public via FOIA requests, and
via audits with the Department of HHS OIG and inquiries by the
Government Accountability Office.
And we have spent substantial staff time voluntarily
helping with every and all realistic and bipartisan
investigations on the origin of COVID.
Like other public figures, I have been personally targeted
with a white powder letter sent to my home address, devastating
online threats and media harassment, and my children and wife's
names appearing on a 4chan kill list, among with other
incidents now under investigation by the FBI and other
authorities.
Indeed, between the public announcement of my voluntary
appearance before this Committee and the Subcommittee's tweets
over the past 2 weeks, we have seen a noticeable increase in
death threats and other harassment, including a swatting attack
in my home when the local police received a notice that someone
had killed a scientist and had his wife tied up in my basement.
Of course, it was a fake call, but we ended up with six
police cars and detectives searching the house and staying for
the afternoon.
This is not what a scientist should be put through to do
their work.
Our funding has also been targeted even though our research
programs continue to be identified as high priority by NIH and
other Federal agencies.
Despite these challenges, we remain committed to our
pandemic prevention mission and to protecting the health of the
people in the U.S. and globally. We continue to conduct our
research and to publish scientific papers, so that the data are
available for everybody and to upload viral genetic sequences
into NIH's GenBank data base.
In 2005, EcoHealth scientists developed the first-ever
emerging infectious disease ``hotspot'' map to chart threats,
so we can better target resources to prevent them.
Dr. Wenstrup. Dr. Daszak----
Dr. Daszak. Our work and that of many other scientists show
that most----
Dr. Wenstrup. Dr. Daszak, you were given 5 minutes. Are you
ready to wrap up?
Dr. Daszak. Sir, the light says I've got 30 seconds left or
so. I've just got a short period here.
Dr. Wenstrup. You've gone over. Go ahead.
Dr. Daszak. Our work and that of many other scientists show
that most pandemics originate from animals, mainly wildlife, in
rapidly developing countries where people and animals come into
direct contact.
But as we saw with COVID-19, once a virus begins to spread,
it exploits travel and trade networks, which means a virus
emerging anywhere on the planet is a direct threat to all of us
here in the USA.
Thus, our research has direct benefits for the public
health of the American people, strengthens national security,
and enhances sustainable economic growth in our allies around
the world.
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to your
questions.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
I now recognize myself for as much time as I may consume
for questions, with equal time being afforded to the Ranking
Member.
Dr. Daszak, my time is limited, so as much as you could
limit your answers to ``yes'' or ``no'' for now it would be
greatly appreciated.
In 2018, did you submit an application for funding to DARPA
for a project entitled ``DEFUSE''?
Dr. Daszak. Yes, EcoHealth submitted----
Dr. Wenstrup. On this proposal, did you collaborate with
Ralph Baric from the University of North Carolina?
Dr. Daszak. UNC was one of the co-investigators on the
proposal, yes.
Dr. Wenstrup. With Dr. Ralph Baric?
Dr. Daszak. Yes, he was on the proposal.
Dr. Wenstrup. On this proposal, did you collaborate with
Zhengli Shi from the Wuhan Institute of Virology?
Dr. Daszak. Yes, they were involved in the proposal.
Dr. Wenstrup. Were there any other Chinese collaborators on
this proposal?
Dr. Daszak. I don't know. I'd have to check the proposal.
But I think it was just that organization. I'm not sure.
Dr. Wenstrup. The organization being?
Dr. Daszak. The Wuhan Institute of Virology.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
So others may be from the Wuhan Institute of Virology?
Dr. Daszak. It would be in the proposal. I've got a copy if
you want to see.
Dr. Wenstrup. We'll take a look at that.
A draft of the DEFUSE proposal was released via FOIA and
had some comments in it regarding where the work would take
place and the biosafety level for it.
The first comment is up on the screen. It has the initials
``PD.''
Did you write this comment?
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Dr. Wenstrup. Can we get it on the screen? OK.
It says, ``Ralph. Zhengli. If we win this contract, I do
not propose that all of this work will necessarily be conducted
by Ralph, but I do want to stress the U.S. side of this
proposal, so that DARPA are comfortable with our team. Once we
get funds, we can then allocate who does what exact work, and I
believe that a lot of those assays can be done in Wuhan as
well.''
The proposal says that Dr. Baric would reverse engineer
spike proteins to test their capacity to cause disease.
Were you also intending that the WIV conduct some of the
work?
Dr. Daszak. If you look at the language in my comment----
Dr. Wenstrup. Yes or no, please. I'm just----
Dr. Daszak. No. The language says assays, not experiments.
Already the WIV is clearly listed in the proposal to conduct
some assays.
Dr. Wenstrup. Why did you want to stress the U.S. side of
the proposal?
Dr. Daszak. Well, I checked with DARPA if it was OK to
include a Chinese collaborator on the proposal. They said yes.
They checked with their higher-ups and said yes. So, we went
ahead with that.
But I still was concerned that we didn't want to have too
much American taxpayer dollars going to China. So, that's the
meaning of that.
Dr. Wenstrup. The second comment is up on the screen, and,
again, it has the initials ``PD.''
Did you write this comment?
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Dr. Wenstrup. It says, ``I'm planning to use my resume and
Ralph's. Linfa/Zhengli, I realize your resumes are also very
impressive, but I'm trying to downplay the non-U.S. focus of
this proposal, so that DARPA doesn't see this as a negative''--
again, your language of attempting to downplay how much work
would occur in China.
Dr. Daszak. Well, there's nothing----
Dr. Wenstrup. Why?
Dr. Daszak. Sorry.
Dr. Wenstrup. Why?
Dr. Daszak. Well, there's nothing unusual about this at
all.
If you're writing a grant to a Federal agency, it gets
reviewed by a committee of outside scientists.
It's not necessarily--DARPA telling me it's OK to include
Chinese and foreign collaborators doesn't necessarily mean the
reviewers know that or are going to see it in the same way.
So, I simply wanted to stress the U.S. side of the
proposal. I was trying to explain to our colleagues why their
CVs weren't going to be in.
We were limited in the number of CVs we could add. That's
all. It's quite simple.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
So, you were downplaying how much work they would do.
Dr. Daszak. I say it right there in that comment.
Dr. Wenstrup. Did Dr. Shi contribute to the drafting of the
proposal at all.
Dr. Daszak. Of course, yes, all collaborators did.
Dr. Wenstrup. OK. The third comment is up on the screen,
and this time it was written by Dr. Baric and says, ``In the
U.S., these recombinant SARS coronaviruses are studied under
BSL-3, not BSL-2. In China, might be growing these viruses
under BSL-2. U.S. researchers will likely freak out.''
Were you proposing to do the work in DEFUSE at BSL-2?
Dr. Daszak. No.
Dr. Wenstrup. In fact, you write in the proposal that the
choice of BSL-2 is more cost effective. Dr. Baric testified
that he does this work at BSL-3 and, in fact, encouraged you to
do the same.
What's more important to you, biosafety or cost?
Dr. Daszak. Well, look, EcoHealth Alliance maintains the
appropriate biosafety levels for our research. The proposal
includes research which, according to both U.S. and Chinese
biosafety rules, which I have right in front of me, BSL-2. It
also has research which, according to both U.S. and Chinese
rules, are BSL-3.
The final proposal is the proposal of record, and it is
absolutely correct in the definition of biosafety levels that
go into this. This is simply a draft proposal where one group
is suggesting one thing, another is suggesting another. The
final proposal is what matters.
Dr. Wenstrup. Well----
Dr. Daszak. And I want to remind the Committee that this
proposal was not funded. The work was never done. It is utterly
irrelevant to the origins of COVID.
Dr. Wenstrup. Well, it's not irrelevant, Dr. Daszak. It's
very relevant. And, you know, you just stated that China--those
are China standards. So, you're OK with China standards as
opposed to the U.S. standards, and it does matter whether it's
at a BSL-2 or BSL-3, as Dr. Baric pointed out.
And it also is important to understand that you
intentionally downplayed the role of China.
Between your actions to DARPA and those within NIH, you
have failed to be a good steward of taxpayer dollars, and so
our recommendation is that you do not receive any more.
Understanding the lethality of COVID-19--to certain
vulnerable populations for sure--do you believe that a lethal
virus could be used as a bioweapon? And should we be concerned
about such weapons?
Dr. Daszak. Well, with respect, you made two allegations in
there that I want to address.
First, you mischaracterized my statement. What I said about
biosafety levels is that they are the same in both China and
the U.S. and that we follow them implicitly to the letter. I
have them in front of me. I'm happy to share them with the
Committee.
Second, you suggested that we downplayed the role of China.
That's not true. Before the proposal was submitted, I contacted
DARPA and asked them if it was appropriate to conduct a project
in China and to include Chinese scientists. They checked with
their authorities, and they said yes. So, we included that.
And in response to your question--sorry.
Dr. Wenstrup. Do you have a record of that check?
Dr. Daszak. Yes, I do.
Dr. Wenstrup. OK. We would----
Dr. Daszak. And I'm happy to share it with the Committee.
Dr. Wenstrup. Please do.
Dr. Daszak. And I remember the name of the person. It was a
Dr. Gimlett, and I have an email record of it. I've seen it
recently, yes.
Dr. Wenstrup. Excellent.
Dr. Daszak. Of course.
Dr. Wenstrup. Excellent.
And we also have on record what you had said in your email.
But, again, to my question, do you believe that a lethal
virus could be used as a bioweapon, and should we be concerned
about such weapons?
Dr. Daszak. Of course. And there's a long history of
pathogens being used as bioweapons.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
Dr. Daszak. But that is the not the research that we do.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
But maybe that's why DARPA turned you down.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Dr. Ruiz from
California, for 5 minutes of questions.
Dr. Daszak. I will address that later, of course.
Dr. Ruiz. I'll go ahead and let you address that for a few
seconds.
Dr. Daszak. Well, thank you very much, Dr. Ruiz.
DARPA turned us down for whatever reasons DARPA had. The
only information we received from DARPA about the reasons for
turning us down was an exit interview, which I have
contemporaneous notes from, which I'm happy to share with the
Committee.
In no instance did they suggest that the reason for turning
down was because of safety issues. In fact, they said it was an
excellent proposal. They didn't have enough money to fund it.
They came back to us later to try and fund portions of it.
Dr. Ruiz. For that it was a bioweapon research?
Dr. Daszak. Sorry?
Dr. Ruiz. Dr. Daszak, did they turn you down because they
thought somehow there was going to be bioweapon research in the
lab?
Dr. Daszak. Absolutely not. That was never mentioned.
Dr. Ruiz. I think one of the things that we know--there's
two things. One is that there're so many agencies that have
shown or reported with low, mostly low, and one with moderate
confidence, that it could either be a zoonotic transmission or
a lab leak. So, the data is still out there that it's
inconclusive.
But one of the things that they clearly state is that it
was not bioweapon research.
I believe that my colleagues on both sides of the aisle
would agree that transparency and disclosures regarding
competing interests are necessary for individuals addressing
scientific questions open to reasonable debate.
In February 2020, The Lancet published a statement signed
by an international group of scientists who stood together to,
quote, ``condemn conspiracy theories suggesting that COVID-19
does not have a natural origin.''
The statement purports to express solidarity with
scientists and frontline workers in China, many of whom, we
learned, were sharing early information about the virus at
great personal cost.
Dr. Daszak, evidence reviewed by the Select Subcommittee
demonstrates that you authored and organized the statement. Is
it still your view that all theories suggesting that COVID-19
has a research-related origin are conspiracy theories?
Dr. Daszak. No. We take all theories seriously. We looked
at every single theory that was submitted.
Dr. Ruiz. OK. Well, I'm glad there's been a shift in your
thoughts and that you agree, because whether the virus came
from a lab or from nature is still unknown.
Two Federal agencies still assess with low and moderate
confidence that the virus originated in a lab, and four
government agencies still assess with low confidence that the
virus emerged from nature.
But the Lancet Statement that you authored summarily
attempted to close that question, understanding that your
funding and ability to partner with the Wuhan Institute of
Virology relied on relaxed scrutiny of research-related origin
theories.
So, let me ask you, why did you decide not to declare a
competing interest?
Dr. Daszak. Well, first of all, Dr. Ruiz, the conspiracies
that we were talking about in the Lancet letter at the time, in
February 2020, were things like there are HIV inserts into the
virus, that the virus contains snake DNA, that it's a
bioengineered virus.
And those are pure conspiracy theories. There's no evidence
at all for them. And they're based on myth and legend. So,
that's what we were talking about at the time.
Dr. Ruiz. So, why did you decide not to declare a competing
interest.
Dr. Daszak. I did declare a competing interest. The full
statement----
Dr. Ruiz. So, The Lancet later requested that you expand on
your initial disclosures. In turn, you elaborated on your
coronavirus work in China. However, your updated disclosures do
not explicitly acknowledge that you had partnered with the
Wuhan Institute of Virology.
That is a glaring omission, particularly when, as you
stated at your transcribed interview, your updated disclosures
are otherwise extremely detailed.
Dr. Daszak, why did you decide not to name the Wuhan
Institute of Virology in disclosures of your coronavirus work
in China?
Dr. Daszak. Well, I want to point out that the competing
interest statement that we published in Lancet is longer than
the original letter. It contains the most detail----
Dr. Ruiz. It could have a thousand words, two thousand
words. The fact of the matter is that you didn't disclose the
competing interest. And at one point you agreed with your
colleagues that you should not sign the statement and offered
that--you should not sign the statement and offered that you
would release it, quote, ``in a way that doesn't leak it back
to our collaboration.''
So, I'm going to list a series of actions you took before
and shortly after the statement publication.
Dr. Daszak. So----
Dr. Ruiz. So, 1 second. Let me just finish this list.
Dr. Daszak. Of course.
Dr. Ruiz. You requested The Lancet not designate you as a
corresponding author. You arranged for The Lancet to feature
the 27 signatories as coauthors in alphabetical order. You
created a COVID-19 Statement Google Mail address for reader
correspondence. You directed one of the Statement's signatories
to take a press inquiry you had personally received.
Dr. Daszak, did you take those actions, so that the Lancet
Statement would not, in your own words, link back to your
collaboration?
Dr. Daszak. No. Those actions were taken because, as we
state in, I think, the final sentence of the statement, this is
a 300-word statement to show support for scientists fighting a
pandemic.
In the final phrase, we say: We speak in one voice. All of
us, all 26 people, are leaders in public health.
There are people in--authors of that letter that are far
more high ranked in the system than I am. It was inappropriate
for me to be first or corresponding author because we speak as
one voice. We state that clearly in the letter. We all felt
very strongly about it.
And I want to remind the Committee that almost all of those
authors followed up with a renewed letter to Lancet to continue
support for that original letter about a year later.
Dr. Ruiz. So, you know, let me be clear here. I
categorically condemn the threats you and other scientists or
public health officials have received due to extreme
accusations like we've heard from some of my colleagues. Words
have consequences, and repeated attacks can rile up people's
negative sentiments and result in threats.
But it seems like you were aware of your involvement, and
the Lancet Statement had at minimum the appearance of a
competing interest.
Dr. Daszak, you may disagree that you had a competing
interest as a technical matter. So, I'd like to know, where did
you draw the line between the appearance of a competing
interest and an actual competing interest?
Dr. Daszak. At the time we wrote the letter, none of us,
all 26 authors, could ever imagine the political maelstrom
that's happened since. None of us thought that the work we did
would be considered----
Dr. Ruiz. So, where do you draw the line between the
appearance of a competing interest and an actual competing
interest?
Dr. Daszak. Well, in the case of the Lancet letter, we
filed our submission----
Dr. Ruiz. In the case of all of your disclosures and all
the debate where you didn't say that Wuhan was a subsidiary of
your grant, like, where do you--you know, you were doing
subsidiary work at Wuhan.
Where do you draw the line between telling folks that, yes,
you, in fact, were subgranting research at Wuhan and yet you're
debating whether or not this came from Wuhan?
Dr. Daszak. And I think you'll find in my competing
interests I stated we've done extensive work with multiple
organizations in China.
Dr. Ruiz. Multiple organization in China is a way to skirt
around the fact that it was Wuhan.
Dr. Daszak. We had years of research----
Dr. Ruiz. It was Wuhan.
Dr. Daszak. Dozens of----
Dr. Ruiz. I mean, the one lab that we're interested in here
is Wuhan.
Dr. Daszak. Right.
Dr. Ruiz. And yet you say multiple labs.
So, Dr. Daszak, you know, my heart goes out to you and your
family. I really feel for you and your family for the attacks
that you guys have endured.
But, you know, I can appreciate the importance of
solidarity with scientists fighting COVID-19, sharing
information about the virus, yet facing resistance from the
government. We saw the same during the Trump administration.
But your failure to declare a competing interest, coupled
with your efforts to disperse apparent authorship among the
signatories, deprived the public of important context when
reading the statement.
So with that, you know, I want to thank you for being here.
And I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
I now recognize the Chairman of the Full Committee, Mr.
Comer from Kentucky, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Daszak, how long have you been a collaborator with the
Wuhan Institute of Virology?
Dr. Daszak. I think since about 2003.
Mr. Comer. So, during that time before the pandemic, were
you aware of all the types of research occurring at the Wuhan
lab?
Dr. Daszak. We were aware of all the published information
coming out of the lab and the people we met from the lab.
Mr. Comer. Were you aware that there was a Chinese military
lab associated with the Wuhan lab?
Dr. Daszak. No, and I still am not aware of that.
Mr. Comer. In the fall of 2019, the Wuhan lab virus data
base was taken offline.
Have you ever seen its full virus data base?
Dr. Daszak. No. No.
Mr. Comer. To your knowledge, did the Wuhan Institute
conduct coronavirus research that did not involve EcoHealth?
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Mr. Comer. In kind of standard procedure, do you--do
research--do researchers publish every virus they find or every
experiment they conduct?
Dr. Daszak. They try to publish most eventually.
Mr. Comer. So, is it possible the Wuhan Institute has
viruses or conducted experiments that they never published?
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Mr. Comer. So, you testified to your lack of knowledge
regarding activities at the Wuhan lab. Is it possible COVID-19
was the result of a lab leak?
Dr. Daszak. I've publicly stated that many times, including
as a member of the WHO mission to investigate the COVID
origins. All of us in the group unanimously voted----
Mr. Comer. So, yes, it's possible, correct?
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. That it was possible but extremely
unlikely, based on the evidence we have.
Mr. Comer. Dr. Daszak, the U.S. intelligence community has
been investigating the origins of COVID-19. During that
investigation were you ever contacted by any intelligence
agencies?
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Mr. Comer. Which ones?
Dr. Daszak. The CIA, the FBI, and the Defense Intelligence
Agency.
Mr. Comer. OK. Dr. Daszak, before I ask you this next
question, I want to remind you that you are under oath.
Other than the interactions that you just testified to,
have you or do you have a standing relationship, either
officially or unofficially, with any agency in the intelligence
community?
Dr. Daszak. No.
Mr. Comer. So, you've never been an informant for the U.S.
Government?
Dr. Daszak. You asked me if I have a standing relationship
with any agencies in the intelligence community. The answer is
no.
Mr. Comer. So, you're stating publicly you've never been an
informant for any U.S. intelligence agency?
Dr. Daszak. I'm stating publicly that I do not have a
standing relationship with the intelligence community. That was
your question.
Mr. Comer. Have you ever been an informant for any U.S.
intelligence agency?
Dr. Daszak. Not to my knowledge. I've certainly when
they've asked me questions, I've provided answers, as any
citizens of the U.S. would.
Mr. Comer. What types of questions? Did they ask you
questions before the COVID outbreak?
Dr. Daszak. I've spoken with FBI before the COVID outbreak,
of course.
Mr. Comer. So, you had communications with the intelligence
community before the outbreak of COVID.
Dr. Daszak. Well, the FBI was a member of the Forum on
Microbial Threats, which I'm the Chair of. So, yes, only in
that context.
Mr. Comer. Like what types of conversations did you talk
about prior to the outbreak of COVID?
Dr. Daszak. Talked about emerging disease threats and what
information we have about where on the planet the next virus is
likely to emerge.
Mr. Comer. Did the U.S.----
Dr. Daszak. And then we talked about China and the threats
of coronaviruses.
Mr. Comer. So, did the U.S. intelligence community know
what was going on in the Wuhan lab.
Dr. Daszak. That's a question for the U.S. intelligence
agency. I mean, we've supplied any information to any
government agency that----
Mr. Comer. So, the U.S. intelligence agency was interested,
because you had conversations with them prior to COVID, in what
type of activity was taking place in the Wuhan lab?
Dr. Daszak. Yes. And I believe they've asked many other
scientists too.
Mr. Comer. How familiar would you state that the
intelligence community was with what was going on in the Wuhan
lab? Did the intelligence community believe that the Wuhan lab
was being used by China to manufacture bioweapons?
Dr. Daszak. Well, that's really for the intelligence
community to answer.
But in the public statements that they've made, two
agencies, I think, have low to moderate confidence that there
was some activity, and the other agencies were unable to
comment. So, I'm not sure they do have much information.
Mr. Comer. Do you find it troubling that, by all accounts
from your testimony, the intelligence community suspected
something fishy was going on at the Wuhan lab, despite that
they still funded research with American taxpayer dollars at
the Wuhan lab?
Dr. Daszak. Well, I don't know that the intelligence
community funded research there, but----
Mr. Comer. But the government did.
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Mr. Comer. And the intelligence community is part of the
government.
Dr. Daszak. Sure. Sorry, I misunderstood your question.
And I don't find it troubling at all, I don't think it's
unusual, because only two intelligence agencies, from my
recollection, have any belief that that may have been involved
in a lab origin of COVID and they have low to moderate
confidence.
I just don't think the data are there to support that. And
I think the evidence that this came from a natural spillover is
huge and growing every week.
Mr. Comer. My time has expired.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Mrs. Dingell from Michigan
for 5 minutes of questions.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In 2018, EcoHealth submitted a grant application titled
``Project DEFUSE'' to DARPA. And although DARPA ultimately
rejected the application, it proposed experiments to introduce
furin cleavage sites into coronaviruses. That has, as we all
know, since met controversy.
For context, furin cleavage sites are an attribute found in
some viruses, including SARS-CoV-2, that can help make these
viruses more infectious.
Dr. Daszak, did Project DEFUSE propose that the Wuhan
Institute of Virology perform the furin cleavage site
experiments?
Dr. Daszak. No.
Mrs. Dingell. Do you have any knowledge of the Wuhan
Institute of Virology or UNC ever performing the furin cleavage
site experiments?
Dr. Daszak. No.
Mrs. Dingell. You have none?
Dr. Daszak. No.
Mrs. Dingell. Your answers appear to be consistent with
your transcribed interview testimony about Project DEFUSE's
proposed furin cleavage site experiments.
However, Republicans have suggested that your testimony
today and previously is materially inconsistent with a comment
you made on a recently released draft of the Project DEFUSE
application.
You wrote that you, quote, ``want to stress the U.S. side
of this proposal, so that DARPA are uncomfortable with our
team. Once we get the funds, we can then allocate who does what
exact work, and I believe that a lot of these assays can be
done in Wuhan as well.''
Republicans have suggested that this comment is
inconsistent with your testimony about where particular Project
DEFUSE experiments would be conducted.
However, it's not entirely clear that the furin cleavage
site experiments you've testified about today and previously
are the same work being referenced in your comment.
And I would like to note that the final Project DEFUSE
proposal does, in fact, reference certain lab work to be
conducted in Wuhan.
Dr. Daszak, is your testimony about the proposed furin
cleavage site experiments at UNC inconsistent with your comment
about lab work in Wuhan?
Dr. Daszak. Absolutely not. And as you can see from the
sidebar comment in the draft proposal that you're referring to,
I was talking about assays.
Assays are things like PCR tests, like the COVID tests we
all take. They use noninfectious particles. They're not
infectious agents.
The infectious work involving recombinant viruses is
clearly laid out in the proposal to be done at UNC.
And I want to remind the Committee again that this proposal
was never funded and the work was never done.
Mrs. Dingell. Well, thank you for clearing that up.
But I do want to note, however, that it appears that you
intended to mislead DARPA about the extent of Wuhan's
involvement at the time you made this comment. You told the
Chairman that you saw nothing unusual about this.
It kind of raises some questions for me. It's not so easy.
So, I guess I'd like you to talk about that a little more.
Dr. Daszak, why did you even entertain the thought of
minimizing and apparently omitting the extent of Wuhan's
involvement?
Dr. Daszak. Well, I did talk to the DARPA staff right at
the beginning when we started planning this proposal and asked
them straight up in an email chain: Is it OK to propose this,
to work with the colleagues in China on coronaviruses from
China? They said yes.
So there was no intent to hide any China involvement.
They're in the proposal. And what matters is the record of the
proposal, not what's written in a draft months earlier that was
then rejected by our internal deliberations.
The record of the proposal that was submitted clearly lays
out the work plan and indicates each lab and what work it's
going to do. DARPA reviewed that. They saw it. They had
oversight of that.
If then when they said, ``Yes, you've got the go-ahead to
be funded,'' we would then have submitted work plans. If I
wanted to change where one or two of the assays were done, I
would then propose that to DARPA. They would have complete
authority and oversight over whether that happened or not.
So, there was no attempt to deceive at all.
Mrs. Dingell. There are appearance issues here. So, that's
why I want to say my Democratic colleagues and I want to----
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Mrs. Dingell [continuing]. Emphasize the importance of
transparency.
We believe in a full accounting of facts, and I believe we
have been very fair with you. We won't accuse you of creating
COVID-19 because that's simply not what we can do with the
available evidence. It doesn't demonstrate it. And we will give
you the opportunity to respond to allegations--Republican
allegations--that may not hold water.
But to the extent that you have considered misrepresenting
facts or done so, we will consider that a very serious mistake.
And with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Griffith from Virginia for 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you.
Dr. Daszak, I'd like to walk through an inconsistency we
have identified in your--in this investigation and your
testimony.
I would request unanimous consent to move three documents
into the record. The first is the draft progress report dated
May 2020, the second the year 5 progress report submitted to
NIH in August 2021, and the last is an excerpt from Dr.
Daszak's transcribed interview of November.
Dr. Wenstrup. Without objection.
Mr. Griffith. The first document is an earlier draft of the
year 5 progress report that was originally due in September
2019 that was sent to the Committee by an anonymous
whistleblower.
You should have that now, and it's this document here.
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. It appears that this version was updated on--
or last updated on May 26, 2020, which was about 7 months after
it was due and about 16 months before you had submitted--or
submit a document--to the NIH--to NIAID in August 2021.
I'll also note that we have repeatedly requested the drafts
of these progress reports from EcoHealth, but the drafts,
including this one, have not been produced.
In the version you submitted to NIAID in August 2021, in
talking about transference from bats to humans, you stated--or
the report stated--``There may be as many as the low hundreds
of thousands to over a million people infected each year in
south China and Southeast Asia.''
This statement has since been repeated in multiple news
articles for the proposition that direct bat-to-human spillover
of viruses is a common occurrence. It has been used to bolster
the case for natural origin, and may even be responsible, as
you said, for the intelligence community having low to moderate
assurance that it started in the lab.
But the May 2020 draft of the year 5 progress report
reached a different conclusion with the same data. This is
still your people. And you stated in that one, quote, ``The low
rate of seropositivity observed in this study indicates that
the bat coronavirus spillover is a rare event.''
Rare or up to a million?
So as of May 2020, EcoHealth was in the opinion that a
spillover of bat viruses into people was a rare event. But when
you finally sent this report to NIH, the report stated that
spillovers infected potentially a million people each year in
south China and Southeast Asia.
Now, in addition to the draft being materially different,
this May 2020 draft also contradicts your transcribed interview
testimony.
During the interview, I specifically asked you, and I asked
you directly, whether the 2021 version of the year 5 progress
report was, quote, ``in all respects the same as,'' end quote,
the one that was supposed to be submitted in September 2019.
Mr. Griffith. You testified from the point of view of the
work that this Committee's concerned about in SARS-related
coronavirus, yes. Then we had a discussion about the fact that
there's a couple of committees involved. And you repeated, yes,
that there was nothing significant that wasn't in the draft
that would have then been put in the final version. That's your
testimony under oath.
In light of this May 2020 draft of the progress report, I
don't know how to interpret your answer to me in the
transcribed interview as anything other than untruthful.
You changed perhaps one of the most important findings, the
likelihood of bat coronavirus spillover into humans, from very
rare in early 2020, on a report that was due in September 2019,
to possibly over a million spillovers annually in Southeast
Asia and Southeast China alone by late 2021.
There's no new data. There's no new paper cited--just a
complete 180 reversal on the conclusion.
And, Dr. Daszak, this is uncomfortable, but we must know,
and my assumption is that you either had communications with
Dr. Fauci or others at NIAID; you had outside pressure; or you
realized that your company could be liable, and so, changes
were made either to satisfy NIAID or others in the scientific
community, or to cover up potential liability. Which one is it?
Dr. Daszak. Well, there's a fourth possibility, isn't
there, that we conducted scientific research in the period
between the initial drafting of that report and updating it----
Mr. Griffith. And, if that were true--hang on--if that were
true, Dr. Daszak, why didn't you tell me that in November of
last year? It's been less than 6 months. I gave you the
opportunity to say that there was a change in your initial
draft and later drafts. You didn't bring up this fourth
possibility then. You didn't say, ``Well, we did some
additional research, and we made a change on the number of
times that a bat virus might spill over into the population in
Southeast Asia or South China.'' You didn't give me that.
I gave you the chance. I didn't ask it as--I was looking
for facts. I wasn't trying to cross-examine you at that time,
and yet you didn't tell me the truth. And today you come up
with a new theory as to why that might've happened, but that's
not what you gave me in November. Isn't that true? You didn't
give me that in November, isn't that true, yes or no?
Dr. Daszak. My theory----
Mr. Griffith. Is it yes or no that you told me something
wrong and false in November?
Dr. Daszak. My theory has a substantial advantage over
yours in that it's----
Mr. Griffith. No, my theory is you didn't tell me the
truth. You're now coming up with a theory as to why your
reports in the leaked 2020 report and your later 2021 report
are different. I'm asserting, and I'm asking you, you told me
something wrong in November if your----
Dr. Daszak. I believe----
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. Is correct. Is that true?
Dr. Daszak. I believe I'm seeing this for the first time.
You never showed this to me on the record.
Mr. Griffith. I didn't have it in November, but I asked you
if there was a substantial change----
Dr. Daszak. If you would've shown me this, I would've
explained it then. If you let me speak, I'll explain it now.
Mr. Griffith. Well, let me----
Dr. Daszak. I can give you the answer to your question.
Mr. Griffith. I'm going to answer it for you because here's
the problem.
Dr. Daszak. OK.
Mr. Griffith. I asked you specifically if there would be
any substantial or significant changes from what you would've
had--you said you tried to send the report in earlier, and
there was something wrong with the site and so forth, and I
said, but that report that was due in September, when you tried
to send it in September 2019, were there any substantial
differences. You said that there weren't, that they would be
substantially the same.
Dr. Daszak. And that is still correct.
Mr. Griffith. And you don't think this is a significant
change?
Dr. Daszak. No.
Mr. Griffith. Wow.
Dr. Daszak. I will explain--I will explain----
Mr. Griffith. You know what, I practiced in the criminal
courts for many, many years, and I will just tell you, if you
were my client, I would tell you that that dog won't hunt and
the judge ain't going to believe that.
And I yield back.
Dr. Daszak. Thanks.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Ms. Ross from North Carolina
for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member.
Dr. Daszak, I'm going to return to the report but talk
about a discrete issue examined in the minority staff report
that the Democrats released this morning, concerning your
compliance with NIH's reporting requirements. So, we're just
going to stay on reporting requirements.
And, as you know, as a grant recipient and a scientist,
accurate and timely reporting is crucial for the stewards of
taxpayer funds, and missteps in this process can reflect poorly
on the broader scientific enterprise.
So, consistent with NIH's grants policy statement and
NIAID--NIAID required you to submit annual progress reports for
your grants--annual, every year.
Your grant had an initial 5-year term, meaning you were
required to submit five reports. But I'm going to go back to
the report that my colleague was talking about.
So your year 5 report, so the fifth report--you'd already
reported, done fine, before then--that was due on September 19.
Is that correct?
Dr. Daszak. That's not correct. It was due on September the
28th, 2019.
Ms. Ross. Right. I'm sorry. September 28, 2019?
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Ms. Ross. Perfect. Thank you.
But it is also true that you did not submit this report
until August 2021, nearly 2 years later, as my colleague just
represented.
Dr. Daszak. Well----
Ms. Ross. You did not submit the report at the end of
September 2019?
Dr. Daszak. We uploaded the report into the system. The
system locked us out. We tried to contact NIH. We received no
response----
Ms. Ross [continuing]. Excuse me. Reclaiming my time.
You did email, on July 30 of 2019, your grants manager,
saying you expected to have everything uploaded by the end of
July. But then the report was not uploaded by the end of July.
I'm quoting an email from Dr. Chmura, dated July 30, 2019,
which is on file.
Then HHS IG examined why you submitted the year 5 report
nearly 2 years late, and, again, you told us about this lockout
for the deadline.
However, NIH performed an electronic, forensic
investigation of its report-submission system and found no
evidence of a lockout. They also found no evidence to
corroborate your claims.
Additionally, in a transcribed interview with Select
Committee staff, the NIH official tasked with your grants
compliance believed that you could have submitted the report on
time.
You have provided us with no documented evidence of
EcoHealth's outreach to NIAID about the lockout, and then you
stated it didn't exist because you only contacted by phone.
That assertion is pretty difficult to square with your
staff's previous patterns of communication over the previous 4
years.
For example, your staff had emailed twice in July 2019,
once on July 30, as I previously explained, and then earlier on
July 24. So, there was no email on September 29 that said we
tried to call you.
And, in the previous year, you previously emailed a copy of
your year 4 annual report to multiple NIAID officers. So, there
was no email of the fifth year report, the same one that my
colleague was talking about.
So your staff knows how to communicate--they had--for the
life of the grant. And then later you claimed that that year 5
report was of little significance because the grant renewal
application contained experimental results from year 5 of the
grant.
But that's just not true because we've heard this whole
colloquy about differences that would've been made between 2019
and 2021.
Yes or no, if you had looked back and knew that you would
be here today, would you have done something differently to
ensure that that report was received in September 2019?
Dr. Daszak. Well, I have a timeline of submission efforts,
and there are attempts to submit which are not yet on the
record with you, which we'll supply.
Ms. Ross. We'd appreciate that.
Dr. Daszak. There are also--it's also both things can be
true, that a forensic analysis of efforts to submit aren't
going to pick up a phone call to the grants management staff
that our admin people made. They did. They received no
response. I believe that person then left.
And, look, the issue over what we would do differently,
well, one thing I would do differently was I'd certainly send a
copy of the report to our program officer. I did that in year 4
not because that's a routine process--that's not----
Ms. Ross. But you knew----
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. But I was trying to set up a
meeting with the program officer----
Ms. Ross [continuing]. You knew that there were
difficulties. You had a previous----
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Ms. Ross [continuing]. Experience of doing this and making
sure people got things. And what I am saying is, when the
taxpayers' money is used for scientific research, it is
imperative that people comply with the rules, particularly when
their behavior had been exemplary in the past.
And that is what raises the concerns that you have heard
from our colleagues----
Dr. Daszak. Well, let me explain----
Ms. Ross [continuing]. And with that, I yield back.
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. But let me explain, please, if I
can. NIH told us 2 years later to submit that report. It took
NIH 11 days to unlock the system--so any assertion that the
system was not locked are demonstrably false--11 days. And that
time we got the email receipts which I'll share with you, of
course.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Ms. Malliotakis from New York
for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Malliotakis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Daszak, ``gain of function'' is broadly understood as a
type of research that modifies a biological agent, so that it
confers new and enhanced activity to that agent.
Does that describe any of the work that Wuhan conducted as
far as you are knowledgeable?
Dr. Daszak. That is not the definition of ``gain of
function.''
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. Then what is your definition?
Dr. Daszak. I don't have a personal definition.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. But did you--then let me ask this
question. Did any of the research that you funded through your
organization at Wuhan Lab modify a virus to make it more
infectious among humans, yes or no?
Dr. Daszak. No. That was not the goal of our work, and
that's why it was not considered gain of function.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. But in 2016----
Dr. Wenstrup. Will the gentlelady suspend?
Under the rules of the House, the Chairman is responsible
for maintaining order and preserving decorum in the Committee
room. I expect the audience members to be respectful of the
witnesses, Members, and public, and there should be no filming.
I yield back.
Ms. Malliotakis. In 2016, in an email to NIH, you said,
``We are happy to hear that our gain-of-function research
funding ban, or prohibition, or pause rather, has been
lifted.'' So, what were you--what gain of function therefore
followed?
Dr. Daszak. Well, they paused our research because of the
gain-of-function pause. They lifted the pause on our research.
That was the response I was----
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. So, after that period of time, you did
not fund any research that modified a virus to make it more
infectious among humans?
Dr. Daszak. EcoHealth Alliance never has and did not do
gain-of-function research, by definition.
Ms. Malliotakis. Are you aware of Wuhan Lab conducting that
type of research?
Dr. Daszak. No.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. The State Department has indicated
ties between Chinese military and WIV since 26--17. You
testified earlier that you were not aware of any type of
military activity at the WIV?
Dr. Daszak. I've never seen any. I've never seen any
reliable reporting of any.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. EcoHealth received tens of millions of
dollars from the Defense Department. Did any of this money make
its way to the WIV?
Dr. Daszak. Not a single cent.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. Did any scientific information derived
with those funds make its way to the WIV?
Dr. Daszak. The scientific information derived from the
DITRA--the work that we do, goes to DITRA and the American
people.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. And so, no technology or anything
obtained with the funds from the Department of Defense made its
way to the WIV?
Dr. Daszak. There is no connection between the WIV and the
work we do with DITRA at all whatsoever.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. Thank you.
Why did you choose to partner with the Wuhan Lab?
Dr. Daszak. Well, if you want to work in a foreign country
to find the next potential risk of a pandemic, you have to work
with labs in those countries. We looked at labs across China.
The WIV is the premier viral research in China.
Ms. Malliotakis. And at no time were you concerned about
sub-par safety conditions at this particular lab?
Dr. Daszak. No. In fact, it's got very good biosafety
level.
Ms. Malliotakis. Well, I mean, I think that could be
disputed at this point.
Dr. Daszak. Well, I've never seen any verifiable evidence
or data that suggests otherwise.
Ms. Malliotakis. Like, I think our intelligence
department--intelligence community has shown that they've been
operating----
Dr. Daszak. No, I've never seen any verifiable or real data
to suggest otherwise. Intelligence community reports behind
the, you know, the security code----
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. I'd like to turn to----
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. And I can't see those.
Ms. Malliotakis [continuing]. How much has the EcoHealth
Alliance received since the outbreak of the COVID pandemic
from--in American tax dollars, from 2020 to today?
Dr. Daszak. Our annual operating budget this year is about
$16 million. So, it's been about 4 years since the pandemic,
so, given the fluctuation in funding, approximately four times
$15-or $16 million.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. And our colleagues on both sides of
the aisle say that we want to prevent the next pandemic. Yet
EcoHealth is still receiving tens of millions of dollars to do
risky----
Dr. Daszak. To prevent the next pandemic.
Ms. Malliotakis. Well, but----
Dr. Daszak. That's our goal. That's our mission. It's
written into our mission.
Ms. Malliotakis [continuing]. I mean, it's one thing to
prevent the next pandemic. You could actually produce one and--
--
Dr. Daszak. No.
Ms. Malliotakis [continuing]. What I want to--yes,
absolutely, yes.
Dr. Daszak. No, absolutely not. That's not----
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. So, although funding was stopped at
EcoHealth Alliance work on bat coronaviruses in Wuhan, your
researchers are still doing research on bat coronaviruses in
Myanmar, Laos, and Vietnam. Is that correct?
Dr. Daszak. Yes. Not Myanmar. We're not allowed to work
there yet because of political instability.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. And are you doing experiments with
bats and hamsters on the deadly, brain-swelling Nipah virus in
Bangladesh?
Dr. Daszak. I would have to check if we're doing
experiments on that. We certainly have funding to work on Nipah
virus. It's a very real threat globally and to the American
people.
Ms. Malliotakis. And are you infecting humanized mice with
zoonotic viruses in Southeast Asia?
Dr. Daszak. Not to my knowledge, but I would have to check.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. And are you--did you obtain $14
million in taxpayer funds to import bats from Asia to create a
breeding colony here in the United States at the State
University of Colorado?
Dr. Daszak. We have a collaboration with CSU to conduct
work on a really significant public health threat called Nipah
virus.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. And now you'll be infecting those bats
with deadly viruses including the Nipah and the Ebola. Are you
aware that Colorado State University has had lab accidents in
the past?
Dr. Daszak. There will be no infection experiments, to my
knowledge, with Nipah or ebola at CSU. That will be done at a
BSL-4 facility elsewhere.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. I've run out of time. I yield back.
Thank you.
Dr. Wenstrup. Dr. Daszak, we are going to take some of the
questions that you said you'd get back to us on, we'll submit
them for the record and get a response.
I now recognize Ms. Tokuda from Hawaii for 5 minutes of
questions.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Doctor, a key issue at today's hearing is your transparency
as a Federal grantee. There's an apparent gap in understanding
between you and NIAID about the status of key bat samples
related to your grant.
There's an open question about the extent to which this gap
may be attributable to omissions or misrepresentations on your
part. I'd appreciate your help in understanding this a little
bit more.
In April 2023, NIAID allowed work to resume on the
EcoHealth grant, while barring EcoHealth from providing any
grant funds to the Wuhan Institute of Virology. The Select
Subcommittee interviewed two senior NIAID officials involved in
that decision.
We were told that part of the logic in allowing the grant
to move forward was preserving access to biological bat samples
from your prior work.
So, for context, under the former iteration of the
EcoHealth grant, the Wuhan Institute of Virology collected and
tested bat samples for the presence of coronavirus.
Doctor, it appears that when NIAID renewed your grant, that
they were of the understanding that you would have access to
those bat samples. In fact, in a transcribed interview, a NIAID
official testified that you had directly informed her EcoHealth
had access to those samples.
But, in your transcribed interview, you testified that all
of the bat samples that WIV had collected under your grant
remained in the custody of the WIV.
Doctor, do you have physical access to the bat samples the
Wuhan Institute of Virology previously collected under your
grant? A simple yes or no will suffice.
Dr. Daszak. Sadly we do not.
Ms. Tokuda. Do you have access to the genetic sequences of
viruses found in those bat samples?
Dr. Daszak. Yes, we do.
Ms. Tokuda. At any point did you as the CEO of EHA demand
that your team physically verify and cross-check the sequencing
at the Wuhan Institute of Virology? Yes or no will suffice.
Dr. Daszak. We cross-check all the information that comes
out from all of our collaborators.
Ms. Tokuda. So, you cross-check it, but did you actually
see the conduct yourself? Did you go there to the lab, actually
have access to the samples, and do the work yourself? Or were
you taking the information, the sequencing you got from Wuhan,
and just assuming that it was correct?
Dr. Daszak. For us to go to China and do the sequencing and
the extraction of RNA and all that work ourselves----
Ms. Tokuda. So much of this is based upon----
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. Would defeat the objective of
having a subcontract. The whole point is that the work is done
in China by the Chinese researchers because that's what is the
most efficient way to do that work.
We then get the data from them. We cross-check it, validate
it, submit it for publication. It's reviewed, revised----
Ms. Tokuda. So, we're working off of the----
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. Uploaded into the NIH data base.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you, sir. I'm taking back my time.
So clearly we are taking the word of these Chinese
scientists, and to state the obvious, having the Wuhan
Institute of Virology send you electronic sequences through
emails, as I recall through your testimony, is not the same
thing as physically having the samples.
There's nothing stopping the Wuhan Institute of Virology
from withholding certain sequences of particular interest or
for manipulating sequence data for unknown purposes.
In addition, the gap in understanding between you and NIAID
regarding the status of these samplings is highly concerning to
me.
Doctor, did you intentionally misrepresent your access to
the samples to get your grants renewed by NIAID, yes or no?
Dr. Daszak. No. And let me explain why there may be a
discrepancy in the understanding from NIAID. We were very clear
that the samples collected with U.S. taxpayers' money, because
of the geopolitical issues and our grant being terminated, are
now unable to be taken out of that lab. We were told that by
the Chinese authorities.
However, we had gotten access to genomic information, new
information, sequence data, and that is what we proposed to
work with, with NIH.
In fact, it was EcoHealth Alliance, me, who proposed to
NIAID in our renegotiation that we would not do any on-the-
ground work in China, and we don't need to because we already
have full genome----
Ms. Tokuda. You seem to have a lot more information than
what we were provided in the days of testimony that you sat
down and gave our team, as well as that that we got from NIAID,
so clearly someone is either lying or somebody is clearly
misrepresenting themselves.
So if you, in fact, said all of these things to NIAID
officials, are you saying that they are misrepresenting you?
Dr. Daszak. No. And I categorically refute the suggestion
that someone's lying. This is a simple case of people are
mistaken between what a sample is and what a sequence is.
The critical piece of information that the Committee could
see----
Ms. Tokuda. I think it's very hard for you to mistaken
between a sample and a sequence in your profession and within--
--
Dr. Daszak. People make that mistake all the time.
Scientists usually don't.
Ms. Tokuda. But the series of mistakes that had to be made
in order for NIAID to have the understanding that you had
access to the samples yourself versus having it in WIV as
you're stating. You clearly stated that to them, that you had
no access to the physical samples?
Dr. Daszak. Yes, repeatedly, and there's a key document
that the Committee's missing, which is the----
Ms. Tokuda. So, the NIAID official misrepresented herself
in her testimony to this Committee? Is that what you're
claiming?
Dr. Daszak. I'm not claiming anything about the NIAID
official. I've not seen the testimony. I've not seen what
evidence they've got.
However, I will state, the Committee should look at a
document, which is with NIAID--and we have a copy of it--it's
the renegotiated specific aims which clearly say, no on-the-
ground work will be done in China----
Ms. Tokuda. I think--OK.
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. No samples will come from China.
The genomes are already in possession----
Ms. Tokuda. Doctor, my time is up. I appreciate the----
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. To do this research.
Ms. Tokuda [continuing]. Time of the Chair here. I think
it's important that grantees represent themselves honestly and
transparently.
Dr. Daszak. Which we do.
Ms. Tokuda. Our taxpayers deserve better, and this
Committee demands nothing less.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Dr. Daszak. Thank you.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Dr. Miller-Meeks from Iowa
for 5 minutes of questions.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you, Dr. Daszak, for testifying before the Select
Subcommittee today. I've not been in your place before, and I
would say that it's certainly very challenging.
You know, some people would say where I represent in
southeast Iowa is kind of redneck or kind of hickville. So, I
think a lot of medical terminology and scientific terminology
is very confusing and very confusing to the average person and
even the average Congressperson.
So, as I recall, there was, under the Obama Administration,
a pause on gain-of-function research, and that was a 2-year
pause that Dr. Fauci helped to communicate, and then also was
communicating whether or not that prohibition should be lifted.
And, as I recall, weren't you in favor of lifting the
prohibition on gain-of-function research?
Dr. Daszak. I don't think I've ever publicly stated whether
the prohibition should be lifted or not. I think we published
an editorial in our journal, EcoHealth, that discussed the pros
and cons of gain-of-function research, back in 2015, something
like that.
And we came out with a conclusion, me and some other
authors, that this is a controversial piece of work, that if it
goes ahead, must be done in a very controlled and biosafe way.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. Thank you for that. And for your grant
which funded the Wuhan Institute of Virology, you proposed a
one log growth award term, and this term was in place in case
any of the viruses that were being modified grew, so--but
that's not considered gain of function, so--or is it? That's
the confusing part.
Dr. Daszak. Well, yes, it's quite important distinction.
The gain-of-function rules come into play when you propose an
experiment, and the experiment is reviewed then as to whether
it is likely to, with a reasonable assurance of likelihood,
cause an increase in transmission or pathogenicity of a virus
already known to infect people.
Because the work we were doing was on bat coronaviruses, it
was not covered by those rules. It was not considered of any
risk to human health because they've never been shown to infect
people. Now, that's one of the reasons why it wasn't
considered----
Dr. Miller-Meeks. I mean, what about SARS? Did SARS not
infect people? Is that not a bat coronavirus?
Dr. Daszak. The work we were doing was to work with bat
coronaviruses----
Dr. Miller-Meeks. I may be confused, but I think SARS was a
bat coronavirus. So----
Dr. Daszak. No, SARS was not a bat coronavirus. It's a----
Dr. Miller-Meeks. [continuing] Any of the viruses in your
experiments, did any of them grow in, as you said,
transmissibility, or pathogenicity?
Dr. Daszak. Not in any way that would cause any reason for
concern----
Dr. Miller-Meeks. So, they may have grown in
transmissibility or pathogenicity, but that's not gain-of-
function research?
Dr. Daszak. Because if you look at the definition of gain-
of-function research, it's to assess whether a human pathogen
is likely to be increased by some experiment on it. The viruses
we were working on were bat coronas.
But, listen, please don't take my word for it. The NIH
wrote to us--and I have the letter here--and said, ``Your work
is not gain of function and can move ahead.''
Dr. Miller-Meeks. I think it's contested whether the
experiments violated the one log growth term occurred during
the fourth or fifth year of your grant, and then, therefore, as
we know, there was questions about oversight and oversight on
your grant.
Let me just change a little bit. In your written
testimony----
Dr. Daszak. Well, can I just respond very briefly?
Dr. Miller-Meeks. Sir?
Dr. Daszak. Of course.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. Thank you.
You state that EcoHealth has maintained open, transparent
communication with agency staff, rapidly provided information
critical to public health and published analysis in scientific
journals, so that scientists everywhere can use this
information. Very important.
You continued by describing how Federal funding has allowed
you to build capacity in China which led to you being able to
obtain actual public health information from the scientists
which aided your research of SARS virus, originating from bats.
Based off your remarks and your testimony, would you say
that you have responsibly used Federal grant dollars?
Dr. Daszak. We have responsibly used Federal grant
dollars----
Dr. Miller-Meeks. So, the HHS Office of the Inspector
General----
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. And complied with every oversight
issue.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. So, the HHS Office of the Inspector
General released a report, in January 2023, stating that the
National Institutes of Health and EcoHealth Alliance did not
effectively monitor awards and sub awards, which resulted in
missed opportunities for oversight and effective accounting of
taxpayer dollars.
Amongst the many recommendations of the OIG report
included, it stated that EcoHealth should comply with reporting
requirements for grants and sub awards as well as implementing
enhanced monitoring of how funds are used.
I think the point has already been made that transparency
is absolutely necessary. The type of research being done in a
lab, whether it is overseas or in the United States, it is
critical that it's done in the proper safety environment and
that the ethics of the research we're doing should be valid.
And we are stewards of taxpayer dollars that should not be
used in an irresponsible, nontransparent manner.
With that, I yield. Thank you.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Garcia from
California for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Dr. Daszak. I appreciate you being here, and I
want to thank everyone for some good questions that have
happened so far.
We all know that this Subcommittee has a critical mission
to prevent future pandemics--I think that's why we're all
here--and of course keep Americans safe from threats like
COVID. And, to the extent we're able to do that here today, I
obviously welcome that opportunity.
You probably are aware that we have had multiple hearings
now investigating the origins of COVID-19. And I want to just
remind us, the scientific consensus on this point is very
clear, which is that we do not have any conclusive evidence to
determine whether COVID sprung from an accidental lab leak or
some animal spillover.
Dr. Daszak, is a fair assessment in your mind as well?
Dr. Daszak. I would say the scientific consensus right now
is that--by far more likely that COVID-19 emerged from the
wildlife trade and wildlife markets of China, which employed 14
million people prior to the outbreak. There is zero evidence
that it emerged from a lab.
Mr. Garcia. Now, I want to remind you and as well as the
public that our own Federal agencies, of course, share this
exact lack of confidence, what one determining origin actually
is, and we actually have multiple different perspectives from
our agencies.
So, our press reports, as we all know--we have five
intelligence agencies that believe in animal spillover with low
confidence. The FBI thinks with moderate confidence, and the
Department of Energy with low confidence, in a lab leak, and
the CIA just doesn't know.
So, from a Federal agency perspective, there is no
conclusive evidence that we have actually made.
Now, what we do know, which is a lot of attacks, there's a
lot of thoughts about where certain folks in the Congress
believe these labs--or these leaks actually came from.
Now, Dr. Daszak, I'm going to be honest with you as well. I
share a lot of my colleagues' concerns about EcoHealth
Alliance's practices. A lot of them are deeply concerning,
particularly when it comes to the monitoring and reporting
requirements you had to the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases.
I think these lapses make a strong case for us, as Members
of Congress, to strengthen our country's ability to monitor and
enforce effective bio security measures and encourage the same,
of course, of our international community.
But I also want to just address what I think is the big
elephant in the room today, and oftentimes of what you and your
organization are accused of. Did your organization cause the
COVID-19 pandemic?
Dr. Daszak. Absolutely not.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. And I say that because we've
actually heard that being--have heard that throughout the
course of the last few months. And I ask this because we have
yet, of course, to focus on real solutions, for example, like
increasing funding to actually have better efforts to monitor
research grant recipients or improve biosecurity.
This Subcommittee also hasn't really talked about tangible
ways to increase international cooperation to achieve these
goals.
But we have heard a lot of implicit and explicit
suggestions that EcoHealth Alliance was part of some broader
conspiracy to spark a global pandemic.
Now, Doctor, were you ever directed by a government
official, let's say Dr. Fauci, to intentionally manufacture a
viral pandemic?
Dr. Daszak. Of course not.
Mr. Garcia. And I wanted to just ask you that, as
ridiculous as that question sounds, because we know folks have
actually suggested this. There was actually--we've had a Member
of even this--our own Subcommittee mention that Dr. Fauci was
trying to, and I quote, create a vaccine pandemic experiment,
mandate a vaccine be developed from it, and have the American
taxpayers foot the bill.
So, proponents of this conspiracy generally seem to think
your organization was somehow involved. So, I'm sure you've
heard this before. Do you want to, for the record, again, clear
this up?
Dr. Daszak. Well, it's patently false. There's no evidence
for that whatsoever, and there is incredibly substantial
evidence that this virus emerged through so-called natural
zoonotic origins.
And I might add that we're, right now as we speak, seeing a
global pan zootic, an outbreak in wildlife, of high pathogen
avian flu. It's now in our cattle. It's in our people, and here
we are debating lab biosafety which has nothing to do with
the----
Mr. Garcia. I appreciate that, and I think, you know, we've
heard also, not just that somehow Dr. Fauci or you or, you
know, your organization was involved, but that maybe it was a
Chinese-made bioweapon, which we've heard--actually the same
somebody of the Subcommittee has said in the past.
I think what's clear is that this Subcommittee needs to
actually focus on good-faith investigations, supporting
additional research, ensuring that grantees are actually given
the support that they need.
And I think what's also really clear is that we have
opportunities in this appropriations cycle, and in others in
the future, to actually collaborate, support HHS, support the
work the scientists are doing across this country, and that we
stop making these conspiracy theorist arguments and attacks
that aren't really helping us solve any future pandemics that
we may and, we know, will experience in the future.
Dr. Daszak. Agreed.
Mr. Garcia. And so, I want to thank you for being here.
Again, I think there are real concerns that we've had, and
certainly they've been shared today, but I think we should
focus on what we actually know to be true and move in that
direction.
And, with that, I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Mrs. Lesko from Arizona for 5
minutes of questions.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for being here. I think I heard you say earlier
today that the safety measures in the Chinese labs are the same
as in the U.S. Did you say that or something similar to that?
Dr. Daszak. I said they follow the same biosafety levels
for coronavirus research as we do here in the U.S., yes.
Mrs. Lesko. And so, you said that WIV followed the same
U.S. standards--or U.S. standards?
Dr. Daszak. The mandated rules in China are the same as in
the U.S. I have the paperwork here.
Mrs. Lesko. So, help me understand, because I've been told
that WIV is a biological safety level 2 and U.S. labs are
required to be biological safety level 3 for the type of
research that was done. So, how is it that you say they're the
same?
Dr. Daszak. Well, because that's--with all due respect,
that's not correct. There are--the biosafety levels are in the
Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratory Manual,
Sixth Edition, for the U.S., and they mandate that, for bats,
SARS-related coronaviruses--on page 452--it states that they're
for BSL-2 in culture, BSL-2 or 3 for in vivo work in mice.
So, those are the same standards that are used in China.
They're the same standards that are published. They're the same
standards that I'm being repeatedly asked questions about and
being attacked over. Yet here they are in black and white in
the manuals that describe the work that should be done in the
U.S.
Mrs. Lesko. Good. I'll look at it closer. The other thing I
think you said earlier is that you still don't know that there
is a Chinese military presence or collaboration with the Wuhan
Institute of Virology. Is that what you said?
Dr. Daszak. No. What I said was that I know of--I have no
knowledge of any military activity in the Wuhan Lab, and that
is correct.
Mrs. Lesko. And how do you know that? Because the State
Department--this is what the State Department said--the U.S.
State Department said in 2021, a fact sheet. It says, ``Secrecy
and nondisclosure are standard practice for Beijing. For many
years the United States has publicly raised concerns about
Chinese past biological weapons work which Beijing has neither
documented nor demonstrably eliminated despite its clear
obligations under the Biological Weapons Convention. Despite
the WIV presenting itself as a civilian institution, the United
States has determined that the WIV has collaborated on
publications and secret projects with the Chinese military.''
And this was in 2021, so you just deny what the State
Department says, that this is not happening?
Dr. Daszak. Well, something doesn't add up, I completely
agree, because it's the same State Department that reviews our
proposals to NIH and allows us to work with that lab.
If the State Department considers that to be a military
lab, surely they would've said, ``No, the WIV is not
appropriate for doing this research.'' However, they reviewed
it and said, ``Yes, it's appropriate and allowed.''
Now, I don't know--I don't have access to what the State
Department reviews and knows, but something doesn't add up
there because it's them that gave us the go-ahead to work with
WIV. If they'd have said, ``No, this is not appropriate,'' we
would've not done so, obviously.
Mrs. Lesko. I'm going to ask you a question similar to what
the Congresswoman from Hawaii asked, and, you know, you got a
lot of money, EcoHealth Alliance got a lot of money from grants
from the U.S. Government, from the taxpayers.
And I'm trying to understand if you went there, if anybody
from your company went to the Wuhan Institute of Virology to
actually inspect what was going on, because you keep saying no,
there was no gain-of-function research.
I think my colleague right here, Ms. Malliotakis, asked
that and you said, no, didn't happen. How do you know that if
you didn't go there?
Dr. Daszak. Well, what I said is, the research we did is
not gain of function, that is correct. Our staff visited Wuhan
repeatedly during the period we were working with them--we're
not working with them anymore--I visited them repeatedly. We
had online meetings, calls, Zoom calls, exchanged megabytes of
information on a weekly, monthly basis, of raw data and reports
and sequences. It's a very active collaboration.
And, after 15-plus years, 20 years of doing that, you get
to know how reliable and accurate their data are and the
working standards that they use. So, you do get a good
knowledge of whether that lab is adequately protected or not,
and it is, and it was, and I don't have access to any
information from the----
Mrs. Lesko. You know, I'm hoping someday that we are going
to get to the bottom of the truth of this. I don't know that we
ever are because I'm hearing totally opposite information from
reliable sources, than possibly you have said.
And so, we have two competing theories, and we can't get to
the bottom of it. It's very frustrating. I hope you understand
that.
Dr. Daszak. I hope you trust the scientists.
Mrs. Lesko. For me--the thing is, we've had scientists on
both sides----
Dr. Daszak. Oh, OK.
Mrs. Lesko [continuing]. That say totally opposite of what
you're saying, and so, we've had testimony over and over. My
time is up, but I hope you understand that the American people
just want to get to the bottom of this, and so do I, because I
don't want this to happen again.
Dr. Daszak. And so do we----
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you.
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. And that is why we do our work
every day in some very difficult places.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Mr. Cloud from Texas for 5
minutes of questions.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you, Chairman. So, you acknowledge you've
received a grant in 2014--NIAID awarded an EHA grant, entitled,
Understanding the Risk of Bat Coronavirus Emergence, to your
organization, correct?
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Mr. Cloud. And, once COVID outbreak happened, you labeled
the lab leak theory as conspiracy theory with your knowledge at
the time?
Dr. Daszak. That's not what I said, actually. I said that
there were conspiracy theories at the time that we wrote about
in our letter in Lancet, including HIV sequences----
Mr. Cloud. Right.
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. In the virus and snake DNA, some
very bizarre things.
Mr. Cloud. Your opinion was used to help--you said, ``Trust
the scientists.''
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Mr. Cloud. Not necessarily because of you. I don't know
that you had any contact with social media companies.
Did you have contact with social media companies during
that time?
Dr. Daszak. Well, I've posted things----
Mr. Cloud. Yes. As far as having, you know, a number of the
scientists, their opinions----
Dr. Daszak. Oh, no, no.
Mr. Cloud [continuing]. Were banned. Our government even
worked to help ban some of those scientific opinions of----
Dr. Daszak. No, that's not what we do.
Mr. Cloud [continuing]. That differed than yours.
Do you--would you acknowledge that that was bad practice at
least, that our government helped work with social media
companies to help ban certain scientific opinions?
Dr. Daszak. Well, I mean, if a social media----
Mr. Cloud. Do you think that benefited science? Do you
think what that was----
Dr. Daszak. I think there's been a lot of misinformation,
there still is, on social media. I think it's good that social
media companies are going to scientists to get information
about whether the data they're putting out is true or false.
Mr. Cloud. There were virologists who had, you know, years
of experience, who had differing opinions, who were silenced.
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Mr. Cloud. License threatened to be revoked, all those
different kind of things----
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Mr. Cloud [continuing]. In the name of science. You know,
we had Fauci almost declare himself to be science and that--you
know, those kind of things, I think, put a deep distrust in the
American people for some of the institutions we're now having
them to rely upon.
Looking back, do you think there was any error in that? Are
you concerned about that, or do you think----
Dr. Daszak. Well, I think, you know, as I said in my
opening statement, that the emotions during a pandemic are very
high. We have loved ones--we've all had that, we've all had our
children infected by COVID and worrying that they're going to
get really sick. And we know people who've died, and it's very
upsetting, very tragic.
I think the emotions lead to a sort of hyper reaction to
some of these things, and I think that we should trust our
scientists. I think that the head of a government institute
that's set up to work on infectious----
Mr. Cloud. Knowing what you know now, do you regret working
with the lab in Wuhan?
Dr. Daszak. Well, our mission is to prevent pandemics.
Pandemics emerge in----
Mr. Cloud. Knowing what you know now, do you regret working
with them?
Dr. Daszak. Pandemics----
Mr. Cloud. Not debating that you knew then, but knowing
what you know now----
Dr. Daszak. It's our mission to do this. We don't do this
because we want to go and work in foreign countries and risk
our lives. Pandemics emerge there. If we can stop them there,
we stop them getting here. That's what we do. It's written into
our mission. It's----
Mr. Cloud. Now, you said there's no evidence to a lab leak
theory. That's what you've said today a couple times.
Dr. Daszak. What I said, there's zero verifiable scientific
evidence--zero.
Mr. Cloud. OK. But we have evidence that the Wuhan Lab
destroyed data. Does that concern you at all?
Dr. Daszak. Yes. Any lab that destroys data concerns me.
Mr. Cloud. OK. Knowing what you know now, do you regret
working with the Wuhan Lab?
Dr. Daszak. As I've said----
Mr. Cloud. Do you think working with labs that destroy data
are--is sound?
Dr. Daszak. I have no choice. We work in countries where
diseases emerge, whether they're our allies or our competitors,
because our goal is to stop those diseases from emerging.
Mr. Cloud. One of the troubling things for us when we go
home, because we're representing the taxpayers----
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Mr. Cloud [continuing]. Who, no doubt, are, you know, most
of them are not virologists or scientists or--but they're
going, we're paying money to fund research in a country that's
in unrestricted warfare against us, that destroys evidence, and
then you still are like----
Dr. Daszak. No, no, I----
Mr. Cloud [continuing]. ``Well, maybe we should continue
working with them.''
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. I recognize those concerns,
absolutely, but if we want to prevent the next pandemic coming
out of China, how do we know when it's going to happen? We need
scientists on the ground to get that information, so we're
better prepared.
Mr. Cloud. Do you maintain that the lab leak theory is a
plausible theory today?
Dr. Daszak. As I've said all the way through this, it's
possible but extremely unlikely.
Mr. Cloud. And, having done it over, you would continue to
work with the Wuhan Lab?
Dr. Daszak. Well, I--they're a lab in China that does
virology research----
Mr. Cloud. This weighs into like your----
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. That----
Mr. Cloud [continuing]. Your organization is still
receiving taxpayer funds----
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Mr. Cloud [continuing]. And you're still making decisions
on which labs across the world that you go into.
Dr. Daszak. We don't work in China. We don't work with the
Wuhan Lab. They're debarred from funding.
Mr. Cloud. OK. Right. Right. But the taxpayer right now is
trusting you in some essence, through the various recommended
channels, to make decisions on who we're working with. And if
you're picking labs and you don't think it's an issue that a
lab destroyed data and that's not a disqualifying factor,
that's a concern.
Dr. Daszak. Well, let me remind you, we didn't pick a lab.
We proposed to do research with that lab. The State Department
and NIH reviewed it and said that lab was on the list of labs
that it preferred to work with.
Mr. Cloud. Well, I'm out of time, and I know Dr. Fauci will
be here, but there's--the, quote, layers of accountability have
become layers of plausible deniability in different
institutions----
Dr. Daszak. Well, that's a fact what I just said. It really
is a fact.
Mr. Cloud [continuing]. And so, we'll have to dig into that
because my time is up.
Dr. Daszak. No, no, I'll send you----
Mr. Cloud. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. The information about it.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Dr. Joyce from Pennsylvania
for 5 minutes of questions.
Dr. Joyce. Thank you, Chairman Wenstrup, for convening what
I feel is a critical meeting.
It is imperative that we are an oversight body who conduct
an adequate investigation and ensure that the American taxpayer
dollars are being spent judiciously and within the law.
Dr. Daszak, why did you try to downplay the fact that Shi
Zhengli and other Chinese scientists would be working on your
proposed grant to DARPA?
Dr. Daszak. I did not. I told DARPA who----
Dr. Joyce. Did you make any edits to your proposal in order
to obscure Chinese involvement in this work?
Dr. Daszak. No. It's clearly----
Dr. Joyce. Specifically, did you alter the number of
Chinese investigators in initial application and follow-up
application? Were the numbers the same?
Dr. Daszak. There was only one application.
Dr. Joyce. And so, that number has always been the number
of Chinese investigators that you worked with?
Dr. Daszak. The application that was submitted to the
agency is the only matter of record. Anything else is a draft.
They're ideas that can be revised and changed.
Dr. Joyce. Following up on some of my colleagues'
questions--and I appreciate the candidness that we continue to
pepper you with, because I think we have conflicting answers--
where are the sequences stored, and who has that data base?
Dr. Daszak. Those are two different questions.
Dr. Joyce. I know that.
Dr. Daszak. The sequences that we acquired from our work
with the Wuhan Institute of Virology are stored at EcoHealth
Alliance and have been shared publicly through GenBank, the NIH
data base, published and shared with this Committee and other
committees.
We have other sequences that we acquired before our grant
was renegotiated, which we're currently analyzing and will
publish----
Dr. Joyce. Do you feel you have all the sequences from the
Wuhan Institute of Virology?
Dr. Daszak. Well, I believe we have all the sequences of
any relevance to COVID.
Dr. Joyce. Having said that you're recognizing that data
was destroyed, you feel that you have all the sequences----
Dr. Daszak. Yes, I do.
Dr. Joyce [continuing]. That were not destroyed?
Dr. Daszak. There's a reason for----
Dr. Joyce. You have all the sequences that were not
destroyed?
Dr. Daszak. No, I think--I think we have--we had all
available SARS coronavirus-related, bat coronavirus sequences.
Prior to the outbreak, I had requested from WIV that they send
us all their data, so we publish a paper together, summarizing
the whole of the work that they do and we do. They included, in
the data they sent us, sequences that weren't collected with
our U.S. funding.
So we had access to all their information of any relevance
to COVID. That was before the outbreak. So, of course, it
didn't matter back then. After the outbreak----
Dr. Joyce. That's a great point----
Dr. Daszak. And we published it.
Dr. Joyce [continuing]. It didn't matter back then.
Dr. Daszak. And we published it.
Dr. Joyce. But subsequent to that, we recognize that there
has been data that has been destroyed. So, giving us data that
doesn't matter is irrelevant to the----
Dr. Daszak. The dates, it matters a lot. It didn't matter
to them whether they sent it to us or not. Now we have the
COVID pandemic and this huge geopolitical concern. There wasn't
a single request for any of those sequences to be moved or
changed. We published them in the summer of 2020 in a U.S.
journal with--uploaded, sorry, into U.S. NIH GenBank data base.
Dr. Joyce. So, you have to count on the goodwill of the
Wuhan Institute of Virology in order to meet your grant
requirements. How does that not violate the terms of the Wuhan
Institute of Virology's debarment?
Dr. Daszak. Well, we don't work with them. They're
debarred.
Dr. Joyce. So, you have no further contact with them?
Dr. Daszak. What I said is we don't work with them. We do--
--
Dr. Joyce. Do you have further contact with them?
Dr. Daszak. Of course, we have contact. Under the terms of
my renegotiated RO with NIH, we have to publish data from that
work. Of course we have to send copies of drafts of papers, get
them to check and make sure that they've included everything,
that we've got everything correct. So, of course we have
contact with them.
Dr. Joyce. Do you feel, given all the concerns that have
been raised during this hearing, that EcoHealth should continue
to receive taxpayer funds?
Dr. Daszak. EcoHealth's work is critical, as I said in my
opening statement, to preventing the next pandemic. Of course
we should receive Federal work. We've worked very carefully and
precisely with all of the Federal funding we've had. We've
reported on time in every other instance. The one instance we
were unable to, the NIH system locked us out, and you can see
from----
Dr. Joyce. We haven't been provided with data. There was an
employee who made a phone call, but you're not sure they still
work for EcoHealth, so that's still suspect for us.
Dr. Daszak. No, no, the NIH employee doesn't work for NIH--
--
Dr. Joyce. So, you have documentation that your employees
reached out? You have that employee that you could produce for
us that made the----
Dr. Daszak. Every bit of documentation I've got, we've
supplied. I think I have a few more other pieces that I can
supply.
Dr. Joyce. I think that's important that you supply that
because----
Dr. Daszak. Yes, absolutely, yes.
Dr. Joyce [continuing]. We, sitting on this side, are
responsible stewards of the taxpayer dollars, but I feel that
you at EcoHealth are not responsible stewards of the taxpayer
dollars that have been shared for you.
And I feel that, based on the information and based on the
actions that we have seen, I believe that you should never
receive taxpayer dollars again.
Dr. Daszak. Well, what's the----
Dr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Dr. McCormick from Georgia
for 5 minutes of questions.
Dr. McCormick. Dr. Daszak, how much was the grant that you
were reinstated--given for?
Dr. Daszak. I think it was $2.2 million.
Dr. McCormick. OK.
Dr. Daszak. Some of the money was never reinstated.
Dr. McCormick. OK. Your understanding, the risk of bat
coronavirus emergency grant was eventually reinstated by the
National Institute of Allergies and Infectious Diseases,
despite the fact that Wuhan Institute of Virology was barred
from receiving Federal funds. I think that was just discussed
ad nauseam----
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Dr. McCormick [continuing]. So, I won't kind of go into too
much detail on that.
But your grant was reinstated based on probably advice that
you got from some people, and I just want to kind of go into
that a little bit.
Did you have any conversations about your grant
reinstatement with Dr. David Morens, the senior adviser to Dr.
Fauci?
Dr. Daszak. I don't know.
Dr. McCormick. You don't know if you had a discussion?
Dr. Daszak. I don't know. Probably. I don't know. I'd have
to check my records.
Dr. McCormick. Did Dr. Morens ever give you any advice on
how to reinstate your Federal funding?
Dr. Daszak. Oh, yes. I mean, I asked everybody who had any
knowledge about the way NIH works on any possible strategy to--
--
Dr. McCormick. So, you did have discussions?
Dr. Daszak. With many, many scientists----
Dr. McCormick. OK.
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. Both those at NIH and elsewhere,
yes.
Dr. McCormick. So, were you aware that Dr. David Morens was
communicating with you on his personal Gmail account to avoid
FOIA and public accountability?
Dr. Daszak. I was aware that he was communicating with me
on his personal Gmail account sometimes, yes, for personal
matters.
Dr. McCormick. So, a personal matter about reinstating a
public grant?
Dr. Daszak. Well, it's not his job to reinstate it.
Dr. McCormick. Got it.
Dr. Daszak. This was me asking his advice as a friend and
colleague----
Dr. McCormick. About reinstating a Federal grant. Got it.
Dr. Daszak. Yes. I mean, we----
Dr. McCormick. Do you even find it problematic that a
senior adviser of Dr. Fauci, the head of NIAID, was
communicating with you on Gmail rather than an official
capacity about an official grant?
Dr. Daszak. Well, when I'm talking to him by email about
personal and security issues and political attacks----
Dr. McCormick. Security issues? So, you talked with him
security on his Gmail account?
Dr. Daszak. Yes, I talked to him about the attacks on my
house.
Dr. McCormick. OK. Officially--when your grant was
officially terminated in April 2020, do you think that Dr.
Morens undermined NIAID's decision by advising on how to get it
reinstated?
Dr. Daszak. Well, if that were true, then everybody else at
NIH who advised me on how to get it reinstated, including the
official reinstatement procedure, would also have undermined--
--
Dr. McCormick. Fair enough.
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. Stop it getting reinstated.
Dr. McCormick. Did you make any assertions that you would
be able to obtain information from the Wuhan Lab in regards to
your research when you were trying to get your reinstatement of
the grant?
Dr. Daszak. The assertion was that the U.S. taxpayer, who
funded the work we did in Wuhan, would get a fair shot at then
getting that information and making it public to protect the
U.S. taxpayer from future coronavirus threats. That's a very
valid and noble----
Dr. McCormick. So, you assume that you would have access to
that information. Is that correct?
Dr. Daszak. We already had access to----
Dr. McCormick. Do you have access to it now?
Dr. Daszak. After a certain day, we had access to genomic
sequences from Wuhan, yes. Yes, we do.
Dr. McCormick. OK. Where are those samples today?
Dr. Daszak. I'm talking about sequences, not samples. This
is exactly as I was saying earlier. People commonly make that
mistake. And the samples are in the freezers in Wuhan. The
sequences, the genetic information----
Dr. McCormick. So, you have access to the sequences, not
the samples?
Dr. Daszak. Yes, I do.
Dr. McCormick. OK. Very good.
Dr. Daszak. And I stated that clearly to NIAID all the way
through the negotiations. I also stated clearly we did not have
access to the sample----
Dr. McCormick. OK.
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. They were in the freezer. They
will probably remain there.
Dr. McCormick. And Wuhan is no longer receiving any tax
dollars, correct?
Dr. Daszak. Correct.
Dr. McCormick. OK. When it comes to your research--and I
know that we're talking some semantics, but I understand the
sequencing--by the way, have you ever found any consequential
sequence of this virus in the bats that you've studied?
Dr. Daszak. Yes, we found a lot of consequential sequences,
yes.
Dr. McCormick. So, in other words, are you finding that
coronavirus that's infected human beings in the bat population
in general that's continued to survive?
Dr. Daszak. Oh, no. No, that's a different question.
Dr. McCormick. OK. Yes. So, I would make the case that
maybe from the very beginning--and we've talked about this ad
nauseam, I think--we haven't found it in any animal samples
despite massive research to begin with.
And yet we continue to pour millions of dollars into
something that should exist--as a physician, as a physician
that just talked to you before, we spent millions and millions
of dollars and hundreds of samples for different species all
over China and have no evidence that it's in a--in an animal
origin, but yet we continue to send millions of dollars to try
to find evidence that now we can't get to essentially. And
that's really what you're here for, is, that's why we're upset,
that we feel like that this grant was misrepresented, it was
seeking information from the wrong source to begin with, and
that the grant--principle of the way we get our grants was
misrepresented too, and that's what we're all kind of angry
about right now.
Dr. Daszak. Well, the grant was scored in the top 3 percent
of grants in that review period. It was considered high impact
and----
Dr. McCormick. And that's exactly the problem, sir. That's
exactly the problem.
Dr. Daszak. No, it was scored that well because it is high
impact----
Dr. McCormick. I don't know why it was scored that well,
but I would disagree with you vehemently, and that's why I
think we're here to make a statement on it.
Dr. Daszak. But I think I pointed out in my opening
statements that we had, from the work we've done in China, we
now have lab assays that can be tested against vaccines, drugs,
and therapeutics to fight COVID to save people's lives. That's
how science works.
Dr. McCormick. I yield.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize majority staff for not more
than 30 minutes of questions.
Majority Counsel. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Daszak, my name is Mitch Benzine. I'm the staff
director for the majority staff. I have a number of questions
but want to follow-up on some of the questions that the Members
asked over the last couple of hours.
In response to Mr. Griffith pointing out that you were
still making edits to the year 5 progress report 7 months past
its due date, the year 5 progress report is only supposed to
contain information from year 5. Is that correct?
Dr. Daszak. The NIH requested the year 5 progress report 2
years late----
Majority Counsel. No, no, no. It was due September 30, and
it covered----
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Majority Counsel. [continuing] The grant period of 2018 to
2019, correct?
Dr. Daszak. Yes. Yes, yes.
Majority Counsel. So, the report is not supposed to cover
information outside of that grant period?
Dr. Daszak. Well, I think NIH is always happy to receive
any information they can on research you're doing that has
relevance to the goals. There are no strict rules on that.
Majority Counsel. You testified that you were editing it
because you gathered more information, but that information
should have gone into the year 6 report.
Dr. Daszak. No, what I said--and I wasn't allowed to
finish--what we did was, we analyzed the data, and we came up
with an estimate of how many people likely infected per year.
We eventually published that information. It's about
60,000--the estimate in the year 5 report was then revised
again--it's about 60,000 people a year, across an area that
includes 300-plus million people.
So, both things are correct, that this is a rare event, and
it infects a lot of people every year.
Majority Counsel. I appreciate that. I have some more
questions about it, but we'll get to it. You've testified here
today that, on the year 5 report being delayed, that an
employee of EcoHealth made a phone call to NIAID. Who is that
employee?
Dr. Daszak. I don't know. It was one of our admin staff. It
might've been Aleksei Chmura, Dr. Chmura. It might've been
other people who were working there at the time. It would've
been from one of their phones.
We've looked at the records, we can't find it, but we
believe there were repeated phone calls to Saddayah Girma ,
to--who was the grant management officer at the time. There
were repeated emails--I've got the list of them here--and she
never responded.
Majority Counsel. And then one question that wasn't touched
on by the Members, is EcoHealth currently drafting a laboratory
standard or biosafety manual?
Dr. Daszak. For field biosafety, yes.
Majority Counsel. And you're pitching it to the CDC?
Dr. Daszak. We're not pitching it. We're going to make it
public for everybody in the world to see.
Majority Counsel. You're asking the Federal Government to
adopt it, though, correct?
Dr. Daszak. Well, we're simply putting it out there, and if
people want to use some of those rules, that's great because
it's the very highest standard of field biosafety there is.
Majority Counsel. Have you met with the CDC regarding the
manual?
Dr. Daszak. I think that the person writing it has spoken
with CDC and talked to them about it, yes, and WHO and others.
Majority Counsel. You also referenced that the biosafety
standards in the U.S. and China were similar for the work that
you were doing. What document were you referencing?
Dr. Daszak. It's the BMBL, Sixth Edition, Biosafety in
Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories, Sixth Edition.
Page 452.
Majority Counsel. Has the Chinese Government memorialized
the BMBL?
Dr. Daszak. They have their own--in fact, every country has
its own national standards. There's no one global standard. But
we looked at those national standards, translated them from
Mandarin. They are the same.
Majority Counsel. In U.S. grants, are sub grantees required
to follow U.S. standards or foreign country standards?
Dr. Daszak. I believe U.S. grantees working in labs in the
U.S., would follow biosafety standards for the U.S. I believe
that labs that are funded through the U.S. Government in
foreign countries would probably follow their national
standards. And, if there were discrepancies between those and
the U.S. standards, some arrangement would have to be made,
some negotiation or debate with the funding agency.
That was not the case in our work.
Majority Counsel. I appreciate that.
Dr. Daszak. They're the same. The standards are the same.
They're right there.
Majority Counsel. I would also appreciate it if you can
produce the----
Dr. Daszak. Of course.
Majority Counsel. [continuing] The original Mandarin
version of the Chinese document.
Dr. Daszak. We'll dig it up.
Majority Counsel. You testified to, I forget which Member
it was, but you testified every bit of documentation I have, I
have supplied. That's patently----
Dr. Daszak. For what aspect?
Majority Counsel. That's all you said. I----
Dr. Daszak. OK. But what was it in relation to? And then I
can understand what----
Majority Counsel. I believe it was in relation to the year
5 report.
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Majority Counsel. Have you supplied drafts of the year 5
report to the Committee.
Dr. Daszak. I'll have to check. I think so, yes. I'll
check.
Majority Counsel. The answer is no. Instead of supplying
the drafts, you supplied a link to the FOIA library.
Dr. Daszak. Which has drafts in it.
Majority Counsel. No. But we asked----
Dr. Daszak. We will check.
Majority Counsel. [continuing] For the documents. It is
your responsibility to----
Dr. Daszak. We will absolutely provide those pretty
quickly. Not a problem.
Majority Counsel. All right. I'm going to go through some
of the questions for documents that we have previously asked
that we have not received yet.
In EcoHealth's custody do you have communications with HHS
regarding the reinstatement of your R01?
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Majority Counsel. In EcoHealth's custody, do you have
communications with HHS regarding the suspension or debarment
of the Wuhan Institute.
Dr. Daszak. Not to my knowledge.
Majority Counsel. In EcoHealth's custody, do you have
communications with the Wuhan Institute regarding its
suspension or debarment?
Dr. Daszak. With the Wuhan Institute.
Majority Counsel. Yes.
Dr. Daszak. Not to my knowledge.
Majority Counsel. To the committees, you produced one email
between yourself and the Wuhan Institute regarding requesting
the laboratory notebooks in response to NIH compliance efforts.
Is that the entirety of the communications you have regarding
that issue?
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Majority Counsel. You never followed up.
Dr. Daszak. Well, we never received a response. We were
told by NIH not to communicate with him, not to work with them.
And I believe HHS wrote to them but by UPS, and it was sent
back with return to sender.
Majority Counsel. That was with the debarment memo. That
wasn't a request for laboratory notes.
Dr. Daszak. But I believe----
Majority Counsel. I'll get back to the laboratory notes.
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Majority Counsel. We touched on the progress reports.
Do you have any communications in EcoHealth's custody
regarding the renewal of the R01?
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Majority Counsel. With the WIV.
Dr. Daszak. I'll check. Probably. I don't know.
Majority Counsel. Did you notify the WIV that they were no
longer on your grant?
Dr. Daszak. Oh, you mean did we get--I'll check. Probably,
yes.
Majority Counsel. Have you ever communicated regarding the
issues we've discussed today on an email other than your
EcoHealth email.
Dr. Daszak. No.
Majority Counsel. On April 12, 2024, in response to a
letter from Chairman Wenstrup to Boston University, you
released some emails on your website. I want to discuss one of
them. It's between you and Dr. Morens, who we've talked about,
and the date of the email is April 26, 2020. It was 2 days
after your grant was terminated.
And in this email, you wrote, ``David, we will communicate
with you via Gmail from now on.''
Was it he that suggested using his Gmail, or was that you
telling him to only use his Gmail?
Dr. Daszak. I'm not sure, but I believe he--he's repeated
said to me by phone and emails and elsewhere that for stuff
that's not his official business, he prefers to receive it to
his Gmail. So, I'm going to comply with that.
Majority Counsel. And that's consistent with what you
testified previously. You said, And when I would write to Dr.
Morens about official NIH-related issues, I would use his NIH
address. When I wrote to him about personal matters that
weren't part of his job, to my understanding, I would use his
Gmail.
That email that you released discussed setting up a call
with NIH officials about your grant, how to respond to your
grant termination, why your grant work was important, the
official NIAID strategic plan, and how you spent your money
pursuant to a federally funded grant. Those are all NIH-
related.
Dr. Daszak. But I wasn't requesting David Morens to set up
a call for me. That would have been official----
Majority Counsel. You have a misunderstanding of Federal
record retention laws. He is discussing his official business.
He needs to----
Dr. Daszak. Again, that's David Morens' business. I don't
know why he does that. He explained to me for personal stuff
use Gmail, for official business, use NIH.
His official business is to advise the director of NIAID,
and there are many, many emails that I've sent him that gives
him information to pass on to the director of NIAID to inform
them on emerging diseases. This wasn't that. This was about a
grant that had been terminated by the President of the United
States. We had no idea----
Majority Counsel. Sir, that's also not true. It was
terminated by Dr. Lauer.
Dr. Daszak. Well, I heard the President of the United
States say, I will end it quickly. Within a week it was gone.
Majority Counsel. And Dr. Collins testified under penalty
of perjury that he agreed with every action that was taken
against you. This was not ended by the President of the United
States.
When was the last time that you spoke with or otherwise
corresponded with Dr. Morens?
Dr. Daszak. Probably yesterday.
Majority Counsel. Did you discuss how you would testify
today?
Dr. Daszak. No.
Majority Counsel. OK. Shifting to the outbreak of COVID-19,
China first reported an unrecognized pneumonia December 31,
2019, and China did not mention that it was a coronavirus in
that report, just undiagnosed pneumonia. They didn't identify
it as a coronavirus until January 7 and then did not share the
sequence until January 11.
When did you first hear about the virus?
Dr. Daszak. I first heard rumors about a virus on December
30, 2019.
Majority Counsel. Who told you?
Dr. Daszak. Someone in China told me.
Majority Counsel. What do they do?
Dr. Daszak. Oh, they work in public health.
Majority Counsel. For who?
Dr. Daszak. I think they're a free agent. They run their
own company or their own business.
Majority Counsel. What company?
Dr. Daszak. I don't know, sir. I would have to check in my
records.
Majority Counsel. And you----
Dr. Daszak. I mean, bear in mind, the people in China
creating rumors about this were later on arrested and put under
severe penalty.
Majority Counsel. No, I understand.
Dr. Daszak. I mean, we didn't know how verifiable that
information was. I didn't publish it. So, we just were trying
to find out what we could.
Majority Counsel. And you testified previously that this
person--I told you that they had identified a coronavirus that
was not SARS, but was 20 percent different. Is that correct?
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Majority Counsel. And COVID-19 is almost 20 percent or a
little bit more?
Dr. Daszak. Oh, yes, it was incredibly accurate data in the
end. When we looked back on it, they were right.
Majority Counsel. When you were told this, did you inform
the U.S. Government?
Dr. Daszak. Well, at the time I was told it, it was a rumor
and a myth. So no, that would have been a mistake. What I did
do was publish it the next day, make a statement publicly on
Twitter. And I also informed ProMED, ProMED-mail, which is a
widely used system for getting rapid information about
outbreaks out to the world. They'd already heard the same
rumors. They published it the next day as well.
Majority Counsel. But they were still publishing
undiagnosed pneumonia, not coronavirus?
Dr. Daszak. No, but they--well, I'm not sure what they said
on the next day, but I think we both put out important
communications that something is going on, we need to know more
about it.
And then I think I talked about our coronavirus research,
kind of hinting heavily this may be coronavirus, but we
couldn't verify it. So, to tell the public that it's a
coronavirus would have been a huge mistake. What if it turned
out not to be?
Majority Counsel. Dr. Eddie Holmes and Dr. Jeremy Farrar
said they have information that the virus was sequenced prior
to Christmas by a U.S. genomics company.
Does that track with your understanding--or by a Chinese
genomics company. Excuse me.
Dr. Daszak. From what I know now, I believe that's where
the information I got came from is from the sequence data from
a private sector company that was doing the work for the Wuhan
investigation.
Majority Counsel. If they had sequenced it prior to
Christmas, they would know that it was a coronavirus, correct?
Dr. Daszak. Someone would. Well, they would be highly
suspicious that it was. You'd need to verify it. I mean, don't
forget, whenever there is a new outbreak of something, we have
to verify and verify it before you go public.
The same thing is happening now with, for instance, avian
flu, fragments of RNA in milk. It would be reckless and a
problem for public health to say there's virus in the milk
until you verify whether there is or isn't. It's the same story
with this.
Majority Counsel. I'm going to shift gears back to the
Wuhan Institute. Prior to the pandemic, was the Wuhan Institute
attempting to start a live bat colony?
Dr. Daszak. Apparently so.
Majority Counsel. Did you have any firsthand knowledge of
that?
Dr. Daszak. Not at the time I publicly stated that it
wasn't, no.
Majority Counsel. In addition to bat samples, to your
knowledge, was the Wuhan Institute also analyzing pangolin
samples?
Dr. Daszak. I'm not sure, but I do know that there was
someone in China we met, a Dr. Tong, who seems to have heard of
a pangolin-positive coronavirus earlier and was working on it
and getting it ready for publication, yes.
Majority Counsel. Does----
Dr. Daszak. I'm not sure if he works with the WIV or not.
Majority Counsel. Does the Wuhan Institute have the ability
to genetically engineer viruses without leaving a trace?
Dr. Daszak. I don't know.
Majority Counsel. You touched on this a little bit in your
testimony, and mentioned the 2020 paper where the primary
author was Alice Latinne.
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Majority Counsel. And testified previously to us, To the
best of my knowledge, I'm fairly confident this is the case,
that every genetic sequence of SARS-related coronaviruses that
the WIV had, both from our work that we funded and from any
work they'd done separately, was in a paper that we submitted
to a U.S. journal and we'd submit into the U.S. NIH data base,
Genbank. There were a few after the fact that we got from the
WIV, and I put into Genbank, and we notified NIH later on, only
a handful.
And sitting here today, you're still fairly confident that
every genetic sequence of SARS-related coronaviruses the WIV
had was published in the Latinne paper?
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Majority Counsel. What was the time scope and the
methodology of the Latinne paper?
Dr. Daszak. Well, it was the methodology we had used in
China for over the last 15 years.
Majority Counsel. No. What was the time scope of the
samples?
Dr. Daszak. I'm not sure. I think it's 2010 to 2015 or
something. I'm not sure. I would have to check.
Majority Counsel. Did the Wuhan Institute collect samples
after 2015?
Dr. Daszak. I don't know.
Majority Counsel. Is it possible that the Wuhan Institute
collected samples after 2015?
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Majority Counsel. Is it possible that the Wuhan Institute
hasn't analyzed these samples?
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Majority Counsel. Is it possible that they haven't
published these samples?
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Majority Counsel. So, is it possible that you didn't
actually publish every virus the Wuhan Institute has?
Dr. Daszak. What I said to you is that we published every
virus of relevance to SARS coronaviruses from our work in
China----
Majority Counsel. No. You said from your work and the Wuhan
Institute provided you the samples that they collected.
Dr. Daszak. OK. So, it's possible that they have hidden
some viruses from us that we don't know about yet, of course.
Majority Counsel. All right.
Dr. Daszak. Of course.
Majority Counsel. I appreciate that.
Dr. Daszak. That's to the best of my knowledge. I'm trying
to help in any way I can.
Majority Counsel. Do you know if the Chinese government
deleted any sequences or samples?
Dr. Daszak. I don't know.
Majority Counsel. We've discussed your grant work a lot,
and you've stated unequivocally many times today in private
testimony publicly that EcoHealth did not fund the WIV to
conduct gain-of-function research.
This has been directly contradicted by witness testimony.
Dr. Tabak testified that while your research did not meet the
definition to be regulated by the P3CO, it did fall under the
function of gain-of-function.
And Dr. Baric, who is a world renowned coronavirologist and
expert in gain-of-function, testified that the work described
in your year 5 progress report was, quote, ``absolutely a gain-
of-function phenotype.'' And he went to far as to say as,
quote, ``You can't argue with that.''
You disagree with them?
Dr. Daszak. Well, I have a letter from NIH that says our
work is not gain-of-function. You have testimony from Dr. Baric
who says absolutely it was. Both are there. I mean, I tend to
go with the regulatory authority on this, which is NIH.
Majority Counsel. All right. During its compliance efforts
with your grant, NIH requested you provide the underlying lab
notebooks from the WIV. You responded that you did not have
access to them, but that you would ask the WIV.
Did you know that you had to have access to them under your
grant terms?
Dr. Daszak. Well, we checked on that, and at the time that
we requested the lab notebooks, it is not true that we had to
have access to lab notebooks in a foreign subrecipient. That
rule then came into play from NIH later and----
Majority Counsel. Dr. Tabak testified that it was part of
the standard grant terms and policies at the time of your
grant.
Dr. Daszak. Well, as I said, we checked----
Majority Counsel. So, you disagree with him?
Dr. Daszak. We checked the CFRs. We've received dozens of
letters from NIH with listing CFR, Codes of Federal
Regulations. We check them all. They do not state that. It's a
fact.
Majority Counsel. You said here--and we have the email----
Dr. Daszak. And we did try to get them, by the way.
Majority Counsel. Well, ``try'' might be a strong word.
We previously discussed the one email that you sent to the
WIV where you forwarded the letter to Dr. Shi and said that you
could answer question No. 1, but you can't answer question No.
2.
You never actually requested the lab notebooks. You just
forwarded the letter. You testified a few minutes ago that the
WIV never responded to that email?
Dr. Daszak. Correct.
Majority Counsel. And you never e-mailed again?
Dr. Daszak. Correct.
Majority Counsel. Why not?
Dr. Daszak. Because, clearly, the WIV is not going to
respond further. I'm happy to email them again if you want me
to.
Look, we were instructed by NIH to terminate our work with
the WIV. In 2020, we then had our grant terminated. We then had
huge geopolitical issues between the U.S. and China, very
specifically around the origins of COVID. And we were then
requested by NIH to do something that isn't in the Code of
Regulations, and that's to request lab notebooks. We did that.
The WIV did not respond. We will do it again, and I predict
they will not respond again, if you wish me to.
But look, every time we act as an agent for the U.S.
Government in seeking things that are not required by Codes of
Federal Regulations, we put our own staff at risk around the
world. But we're happy to do it again if you so wish.
Majority Counsel. There's a dispute whether or not an
experiment was conducted in year 4 or year 5. It's the
experiment that Dr. Tabak reported to Congress that's been----
Dr. Daszak. There's no dispute. It was conducted in year 4.
Majority Counsel. Do you have the dates?
Dr. Daszak. We submitted the results from the experiment
back in 2018, I think, so it was just prior to that submission.
Majority Counsel. You submitted it in the year 4 report?
Dr. Daszak. Correct, yes.
Majority Counsel. NIH disputes whether or not those are the
same experiments.
Do you have the date that the experiment was conducted?
Dr. Daszak. No. And, again, this is another issue of--this
is something that I could ask WIV, and it's highly unlikely
we're going to get a response.
Majority Counsel. When Dr.----
Dr. Daszak. They're debarred from the Federal Government. I
mean, you put me in a very unusual position to go back 10 years
to a debarred agency asking them questions which we know the
Chinese Government are not interested in answering.
Majority Counsel. When Dr. Lauer started compliance
efforts, did you reach out to Dr. Shi and ask her if it
occurred in year 4 or year 5?
Dr. Daszak. Did I ask Dr. Shi what?
Majority Counsel. If the experiment in question occurred in
year 4 or year 5?
Dr. Daszak. Oh, yes, yes.
Majority Counsel. What did she say?
Dr. Daszak. She said that--I asked her--let me just respond
by saying every single request, every single theory, no matter
how bizarre a conspiracy theory or a real hypothesis, something
unusual that had gone on in China, we check on those. We check
everything.
And at the time when NIH suggested that the year 5
experiment was different to year 4, I checked, and we were told
by WIV that it was the same experiment dealing with the
pathological findings from the same----
Majority Counsel. Did you verify it with the underlying
experiment notebooks?
Dr. Daszak. It's impossible for us to do that. We don't
have those.
Majority Counsel. But at that point you could have?
Dr. Daszak. No. It was the same situation. This is at a
time when our grant was suspended with onerous conditions that
included identifying where an allegedly missing person was from
WIV, going to China and seeking a vial of virus to return to
the U.S. These things are illegal.
Look, it was a very difficult position to put a grantee in
and to be requesting that.
Majority Counsel. So, you took Dr. Shi's word for it that
they were--you didn't have any proof at the time of the year 4
experiment that----
Dr. Daszak. I have no other way to verify.
Majority Counsel. You were asked by Ms. Tokuda about access
to samples previously paid for by the U.S. Government. And I
want to read the exact testimony from Dr. Erbelding, so that
you can understand what we're working off of.
The question: Did EcoHealth--was it EcoHealth that told you
they had the samples?
Answer: They did. They did give me an approximate number. I
don't recall what it was.
Question: Did they tell you that the samples were in their
possession?
Answer: I believe I asked, You have access to these
samples? Do you have access to these samples? I think that, to
the best of my recollection, that's how I phrased the question,
and I got an affirmative answer.
Question: You asked, Do you have access? And they
responded, Yes?
Answer: This was Peter Daszak, yes.
Question: There wasn't an elaboration on the yes?
Answer: I did not ask further questions. I took his
representation as truthful.
You testified a couple of minutes ago that you were very
forthright with NIH and NIAID that you actually didn't have
access to the samples.
Dr. Daszak. Correct.
Majority Counsel. Is Dr. Erbelding lying?
Dr. Daszak. Dr. Erbelding is--it's the same procedures for
them. She says she doesn't recall, I believe, I think that.
Clearly, Dr. Erbelding either wasn't in the conversation where
I clearly stipulated we do not have access to those samples; we
do have access to the sequences, or perhaps she has mistaken
sequences for samples. But whatever one might tease apart from
her memory, what matters is the record, which is the emails
sent to NIH proposing the work to be done and the revised
specific names, which clearly state no further samples will be
brought out of China and that sequences are already in
EcoHealth's possession.
Majority Counsel. And we don't have those emails, so----
Dr. Daszak. We will happily share them with you, of course.
Majority Counsel. And the samples are still in the custody
of the Wuhan Institute?
Dr. Daszak. Well, unless they're not. But to the last of my
knowledge, they were in the freezers in Wuhan, over 15,000 of
them.
Majority Counsel. Is there a benefit to having the samples
versus just the sequences? You can, in essence, redo an
experiment to prove the results, correct?
Dr. Daszak. And you might find out more information from a
deep secret, but at this point we do have an incredible amount
of information from those samples.
Majority Counsel. And you testified previously that if the
Wuhan Institute does more work on those samples that you,
quote, ``have an understanding to be able to request and gain
access to the new data.''
Is that memorialized in a memo or contract?
Dr. Daszak. I don't know. I'll have to check. But, yes,
that is the understanding with the sort of--you know, no matter
what the politics around the world, scientists from different
countries try to maintain open channels of communication. It
happened in the cold war. It happens with our rivals and
competitors. I think it's very important for the American
people that we keep those communication channels open.
Majority Counsel. Have you had----
Dr. Daszak. So, yes, I will try to do that.
Majority Counsel. Have you had to request access to any new
data?
Dr. Daszak. No. But we've been able to get new data, yes.
Majority Counsel. From them?
Dr. Daszak. From China, yes.
Majority Counsel. With using--from the Wuhan Institute?
Dr. Daszak. From the Wuhan Institute of Virology, of
course.
Majority Counsel. And you testified a little bit earlier
that you've had communication with----
Dr. Daszak. I might add that we've got 17 years of research
we've done there. Some of it is not yet published. The new data
comes in the form of, here's a publication to be made public,
and that's a very valuable and important resource.
Majority Counsel. And you testified earlier that you have
had communication with the Wuhan Institute in furtherance of
the reinstated R01 grant?
Dr. Daszak. I'm not sure that it was in furtherance of the
restatement.
Majority Counsel. Or if you're requesting data that you
were paid for by the United States to analyze, then that would
be in furtherance?
Dr. Daszak. The communications I've had with Wuhan are
typical scientific collaborative----
Majority Counsel. No. Have you had any communications with
the Wuhan Institute that would impact your R01 grant?
Dr. Daszak. I'm not sure. I'd have to check.
Majority Counsel. OK.
Mr. Daszak. I mean, I'm just not sure.
Majority Counsel. Are you aware that the Wuhan Institute is
not just procurement debarred; they are nonprocurement debarred
as well?
Dr. Daszak. I don't know what that means, but I'll--you'll
have to----
Majority Counsel. It means that the Wuhan Institute is not
allowed to have a substantial impact over any federally funded
government activity.
If the Wuhan Institute today canceled your access to
samples, would that impact your research?
Dr. Daszak. Well, we don't have access to samples, so
that's a moot point.
Majority Counsel. You have access to the data generated
from the samples?
Dr. Daszak. Correct, yes.
Majority Counsel. If the Wuhan Institute cutoff your access
to the data, would that substantially impact your research
efforts?
Dr. Daszak. Not for the purposes of that R01 because we
already have the data in our--at EcoHealth Alliance.
Majority Counsel. All right. Yesterday there was an article
in the National Review regarding a recently made grant from
USAID to EcoHealth Alliance, and a spokesman for EcoHealth gave
a long statement, but also said, quote, ``EcoHealth is no
longer partnering with any Chinese research entities.''
Is that true?
Dr. Daszak. That's certainly for Federal funding, yes,
correct.
Majority Counsel. That's not what he said. He said,
EcoHealth is no longer partnering with any Chinese research
entities.
Do you have any partnerships with any Chinese----
Dr. Daszak. I don't believe right now we have any
contractual relationships with any organization in China.
Majority Counsel. But you're going to----
Dr. Daszak. So, I think that's correct, from the way he's
speaking, yes.
Majority Counsel. You're going to check on if there's a
contractual arrangement regarding the data from the unanalyzed
samples?
Dr. Daszak. There's no contractual relationship.
Majority Counsel. So, it's just a gentleman's agreement
that the Chinese Communist Party will give the U.S. what we
request?
Dr. Daszak. I'm not speaking with the Chinese Communist
Party. I'm speaking with scientists.
Majority Counsel. Well, that might be disputed.
On April 16, 2020, you tweeted, ``The WIV did not have a
culture of a virus related to SARS-CoV-2, so it is impossible
for accidental release being the source.''
You've testified a lot today that you don't know what was
going on at the WIV, you don't know all the viruses they have,
you don't know all the samples they have, that you don't know
all the research. So, you don't know that it is impossible for
accidental release being the source?
Dr. Daszak. Well, what we do know is prior to the outbreak,
we asked the WIV for every single SARS-related bat coronavirus
sequence. Not only did they share the ones from what we were
doing together, they also shared----
Majority Counsel. Sir, this is the Latinne paper that only
goes to 2015.
Dr. Daszak. Well, let me finish my point.
They also shared data from work they had done themselves
without our involvement. So, I think that was very important.
If they had any of the sequences at the time, surely they would
have been in that data dump and----
Majority Counsel. And that data dump is what was published
in the Latinne paper, correct?
Dr. Daszak. Correct, yes.
Majority Counsel. So, that only went to 2015.
Did you ever request all of their SARS-related sequences
and samples from 2016 to 2019?
Dr. Daszak. I requested those data prior to the outbreak in
something like November-ish or fall of 2018. We then went back
and repeated throughout the process backward and forwards. Any
other data that came would have been requested in 2020. So,
yes, we did that.
Majority Counsel. So, the Latinne methodology is wrong?
Latinne actually published samples--sequences that were post
2015?
Dr. Daszak. No. The data from the samples, that's what I'm
talking about. The samples were collected prior to, from my
understanding.
Majority Counsel. OK. On February 10, 2021, you sent a
letter to congressional leadership that stated, Zoonotic
spillover is the origin of most infectious--emerging infectious
diseases, including COVID-19.
This is again unequivocal, but you didn't actually know?
Dr. Daszak. Sorry, to congressional leadership?
Majority Counsel. Yes. You sent a letter to congressional
leadership. It was Speaker Pelosi, Leader Schumer, Leader
McConnell, and Leader McCarthy.
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Majority Counsel. And stated, Zoonotic spillover, the
transmission of novel pathogens from animals to humans, is the
origin of most infectious--emerging infectious diseases,
including COVID-19.
But the origin is in dispute. That sentence is incorrect?
Dr. Daszak. But it's pretty crystal clear and undisputed
that this is a zoonotic virus. And the most close relatives are
from animals, so therefore, it's a zoonotic virus.
Majority Counsel. All right. March 8, 2023, in response to
a hearing this Subcommittee had and multiple times since,
including today, you've said regarding the DEFUSE proposal,
quote, ``The proposal was not funded and the work was not
done.''
Did you ever solicit private funding for anything regarding
DEFUSE?
Dr. Daszak. No.
Majority Counsel. Do you know if the work--WIV started this
work?
Dr. Daszak. No.
Majority Counsel. Then you can't say that the work was not
done?
Dr. Daszak. There's no evidence of the work being done.
There's no evidence that WIV started it. There's no evidence
that any of the other contractors on the ground started it.
Majority Counsel. Did you ask?
Dr. Daszak. I think everyone has been asked at this point
repeatedly by----
Majority Counsel. Did you ask Dr. Shi if she had started
any of the proposed work?
Dr. Daszak. No. But again, I'm happy to send an email to
Dr. Shi and say, Did you begin the work that was proposed in
the DEFUSE proposal? She might not even remember the DEFUSE
proposal at this point. I doubt that I would receive a
response.
Majority Counsel. One of the things that the Select
Subcommittee has been investigating is that it matters what
public health officials write down and what they say. When you
make unequivocal statements that can't possibly be supported by
the evidence, it matters.
Dr. Daszak. So, what was your unequivocal statement again,
please?
Majority Counsel. The proposal was not funded and the work
was not done.
Dr. Daszak. The work in the proposal has not been done,
but----
Majority Counsel. But you just said you didn't know if the
WIV did it.
Dr. Daszak. We--the work in the proposal designates which
groups do the work. That work has not been done. We have
delayed the work. Ralph Baric's group hasn't done any of the
work. The organization that was going to spray some residue
hasn't done the work, to my knowledge. All of this is to my
knowledge. I mean, you know, obviously, one can't know
everything.
Majority Counsel. Then I would suggest clarifying that
going forward.
Dr. Daszak. Well, then I'm clarifying it right here and
now. To the very best of my knowledge, with strong evidence,
the work hasn't been done.
Majority Counsel. And my last question, on March 6, 2024,
you tweeted, The lab leak theory for COVID origins is evidence-
free.
But when testifying regarding submitting your year 5
progress report late and the fact that Dr. Lauer couldn't find
evidence to support your claims, you testified ``just because
he can't find evidence of that doesn't mean it's not true.''
Do you stand by that testimony?
Dr. Daszak. The lab leak is evidence-free. I----
Majority Counsel. No. That just because someone can't find
evidence of something does not mean it's not true. That's what
you said regarding the grant.
Dr. Daszak. Well, I have a very particular knowledge about
Dr. Lauer's inquiry. We did contact those authorities at NIH,
and his forensic analysis did not go to checking phone calls.
He said it in his testimony. So, that's why I stated that, and
I think that stands.
Majority Counsel. The last things I'll say, I apologize,
but you've been asked by a number of Members, including the
Ranking Member, about the letter that you authored in the
Lancet, and you said that you were discussing primarily HIV
inserts and snake DNA.
I want to read for the record what you actually wrote.
It's, We stand together to strongly condemn conspiracy theories
suggesting that COVID-19 does not have a natural origin.
Thank you, sir.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize minority staff for not more
than 30 minutes of questions, maybe 31, since we went over
here.
Minority Counsel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Daszak, thank you for coming in today. I think maybe
I'll just pick up right where the majority left off.
That Lancet letter, we've talked about it a few times
today. I'll read just one more time that very same sentence.
``Standing together to condemn conspiracy theories suggesting
that COVID-19 does not have a natural origin.''
So you talked about snakes, and you talked about HIV. I
don't see either of those words in that sentence or in the
letter. Why is that?
Dr. Daszak. Because there's a word limit on letters to
Lancet. They're not going to allow you to just bang on for a
long period of time. Look----
Minority Counsel. I'm sorry. If I could follow-up on that.
Dr. Daszak. Let me follow-up first. At the time we
submitted that letter, the prevailing theories, other than this
came from a bat through a zoonotic spillover, were HIV inserts
bioengineered, I think snake DNA, and a bioengineered bioweapon
virus. All of those are conspiracy theories.
The intelligence agency stated that clearly at the
beginning of that report that there is no evidence to support
that, there never was, and there still isn't.
Minority Counsel. That's helpful. Thank you.
So I just kind of want to hone in on the exact nature of
what you're saying. I think it's that the word limit wouldn't
allow you to fit in the word ``snake''?
Dr. Daszak. Well, the word ``snake'' wouldn't be enough to
make any difference. So, it would have to say--for instance,
for example, the origin--theories about the virus having snake
DNA, or that it's got HIV inserts, or that it's a bioengineered
virus, perhaps they were in earlier drafts of the statement,
but they're not in that one.
Minority Counsel. All right. Well, your----
Dr. Daszak. And they were the only prevailing theories,
other than that it came from a zoonotic spillover----
Minority Counsel. Sure.
Dr. Daszak [continuing]. Which is still the prevailing
theory.
Minority Counsel. Well, let me finish. As a reader and
writer of the English language, how do you think the sentence
``COVID-19 does not have a natural origin'' reads?
Dr. Daszak. COVID-19 does not----
Minority Counsel. Does not have a natural origin. Do you
read that sentence as being limited to snakes and HIV?
Dr. Daszak. Is that what we said?
Minority Counsel. Yes.
Dr. Daszak. Can you read out of the context of that,
please? I'm not sure what you mean.
Minority Counsel. Sure. That's not a problem.
We stand together to strongly condemn conspiracy theories
suggesting that COVID-19 does not have a natural origin.
Dr. Daszak. Yes. That's what we said then, and we stand by
it. At the time that was the right thing to say.
Minority Counsel. Do you read that sentence as being
limited to snakes and HIV?
Dr. Daszak. I read that sentence in February 2020 as
focusing on those conspiracies that were out there, and they
were the ones that were out there.
Minority Counsel. That's not quite the question. As the
reader of the sentence, how do you read it?
Dr. Daszak. Well, first of all, you would have to go back
in time to 2020, put yourself in the mindset of what was going
on back then, which were those prevailing theories,
bioengineered virus, snake DNA, and HIV inserts, preposterous,
conspiratorial, and without any evidence whatsoever.
Minority Counsel. Yes, I just don't think any reasonable
reader of that sentence is going to read it that way.
Dr. Daszak. Well, but the editor of Lancet read it and
approved it. 26 of the leading public health authorities in the
world read it and agreed with it. 20,000-plus people signed
onto that letter on a public statement. Everybody seemed to
read it and understand exactly what it meant, and it was
correct at the time, and we stand by it.
Minority Counsel. You talked a little bit about the DEFUSE
application and BMBL.
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Minority Counsel. And you've talked several times about how
the BMBL, you know, either says BSL-2 is appropriate or we've
heard elsewhere maybe it doesn't actually have a specific
requirement at all.
I think the thing I want to focus on is your testimony to
us in November wasn't just about BMBL. You told us that you
ensured that WIV adhered to the same biosafety levels that were
used in the U.S., and that were required by the BMBL, and those
are two different things. Ralph Baric clearly told you that
what is used in the U.S. is BSL-3, and you knew that was not
the case in Wuhan.
Dr. Daszak. Well, Ralph Baric is entitled to his opinion
about best practices, which is what he was trying to say in
that statement. But I have here the language from BMBL, it says
right there----
Minority Counsel. Sorry. Yes, we've heard it three or four
times.
Dr. Daszak. OK.
Minority Counsel. As I said, that's not quite the same
thing as what do scientists actually do in the United States.
Dr. Daszak. Well, it is actually, because they're the rules
that government scientists actually do.
Minority Counsel. So, if I follow it, it is that you
disagree with Dr. Baric and you don't actually think that it's
common in the United States to use BSL-3 for this type of work?
Dr. Daszak. Ralph Baric may use it for some types of work.
He may go above and beyond the BMBL levels. Good for him, and
that's good for us, too.
Minority Counsel. Do you understand him to be an outlier in
that respect?
Dr. Daszak. There is no outlier. If the rule states
something differently--and will just add in the DEFUSE
proposal, we did not propose to use BSL-2 for infection
experiments with recombinant viruses. We proposed BSL-3s right
there in black and white at Ralph Baric's lab, using his high
standards, higher than the BMBL requires.
Minority Counsel. Yes, I think the concern is more that you
point to the BMBL, and I understand that. I think----
Dr. Daszak. But I thought your job was to oversee this line
of research, and these are the rules that oversee them.
Minority Counsel. If your collaborator comes to you and
says, What we do here in the United States is use a certain
level of biosafety, and that's not what they do in China, and
people in the United States will freak out, I think that
distinction is probably important for somebody in your
position.
Dr. Daszak. Well, I agreed with Dr. Baric, which is why the
BSL-3 is in the proposal, not BSL-2.
Minority Counsel. The year 5 report has been talked about a
few times as well. You said something that I just wanted to
follow-up on. You said something to the effect of, Look,
there's a record that I tried to submit that report, and that
we as a Subcommittee have that record.
I think what you're referring to, which we do have, and
which is not quite what you say it is, is a screenshot that
your folks initiated the year 5 report on July 24 of that year,
and we agree, we have that. We're all----
Dr. Daszak. From the NIH system.
Minority Counsel. Yes. We're all on the same page there.
The problem is routing the report, submitting the report is 2
years later. There's no evidence that you submitted the report
in 2019.
Dr. Daszak. Correct, there's no evidence.
Minority Counsel. Well, that's not quite what you said
about an hour and a half ago, and I think it's those types of
little representations----
Dr. Daszak. What did I say an hour and a half ago?
Minority Counsel. You told us that there was documentary
evidence that you had submitted the report in 2019.
Dr. Daszak. What I have here is a timeline with documentary
evidence of attempts to submit the report, to open up the
system--we had a draft of the report back in June. We tried to
get it in the system, and it locked us out. I have the record
here.
We will send any of the evidence that you don't yet have,
we will send to the Committee.
Minority Counsel. Well, I'll distinguish for a starting
point, I think we have what you're talking about, and we went
over it in November----
Dr. Daszak. Well, we'll find out. I'll check. It might be
something that you don't have yet.
Minority Counsel. I think it's safe to speak for both sides
here to say that if we don't have what you're talking about,
then at this point, that's a pretty big problem as well.
Dr. Daszak. What do you mean?
Minority Counsel. If you have extra documents on the year 5
issue that you have not handed over----
Dr. Daszak. I'm talking about we've reviewed all of our
systems to try and find information to see if we've got any
evidence at all if that report was uploaded, which we know it
was. We know we had had an inability to get through to the
system. It locked us out. And I'm looking for evidence we may
have somewhere that you don't yet have. We will find it and
send it to you.
Minority Counsel. OK. I just want to be really clear that
the documentary evidence we do have that I think you might be
talking about shows that you all opened up this system----
Dr. Daszak. I know that, yes. Yes, I have that written----
Minority Counsel. It does not show that you submitted or
attempted to submit the report.
Dr. Daszak. Right. Well, I'm telling you here, under oath,
that we did.
Minority Counsel. OK. I would like to pivot to some of the
more science-heavy aspects of really what we've already talked
about back in November, probably starting with, you had this
detailed back and forth with NIAID in the summer of 2016 on the
question of whether or not the work you were proposing was
affected by the 2014 Federal pause on gain-of-function work.
So NIAID ultimately decided that your work was not affected
by that pause. You've said that several times here today. I
don't think we have a problem with that decision. I've not
heard the majority have a problem with that decision.
So it's not the decision that is in dispute, but I do think
we're interested in and would like to focus on some of the
arguments you made to NIAID, because their reasoning I think
was slightly different from what you were suggesting, so I just
kind of want to walk through how you----
Dr. Daszak. Well, I just want to correct one thing. This
wasn't a----
Minority Counsel. Wait, wait, wait, wait. Dr. Daszak, I let
you finish, and I was happy to. I ask that you do the same.
So those arguments sort of ran in order, and I'd like to
touch on them and talk about them.
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Minority Counsel. The first one I think was pretty easy. It
was making the point that the 2014 policy should be viewed as
applying to SARS because that's what it says, SARS, but not to
the SARS-like viruses that you were planning on working with.
I think we understand that argument and acknowledge that
the pause was a little bit unclear from a textual point of view
there, so I really don't have too many questions about that.
You then pivoted, though, to talk about WIV1, which I think
is that virus that you all were planning to use as a backbone
in your experiments. And you said to NIAID that WIV1, quote,
``has never been demonstrated to infect humans or cause human
disease.''
Later in the letter, for other reasons, you included a
parenthetical to an article that's called ``WIV1 is Poised for
Human Emergence,'' and that article concludes that, quote,
``the results indicate that WIV1 has the ability to directly
infect humans.''
I think it's really hard for us as readers to understand
how that context was not addressed in your letter.
Dr. Daszak. Both can be correct. It is correct that it has
never infected people, to our knowledge, but it's also correct
that it infects human cells in the lab, not people. There's no
evidence of that.
Now, we cite that paper in the response to NIH. NIH is the
body that oversees this. If NIH had said, Wait a minute, this
paper that you cite yourselves suggests that we need to
rethink, we would have not gone ahead with the experiment.
Don't forget we proposed alternatives to this work. We send
them a paragraph of modeling we could do, pseudovirus work we
could do if they decided the work should not go ahead. NIH had
every possibility, every reason to go through that and say no
if they wanted to, and we would have not done that work.
This is something to ask NIH, not EcoHealth Alliance. We
did our best, our best shot at trying to explain why we believe
the work was not covered by the gain-of-function, as they asked
us, what alternatives we could do, and then it's NIH that makes
the decision on that.
Minority Counsel. Yes. So, you cited the article for a
different reason. You would have had to open the article and
read it to appreciate what I just quoted from it. And I
understand that I think you're drawing a distinction between
human cells in the lab and a human receptor in a lab.
Dr. Daszak. A big distinction.
Minority Counsel. So, I think the eventual conclusion of
that is it does not count until a live human walks in and drops
to the ground sick?
Dr. Daszak. No, until it infects a person.
Minority Counsel. Uh-huh.
Dr. Daszak. There's a big difference between infecting a
cell in a lab.
And also you point out that you would have to read--open
the paper and read it. Surely, the NIH system that deliberates
on these issues actually opens up the papers and reads them, as
do scientists. I mean, we assume that this group is doing it.
They know the literature. They are going to make a
knowledgeable decision based on their knowledge of the
literature which we cited in our letter to them.
Minority Counsel. Yes. So, the concern is less on the back
end of the reader of your letter, because we do assume that
those folks are knowledgeable and they'll open the article. The
concern is more on the front end as a grantee that that article
is out there and you didn't say anything about----
Dr. Daszak. We cited it.
Minority Counsel. You cited it for a different reason.
Dr. Daszak. We listed the paper in our list that went to
NIH.
Minority Counsel. Yes, you did. You managed not to include
the title of that paper in your email I noticed.
Dr. Daszak. Well, if the citation is there, the title will
be there. If not, they can look it up on the web, but it's a
well-known paper at the time from the group that were already
doing similar work. They knew about it. Surely, they--they
funded it actually. Surely, they know about that work.
Minority Counsel. If the paper's results were true that
WIV1, quote, ``had the ability to directly infect humans,''
would that be a problem for your argument that WIV1 has never
been demonstrated to infect humans?
Dr. Daszak. If WIV1 has been demonstrated to infect people,
then that argument that I made would not be true, so that would
be a problem. It has not, therefore, it was not.
Minority Counsel. Don't worry about the human cells.
Dr. Daszak. Human cells are not humans. They're cells in a
lab. It's a very different thing. Any biologist will tell you
that. Same as mice are different to humans. You know, you step
up from the cell line work, to the mouse work, to--then we know
from other work that people do in primates and the rest of it.
It's a big gap between a virus that can infect a cell in the
lab and one that can actually infect people in the wild.
Minority Counsel. So, the progression from there went to,
well, because WIV1 is about 10 percent distant from SARS, and
the spikes that we want to insert are getting progressively
more distant from there, it seems progressively less likely
that any of these chimeric viruses would be more pathogenic,
more transmissible.
We talked about this in November. You hopefully explained
to us that the theory was, OK, we know that SARS-1 is a human
pathogen. We know of 95 or 97 percent SARS-like viruses that
simply are not able to infect humans; and so it seems
reasonable to hypothesize that as you move away from SARS, you
have reduced human pathogenicity.
I think what we struggle with a little bit is at the time,
if you know that SARS-1 is a human pathogen, and you know that
a 95 percent SARS-like cannot infect humans, and we know that
WIV1 at 90 percent similarity seems as if it can, at the very
least, infect human cells, it seems as if it would be
reasonable to think that there might just not be a linear
relationship in this family of viruses.
Dr. Daszak. If that were the case, why didn't NIH come back
to us and say, Well, actually we refute your suggestion. This
was the standard thought at the time scientifically, that the
further you go away from that evolutionarily, it's the less
chance that it's going to be a significant pathogen.
NIH had every opportunity to review that and say, Actually,
we disagree. You're not going to do that experiment.
We would have said, OK. Can we do the alternative that's
noninfectious? I'm sure that we would have gone ahead with that
and got interesting results. Maybe not quite as useful.
Minority Counsel. Yes. So, as I said, it's not so much
about NIAID because their eventual reasoning I think was not
related to what I've talked about----
Dr. Daszak. Well, I think this----
Minority Counsel. Dr. Daszak, my point is there are three
or four different reasons in your letter. Not all of them
factored ultimately into NIAID's reasoning. But as a reader,
when we think about grantee transparency and integrity, there's
a concern that you're leaving out an awful lot of context from
the letter.
Dr. Daszak. I don't know how many reams of paper you wanted
us to respond to. We cited references in our response. I sought
the best advice in the world from Dr. Baric, who's an author on
that paper. He could have told us, Wait, that's not a good
paper to cite. He suggested we cite it. I mean, we did
everything we could to lay out the case. NIH then had every
opportunity to refuse it and say, No. Do the alternative.
Minority Counsel. That's helpful. And so, that sort of last
argument was that Dr. Ralph Baric's group took a WIV1 spike,
put it on a SARS backbone, and showed a loss-of-function, not a
gain-of-function.
And I think for us, the question is, your work was going to
be with a WIV1 backbone and other spikes, and so the WIV1 spike
would be the only part of WIV1 that was not relevant at all for
your work. And so, I'm confused about that.
Dr. Daszak. I think if you look at the results from that
experiment--because I think we did the experiment and the
results showed that there was no difference in any aspect of
that.
Minority Counsel. My point----
Dr. Daszak. So, I think our predictions were absolutely
spot on, so I don't know why this should be an issue now almost
10 years later.
Minority Counsel. Well, I think it's that you haven't quite
answered what I was asking about. In other words, you pointed
to experiments testing the WIV1 spike, right?
Dr. Daszak. In the letter to NIH.
Minority Counsel. Yes. You were going to use the WIV1
backbone. The only part of WIV1 that you were not going to use
at all is the WIV1 spike.
So I think as a reader, I'm a little bit uncertain about
why----
Dr. Daszak. Well, I'm sorry. But at this point I'm confused
over WIV1, WIV1 spike, WIV16, SHCO4----
Minority Counsel. Well, I think it's fair to say----
Dr. Daszak. There are multiple experiments we did.
Minority Counsel. Yes. It's a little bit concerning that
you're confused, I think, is my point.
Dr. Daszak. No, because I don't have the documents in front
of me. You've got a question there. But look, we were asked by
NIH to explain why we believed this experiment would not lead
to any aberrant reactions. We explained why we felt that. We
were then asked to produce an alternative. We did. NIH reviewed
it. And as you said, they spent some time reviewing this
detailed proposal, and then came back, I think, in July 2016
and said, This is not covered by the gain-of-function policy.
Experiment can move ahead.
I think this is a system where the oversight was there. It
was brought into play, because we proposed that work, and they
saw it and said, Hold on. Let's check. They checked and allowed
it to move forward. And for that particular experiment there
was no issue at all. And for all of the experiments we did, we
submitted the results to NIH, and they had no concerns
whatsoever with those results.
So I think this shows the system was working. Maybe there
were ways we could tighten it up, and I fully support that. And
EcoHealth Alliance will do everything we can to comply with any
new rules you think are inadequate, and I think that's a good
thing.
Minority Counsel. So, I think it's hopeful to transition to
the oversight. We've talked a little bit about the one log rule
that NIAID put on your grant.
Dr. Daszak. Yes.
Minority Counsel. That rule, I'll just read it out. It's
just one sentence. ``Should any of the SARS-like chimeras show
evidence of enhanced growth greater than one log over the
backbone, you've got to stop all the experiments and notify
your program officer.''
You told us that you'd received data from WIV and that you
and your team at EcoHealth had reviewed that to make sure
everybody is in compliance with the one log rule, which makes
sense. I think we just have a couple of questions about how
that unfolded.
In the year 3 report, you gave the experiment results from
that year showing what the chimeric viruses did. WIV1, the
backbone, wasn't in the report. We talked about this in
November. I don't think it should be new to you. The full
length WIV1 wasn't included in the----
Dr. Daszak. Oh, this is the report, but then it was in the
publication.
Minority Counsel. Yes. That almost makes it worse. In other
words----
Dr. Daszak. Well, there's no significant difference between
the two graphs, actually. I mean, I don't see why that's of any
relevance really, other than the timing. I mean, clearly the
results they had for WIV1 weren't ready to submit for the
report but were available when they submitted the paper. And
we're all on the paper together, I believe, so that's a
standard, normal thing in doing science.
What you do with NIH oversight, when you submit a report,
you send them everything you've got. That is stuff from
unpublished data, it might be wrong, it might need to be
analyzed further. There may be missing parts of it. So, I think
what you're finding is something that was missing, that then
was done, and then put into the paper.
Minority Counsel. So, without the backbone, you can't
possibly know if you are or are not in compliance with the one
log rule. Is that right?
Dr. Daszak. No, that's not right. I mean, we----
Minority Counsel. That's not right?
Dr. Daszak. We--well, no one can know in advance for sure.
Minority Counsel. One log is called what?
Dr. Daszak. With reasonable hypothesis based on the
evolutionary distance, based on everything we know about these
viruses, we put forward the rationale for the thinking that
this would not lead to a striking significant difference. NIH
approved it because they also believed that. We did the
experiment, reported it back. Nobody came back to us and said,
This is highly concerning, because it wasn't. The results were
unremarkable.
Minority Counsel. I'm sorry, because that's not even close
to what I asked.
Dr. Daszak. Oh.
Minority Counsel. So, the question is, without the backbone
strain, it is not possible to know whether you are or are not
in compliance with the one log rule. Is that right?
Dr. Daszak. I don't think that's correct.
Minority Counsel. Why not?
Dr. Daszak. Well, I just don't--I'd have to look at the
data, but I don't think that's correct.
Minority Counsel. Well, it's pretty easy. So, the one log--
we'll go back over it. The one log rule is you can't go one log
above the backbone. And so, if you don't know what the backbone
is, how can you measure compliance?
Dr. Daszak. Well, you'd have to look at the actual filing
of what the backbone--proposed backbone was.
Minority Counsel. I agree. And you don't have it in your
report.
Dr. Daszak. So, let me ask you, did that go over one log
higher than the WIV backbone.
Minority Counsel. No, it didn't end up doing that.
Dr. Daszak. No. So, why is this an issue at all for
anybody.
Minority Counsel. Well, that's easy, I think. It's because
in year 4, the subsequent year, it went way over one log.
Dr. Daszak. But that was a different virus.
Minority Counsel. Sure. It indicates, however----
Dr. Daszak. It's a different issue.
Minority Counsel. It indicates, however, that the
subsequent year when you did start measuring the backbone
strain's performance, it went over a log. And you talked to us
about why you think----
Dr. Daszak. You're not comparing apples to apples. That's a
completely different experiment.
And, by the way, you say whatever, one log viral growth.
Those are genome copies per gram. They're widely known to be
inaccurate and not a very ideal measure of true viral growth.
That should be a viral titer. So, I think that's an unfair
comparison and not relevant.
Minority Counsel. I can appreciate that.
Dr. Daszak. Well, thanks.
Minority Counsel. What did the viral titers say?
Dr. Daszak. I think you know the answer to that.
Minority Counsel. It would help, I think, folks to hear it.
Dr. Daszak. We never received viral titers in the end.
Minority Counsel. Did you ever ask for them?
Dr. Daszak. Well, if you look at the results, you'll see
that there's no significant difference in the final day of the
experiment. By day 6, the number of genome copies per gram had
returned to normal. There would have been no need to go back
and do extra work in an experiment that was only remarkable
with no significant problems.
Minority Counsel. Just because, again, we are focused on
the details, which I know can be tedious, but it was day 8 that
they evened out, so it was----
Dr. Daszak. I think day 6 they were pretty much evened out
statistically.
Minority Counsel. I don't think they were.
Dr. Daszak. Well, let's check.
Minority Counsel. That's fine. We can do that.
Dr. Daszak. OK.
Minority Counsel. So, I think the situation you were in
there is the other accompanying figure shows that those mice
are losing more weight than the mice that are infected with
that backbone strain. And you've got one log of growth on days
2, 4, and 6, and you're telling me, Well, it evened out on day
8, so it doesn't----
Dr. Daszak. Sure. You know, you seem somehow concerned
about that. We submitted that report to NIH. The program
officer clearly read it, and NIH never once got back to us and
said, Look, we have concerns over that issue. If they had have,
then we would have said, OK, let's discuss. Let's get the data.
Let's conduct our own titers. Let's check all the raw data.
Nobody reported anything because it wasn't remarkable.
Those were normal variations within a small group of mice. We
didn't even get to publish it because it probably wouldn't have
been publishable. It just wasn't that significant. If you look
at my conclusions in the report, in the report, I don't say,
Wow, we have this striking response from a group of mice that
suggests this virus is highly dangerous. We certainly didn't
say, Well--you read out from a paper by Dr. Baric--evidence on
the cusp of a pandemic. No. We said this experiment shows that
there is sometimes different responses to different viruses in
different conditions. That's it. It wasn't remarkable. It isn't
a cause for concern.
I also want to remind the Committee these are SARS-CoV-
related bat viruses. They're not known to be infectious to
people. They have nothing to do with COVID-19. They're not
related to SARS-CoV-2.
So again, going back to reports, and even an experiment
almost 10 years ago, and sort of saying, Well, we need to go
back and get more information, that won't be possible. No one
asked for it at the time. We showed the results, all the
results we had to NIH, and they were unremarkable, and NIH
clearly agreed. They then awarded the next year's funding, and
we continued our work.
Minority Counsel. Yes. And I think you've hopefully said
that even if that year 4 is viewed as going over one log, it's
the same experiment as year 5. It's one single experiment. I
think that's your testimony, right?
Dr. Daszak. Yes, that's right.
Minority Counsel. All right.
Dr. Daszak. That's my understanding.
Minority Counsel. And I think, as the majority alluded to,
we're a little bit unsure about that, but just some data points
on it. The year 5 report says, ``In year 5, we continued with
in vivo experiments.''
Just as a starting point, does that not sound to you like
in year 5 they continued with experiments?
Dr. Daszak. Well, this is the language received from
Chinese Nationals writing in English. And our understanding of
that was they continued analyzing from the in vivo experiments,
which is what's in the reports. It's the pathology from the
experiment.
Minority Counsel. So, it's some English proficiency
problem?
Dr. Daszak. It's a ``your misinterpretation of what they
meant'' problem. My interpretation is that, which I think is
shown by the data, that they were doing the pathology on an
experiment that was concluded a year ago, which is normal.
Minority Counsel. Yes. So, those two experiments----
Dr. Daszak. Absolutely normal.
Minority Counsel. Those two experiments are also measured
over different time spans. The figure in year 4 is 6 days. The
figure in year 5 is 14 days. That sounds like a different
experiment.
Dr. Daszak. Well, we were told it isn't a different
experiment. It's the same experiment. And unfortunately, it's
going to be very difficult to get any information on that now.
I did try, but we were told it's the same experiment. Now, the
time difference may be easily explained by the way they set up
the experiment. Maybe some of those mice were allowed to live
longer before they were terminated, killed.
Minority Counsel. Maybe. And so, at that----
Dr. Daszak. Yes. I mean, it's totally reasonable.
Minority Counsel. Well, I don't quite agree there, but I
suppose you can say maybe. We asked what your source was for it
being a single experiment. Am I right that the source of for
that is the Wuhan Institute of Virology told you so?
Dr. Daszak. The source is the lab that did the experiment.
Minority Counsel. That's what they told you?
Dr. Daszak. That's the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
Minority Counsel. And that was after the pandemic when they
told you that?
Dr. Daszak. It was when I asked, when I was asked to ask by
NIH.
Minority Counsel. And was that during the pandemic?
Dr. Daszak. Oh, yes, yes.
Minority Counsel. OK.
Dr. Daszak. After it had begun, yes.
Minority Counsel. Do you think there's any possibility that
they might have been incentivized to be less than truthful with
you in that situation?
Dr. Daszak. I'm not going to comment on people's motives
that I don't know. I've had a long relationship with the
scientists in that lab. I've told you about that. You get to
understand people, and you get to know them. And, you know, you
hear the same stories over 20 years. You hear if there are any
discrepancies in their stories.
They've always been honest with us. They've always been
truthful. There's never been any untoward, underhand things
going on. And I have no reason to think that they were under
pressure to lie. There was no indication of that. They've not
lied about other things, to my knowledge. You know, these are
good scientists that are trying to do their job, and some of
the best scientists in the world.
Minority Counsel. OK. I'll yield some time back, but I
think the broader theme throughout that is a little bit of a
concern that when you discuss your work, either here at the
Select Subcommittee, or with regulators or in public-facing
situations, it's possible perhaps that you're framing issues in
a way that is most favorable to you, and less so in a way
that's confronting the science at any given moment. And that is
just concerning.
Dr. Daszak. I've only told you the truth.
Minority Counsel. OK.
Dr. Wenstrup. I would now like to yield to the Ranking
Member Ruiz for a closing statement, if you would like one.
Dr. Ruiz. As we conclude today's hearing, I remain
seriously concerned that you, Dr. Daszak, appear to be eluding
questions from this Committee in an attempt to avoid
consequences. It was quite evident after this last questioning,
and so, it is important that you and your organization be held
accountable for all of your actions as Federal grantees,
including the failure to comply with transparency obligations.
You can say, Well, everybody knows. That's basically what
your--everybody just assumes. Everybody knows. But when you're
obliged to report them and you don't, that's concerning.
We need to ensure that American taxpayer dollars are being
spent responsibly, and I'm pleased by the strong bipartisan
agreement demonstrated on this point today. At the same time,
we owe it to the American people to be transparent about what
exactly we are seeing. And I want to be clear that nothing
produced to the Select Subcommittee over the past 14 months,
nothing in more than 425,000 pages of internal documents and
100 hours of closed-door testimony substantiates claims that
Federal funding to EcoHealth Alliance and its work in Wuhan
caused the COVID-19 pandemic.
I have always maintained that my role as Ranking Member of
this Committee is to keep an open mind about how the pandemic
started, because understanding whether the novel coronavirus
emerged from a lab or from nature is essential to better
preventing and preparing for future public health threats and
to better protecting the American people.
That doesn't negate not being transparent or, you know, not
giving full context of your remarks at the time or, you know,
saying that you submitted the report, but yet, it wasn't
submitted, and then being locked out and not submitting it
until years later is not concerning, and your administrative
responsibilities and lack of reporting in a timely manner is
not concerning.
So as we press for appropriate accountability for
EcoHealth's concerning conduct, it is my hope that we can also
dedicate our remaining time to an objective analysis of the
various pathways by which SARS-CoV-2 could have emerged, be
they zoonotic or stemming from a research-related incident.
Because the truth of the matter is that the results will remain
inconclusive, and our time in this Congress is running short.
As I said in my opening statement, I stand ready to work
with an objective evaluation of all of these possibilities, Mr.
Chairman, and I hope that we can do so in order to protect the
health and safety of our constituents, our community, and our
country.
This origin could still very well be zoonotic, and it could
have been a lab leak, but we need to, in my opinion, spend
equal amount of time trying to figure out how we can prevent
zoonotic transmissions in the right locations around our globe
and what we can do to collaborate better with foreign
countries, some friendly, some not, in order to better contain
the next emerging virus in the host country.
But I do think, and at the end of the day, Dr. Daszak, your
responses here are unsatisfactory. Some are understandable, but
some are unsatisfactory in that, Well, that's not how I
interpreted the Chinese--that's not how I interpreted it when
it was quoted. And you say you can interpret it this way and I
can interpret it that way. And as my colleague here, my
friend----
Dr. Daszak. Well, I'm----
Dr. Ruiz. You're not asked to speak right now, but as you
said, you know, you're explaining things to your convenience to
avoid the consequences.
So, you know, that's concerning, and it's very concerning.
And, you know, there's been plenty of opportunity for you to
submit all of your data and evidence, and now you're telling us
that you could potentially have more evidence that you will
give us, it's also concerning.
So, with that, you know, I look forward to have forward-
facing solutions because, at the end of the day, the end point
here is, was this a lab leak. And then if it was, let's improve
biosafety standards and ensure that these misinterpretations
don't happen. And then--but if it was zoonotic, then let's
develop a system to prevent animal transmission.
And since we don't know, and we probably won't know because
of the Chinese Communist Party withholding all of their
information, then let's work on forward-facing solutions on
both scenarios.
With that, I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I thank the Ranking Member for his remarks. I
could not agree more that we have a path forward. We've been
conducting investigation. We today have found out a lot of
things that have given us guidance on things that we may need
to correct.
And I have the same concern--whether something is zoonotic
or whether it's manufactured within a lab--how are we going to
be prepared, how can we predict it, how can we prevent it, how
can we keep the American people safe, and for that matter,
people around the globe.
But the purpose of today's hearing was to have a
transparent examination of EcoHealth Alliance's president, Dr.
Peter Daszak, given the extensive evidence of their role in
gain-of-function research at the Wuhan Institute of Virology,
as well as getting a better understanding of the grant process
and the oversight, or lack thereof.
Because Congress has a responsibility to ensure American
taxpayer dollars are spent in accordance with the law, and that
rigorous oversight is applied to the entities that receive
these funds, and as the Chairman of this Select Subcommittee,
I'm committed to doing just that.
We have identified serious issues with EcoHealth for the
public to witness here today, such as failing to disclose
competing interests, efforts to conceal where information
originated from, and other significant reporting failures.
I want to stress, this investigation is not over, and Dr.
Daszak, we are not throwing the baby out with the bath water
when it comes to advances in scientific research. That is not
the purpose.
Everyone on here, on this Subcommittee, supports good
research. This, however, has not been good research.
This Subcommittee has gone, spent time with the World
Organization of Animal Health. You talk about infections
through the zoonotic community, and possibly jumping to the
human community. We have concerns with that. We went and
visited with Dr. Tedros in the WHO.
We are concerned about global health. We're not trying to
throw the baby out with the bath water. And I agree that it's
nice if you can do work in the country where the greatest risk
is, and we can do the surveillance there.
But the problem is, if you're in a country that is not
trustable and not accountable and noncooperative with the WHO,
in this case, we have a problem. And that's not where you
should be.
You can be near there. There may be some countries near
there, where we can do the same research with trustable and
accountable scientists. That is, I think, an important lesson
that we have learned here.
And you talk about, Oh, this is research that's really
important. I'm not saying it's not, but I'll tell you, there's
a difference between this type of research, and research that I
see in my journals about bone growth or orthopedic repairs or--
this is not research on a cure for cancer that benefits all
people. This is dangerous, risky research, and everyone
involved with that, that I know of, has stated that at one
point in their life or other.
So we cannot just blindly trust the scientists just because
they're scientists. They're scientists in China, a country that
is an adversary to the United States of America, and especially
when they're not forthcoming and honest when working to go
forward. And when doing this to secure a Federal grant and fail
to do the important work to satisfy the terms of the grant,
that's a problem.
As we pointed out in our report and heard today, hiding
behind different definitions of ``gain of function'' to deny
your role in conducting dangerous gain-of-function research at
the WIV will not prevent us from conducting oversight and
holding people accountable.
You know, semantics doesn't change the risks involved. The
semantics that we're hearing about today, the different
definitions of gain-of-function research just seems to define
the different levels of the risk and the severity of the
results.
We know that EcoHealth and Dr. Daszak violated the terms of
the NIH grant by failing to report the gain-of-function
experiment it was conducting. Let's be clear. We know this
wasn't a small oversight or a clerical error. This was a
dangerous experiment that was conducted and not reported.
And this was not the only occurrence of EcoHealth failing
to properly report. Didn't submit the annual research report.
We talked about that a lot today.
This is not an organization that shows leadership committed
to protecting taxpayer funds or conducting research in an
appropriate manner as set in the terms of the grant. This is
troubling pattern of behavior that we are seeing, and conduct
as well.
EcoHealth made misleading statements in an effort to
benefit yourself and your organization's financial interests
and reputation. Misleading grant application to DARPA, you
downplayed the Chinese involvement in the project.
Even though we did learn from the emails produced that your
proposal--your proposal did what you said you wanted to do in
private, which is downplay the role of China and the WIV,
specifically Dr. Zhengli Shi.
You know, you didn't disclose your relationship with the
WIV when you published the Lancet letter. And you said that
Lancet approved this correspondence. Well, I'll tell you what,
we asked Lancet to come in and sit before us. They didn't.
Neither did Nature Magazine. Science did. They came in. They
admitted to some of the things they could maybe do better. So,
claiming that Lancet approved of it doesn't bear much water in
front of this Committee right now.
I could go on, but I think we've covered just about
everything, and I'm glad we have. And I think we've done it in
a very thorough fashion, but we're waiting for more, because
while we're trying to be thorough, we don't feel that we have
gotten a thorough response.
If everything was innocent mistakes, we wouldn't need to
send a letter asking for more information and documents by
April 4--on April 4. Too many mistakes. Accountability taking
far too long.
But here we are, and we'll continue to conduct oversight
and evaluate the evidence surrounding EcoHealth Alliance's
research activities.
Before I close, I ask unanimous consent to place the report
on evaluation of the evidence surrounding EcoHealth Alliance,
Inc's, research activities into the record.
Dr. Wenstrup. With that, and without objection, all Members
will have 5 legislative days within which to submit materials
and to submit additional written questions for the witnesses,
which will be forwarded to the witnesses for their response.
With that, and without--and if there's no further business,
without objection, the Select Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:09 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
