- OVERSEEING THE OVERSEERS: A HEARING WITH NIH DEPUTY DIRECTOR LAWRENCE TABAK

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

.                       OVERSEEING THE OVERSEERS:
A HEARING WITH NIH DEPUTY DIRECTOR
LAWRENCE TABAK

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SELECT SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

MAY 16, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-110
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-710 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Michael Cloud, Texas                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Ro Khanna, California
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Katie Porter, California
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Cori Bush, Missouri
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Shontel Brown, Ohio
Byron Donalds, Florida               Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Robert Garcia, California
William Timmons, South Carolina      Maxwell Frost, Florida
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Greg Casar, Texas
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Dan Goldman, New York
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
Nick Langworthy, New York            Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Eric Burlison, Missouri
Mike Waltz, Florida

------
Mark Marin, Staff Director
Mitchell Benzine, Subcommittee Staff Director
Marie Policastro, Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5074

Miles Lichtman, Minority Staff Director
Contact Number: 202-225-5051
------

Select Subcommittee On The Coronavirus Pandemic

Brad Wenstrup, Ohio, Chairman
Nicole Malliotakis, New York         Raul Ruiz, California, Ranking
Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa           Minority Member
Debbie Lesko, Arizona                Debbie Dingell, Michigan
Michael Cloud, Texas                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
John Joyce, Pennsylvania             Deborah Ross, North Carolina
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Robert Garcia, California
Ronny Jackson, Texas                 Ami Bera, California
Rich Mccormick, Georgia              Jill Tokuda, Hawaii

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

Page

Hearing held on May 16, 2024.....................................     1

Witnesses

----------

Dr. Lawrence Tabak, D.D.S., Ph.D., Principal Deputy Director,
National Institutes of Health
Oral Statement...................................................     6

Written opening statements and the written statements of the
witnesses are available on the U.S. House of Representatives
Document Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

*  No additional documents were submitted for this hearing.

OVERSEEING THE OVERSEERS:
A HEARING WITH NIH DEPUTY DIRECTOR
LAWRENCE TABAK

----------

Thursday, May 16, 2024

House of Representatives

Committee on Oversight and Accountability

Select Subcommittee on the Coronavirus Pandemic

Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:01 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Brad Wenstrup
[Chairman of the Select Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Wenstrup, Comer, Malliotakis,
Miller-Meeks, Lesko, Joyce, Jackson, McCormick, Ruiz, Dingell,
Ross, and Tokuda.
Also present: Representatives Griffith and Castor.
Dr. Wenstrup. The Select Subcommittee on the Coronavirus
Pandemic will come to order. I want to welcome everyone.
At the discretion of the Chair and pursuant to an agreement
with the Committee on Energy and Commerce, the Chairman and
Ranking Member of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Mr. Morgan
Griffith and Ms. Kathy Castor, are permitted to participate in
today's hearing for the purposes of questions and give 3-minute
opening statements.
Without objection, the Chair may declare a recess at any
time.
I now recognize myself for the purpose of making an opening
statement.
Good morning. I would first like to highlight the action
taken by NIH and HHS yesterday to immediately suspend and
propose debarment of EcoHealth Alliance.
The Select Subcommittee while investigating the origins of
COVID-19 uncovered multiple instances of wrongdoing by both
EcoHealth and its President, Dr. Peter Daszak. EcoHealth faces
an immediate governmentwide suspension and hold on all taxpayer
funds pending a formal debarment investigation. I have said it
before, but our investigation into EcoHealth and Dr. Daszak's
actions is not over. Dr. Daszak owes us documents and
explanations for what appears to be truths or lies before this
Subcommittee.
Today we will hear from Dr. Lawrence Tabak, principal
deputy director and former acting director of the National
Institutes of Health. The Select Subcommittee has serious
concerns regarding the processes in which NIH awards Federal
grants and conducts oversight of these grants. EcoHealth and
its subgrantee, the Wuhan Institute of Virology, highlighted
numerous inadequacies in the NIH grant management and oversight
process. This is especially true regarding oversight of gain-
of-function work on potential pathogens, pandemic capable or
otherwise.
Oversight of grant management is crucial regardless of
anyone's operative definition of ``gain of function.'' When the
U.S. Government is actively funding research in these areas, as
we saw with EcoHealth and the Wuhan Institute of Virology, we
need to have the highest possible standards in place.
Unfortunately, there does not appear to have been adequate
oversight of EcoHealth and its experiments. This issue has
highlighted broader concerns with the NIH, especially that it
is up to the grantee to oversee themselves. This is a recipe
for waste, fraud, abuse, and deception.
We have heard conflicting testimony regarding late grant
reporting, the dates experiments were conducted, the
interactions with the Wuhan Institute, whether grant terms
actually applied or not. We have uncovered outrageous conduct,
like intentionally using personal email to avoid FOIA or
deleting Federal records from a senior NIAID official, Dr.
David Morens. Put simply, Dr. Tabak, the Select Subcommittee
has serious concerns regarding the NIH's ability to conduct
necessary and proper oversight of its grant processes by what
seems to be its current grant process construct. So, the
American people pay for this scientific research, and the
research needs to be for the benefit of the American people,
first and foremost. We hope we can put forth some solutions to
help going forward. Unfortunately, as EcoHealth President, Dr.
Peter Daszak, made the Select Committee fully aware during a
hearing earlier this month, such oversight and responsibility
is not always taking place.
In securing your testimony today, Dr. Tabak, NIH assured
the Select Subcommittee that you would be able to speak to
these issues on behalf of the Agency, and we appreciate that.
NIH insisted we do not need to have a hearing with Dr. Lauer,
the NIH official in charge of compliance, because you would be
knowledgeable on these matters. In anticipation of this
hearing, the Select Subcommittee provided you with a list of
specific issues that require answers. The Select Subcommittee
has been entirely open and transparent in what it requires of
the NIH, we expect the same courtesy today.
Forward-looking policy recommendations require us to review
what happened in the past and what went wrong in the first
place. Without our extensive report on EcoHealth, I don't
believe that HHS would have been able to propose debarment, and
we are very happy the Department accepted our recommendation.
While we acknowledge HHS's actions with respect to EcoHealth,
more work needs to be done. How do we prevent this from
happening again? While I understand the temptation to simply
look forward, we can't learn how to prevent and respond to the
next pandemic if we do not learn any lessons from the last one.
So, I appreciate my colleagues' assistance in demanding answers
from EcoHealth. Our actions have led to real change and a
benefit to the American people. I hope you all would join me
today in examining what we can do better going forward, and I
look forward to a robust and on-topic discussion, so thank you
very much.
I would now like to recognize Ranking Member Ruiz for the
purpose of making an opening statement.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Fifteen months ago, the
Select Subcommittee declared a mission of getting to the bottom
of the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic. As Ranking Member, I
made a promise to keep an open mind about how the pandemic
started because understanding whether the novel coronavirus
emerged from a lab or from nature is essential to better
preventing and preparing for future public health threats and
to better protecting the American people. And as the origins of
the novel coronavirus remain inconclusive, I stand by this
commitment. But as we approach the three-quarter mark of the
Select Subcommittee's work, this Congress must acknowledge the
fact that the majority's probing into our public health
agencies and federally funded research has left us with no
better understanding of how the novel coronavirus came to be.
We have pored over nearly 450,000 pages of documents
provided to us by Federal agencies, universities, and private
citizens. We have conducted more than 100 hours of closed-door
interviews with 20 current former Federal officials and
scientists, and we have held multiple hearings, all in what has
at times appeared to be an effort to weaponize concerns about a
lab-related origin to fuel sentiment against our Nation's
scientists and public health officials for partisan gain. And
while this Select Subcommittee's probe has uncovered efforts by
Dr. Peter Daszak to mislead his funders at the National
Institutes of Health and the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, it has not substantiated any allegations
that Federal grant funding for EcoHealth Alliance created the
COVID-19 pandemic. This is a critically important distinction.
As Dr. Tabak explained in the letter to the Committee on
Oversight and Reform in October 2021, research performed under
EcoHealth Alliance has grant, including at the Wuhan Institute
of Virology, involved viruses that are too genetically distant
from SARS-CoV-2 to be its progenitor virus. The Select
Subcommittee has obtained no evidence this Congress to suggest
otherwise, nor has it nearly spent equivalent time and energy
meaningfully examining the still very real possibility that the
novel coronavirus could have emerged through zoonosis in
nature. And so, at the end of the day, nearly a year and a half
into House Republicans' majority, we are right where we started
when it comes to understanding COVID's origins.
Now, as the Ranking Member of the Select Subcommittee, I
also promised to follow the facts wherever they lead. And as we
examined earlier this month, the facts indicate that Dr. Daszak
and EcoHealth Alliance may have deliberately misled Federal
regulators and investigators, including at NIH, regarding their
compliance with reporting requirements and the nature of their
scientific work. And we can all agree that demonstrating a
reckless disregard for transparency and accountability to the
American taxpayers who fund your research is unacceptable, and
this misconduct should be taken seriously. But we should also
bear in mind that as EcoHealth misconduct has been identified,
NIH has taken decisive actions to rectify the issue at hand,
including by recommending the debarment of the Wuhan Institute
of Virology, and instituting unprecedented conditions on
EchoHealth's use of funds. And just yesterday, the Department
of Health and Human Services announced that it had immediately
suspended funding to EcoHealth and initiated debarment
proceedings for the organization.
While the discussion of how we can continue to strengthen
oversight of the use of taxpayers funding is always an
important one, it is my hope that we can use this conversation
to generate constructive, forward-looking solutions to fortify
the work of our Nation's public health agencies and work force
as opposed to denigrating them for partisan gain. As Members of
the Select Subcommittee, we have an obligation to confront the
challenges of declining confidence in science and public health
to advance pandemic preparedness, not further weaken it by
sowing extreme conspiratorial accusations that our public
health leaders caused and sought to cover up the origins of the
novel coronavirus for the sake of scoring political points.
So, as we look toward the future, it is my hope that we can
work together to build on the progress Congress made to fortify
our shores for future public health threats. Democrats passed
the Consolidated Appropriations Act reforms that strengthened
protections against undue influence in our biomedical research,
improve training and transparency for the handling of select
agents, pave the way for the interagency collaboration to
fortify zoonotic disease prevention, and invested in our
infectious disease work force, and it is my hope that we can
work with the Biden administration to continue to fortify
biosafety, including by collaborating on the implementation of
new guidelines.
The Office of Science and Technology Policy announced
earlier this month to strengthen oversight of dual research of
concern and research involving pathogens with enhanced pandemic
potential, and I look forward to a hearing of the constructive
work that is ongoing right now that will actually prevent and
help us better prepare for the next pandemic by the
administration. And it is my hope that we can make objectively
examining the origins of the novel coronavirus a part of this
forward-looking work. And I stand by my commitment to take a
serious, balanced look at all possibilities for the origins of
the COVID-19 pandemic, and I stand ready to work on this
critically important mission so that we can save future lives.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Ms. Castor to make an opening
statement.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the
ability to participate in today's hearing, and I want to thank
Dr. Tabak for your years of service to America and the National
Institutes of Health, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic,
one of the darkest periods in our lifetimes. Approximately 1.2
million Americans died due to COVID-19, they estimate over 7
million worldwide, and even today, the mortality rate for
COVID-19 is higher than the flu as is the risk for
hospitalization. In early 2020, when there were tens of
thousands of new cases of COVID-19 in America each day, Dr.
Tabak was one of many public servants who ensured that NIH's
best-in-class scientific research was focused on preventing and
treating this terrible new disease.
Overall, this Congress' effort to examine the cause of the
pandemic has brought more heat than light. Plus, so many,
including me are frustrated that instead of taking time to
learn critical lessons from our Nation's response to the
pandemic, Republicans in Congress have focused on eroding trust
in public health and science. In the Energy and Commerce
Committee, we had a tremendous opportunity to build on the very
difficult lessons learned throughout COVID by passing the
bipartisan Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act, the
PAHPA, which has historically been bipartisan. We wanted to
give the necessary resources and authorities to agencies
working to address and prevent pandemics, but Republicans in my
committee refused to move consensus legislation forward.
Instead, they doubled down on ideological partisanship and
refused to work together on bipartisan solutions. After a
closed-door transcribed interview, public health officials have
been hauled in and asked numerous questions, but it doesn't
seem like the Republican majority is actually interested in the
answers. We have not learned anything more about the origins of
COVID-19, but we have learned a lot about NIH's diligent work
to tackle the pandemic as well as the decades of scientific
work preceding 2019 that dramatically accelerated America's
ability to develop and manufacture vaccines in record time,
saving countless lives.
I hope that we can use today's hearing to learn how
Congress can be a better partner to NIH as it continues to
prepare us for pandemic threats rather than lob speculative
conjecture at our hardworking public health officials. I also
hope the remaining transcribed interviews will be released
quickly so that the public can read for themselves the complete
answers that we have heard from top scientists like Dr. Fauci,
instead of having to rely on misleading tweets about their
testimony.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here today. Thank you,
Dr. Tabak, and I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. Our witness today is Dr. Lawrence Tabak. Dr.
Tabak is the principal deputy director of the National
Institutes of Health and served as acting director of the NIH
from December from 2021 to November 2023. Thank you, Dr. Tabak,
for your many years of service.
Pursuant to Committee on Oversight and Accountability, Rule
10(g), the witness will please stand and raise his right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony that you
are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
Dr. Tabak. I do.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Let the record show that the
witness answered in the affirmative. The Select Subcommittee
certainly appreciates you for being here today, and we look
forward to your testimony.
Let me remind the witness that we have read your written
statement, and it will appear in full in the hearing record.
Please limit your oral statement to 5 minutes. As a reminder,
please press the button on the microphone in front of you so
that it is on, and the Members can hear you. When you begin to
speak, the light in front of you will turn green. After 4
minutes, the light will turn yellow. When the red light comes
on, your 5 minutes has expired, and we would ask that you
please wrap up.
I now recognize Dr. Tabak to give an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DR. LAWRENCE TABAK, D.D.S, Ph.D.

PRINCIPAL DEPUTY DIRECTOR

NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH

Dr. Tabak. Thank you, Chairman Wenstrup, Ranking Member
Ruiz, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. I
appreciate the opportunity to be here today to discuss your
investigation into the origins of COVID-19. It has been an
honor to serve the NIH in various roles over the past 24 years,
and I am pleased to continue my service as the NIH principal
deputy director under the leadership of NIH director, Dr.
Monica Bertagnolli. I have deep respect for the role of
congressional oversight. Since the beginning of the 118th
Congress, NIH has worked diligently with HHS to respond to
letters and inquiries from this Subcommittee, providing written
responses, document productions, and providing NIH employees
for full days of interviews. I am here today to answer
questions related to your investigation.
Like all the Subcommittee Members here today, I strongly
support efforts to identify the origins of SARS-CoV-2, the
virus that causes COVID-19. NIH strongly believes that a
thorough, expert-driven investigation into the origins of SARS-
CoV-2 is critical to prepare for the next potential pandemic.
While it is frustrating, it is not a surprise that we still do
not know with certainty how this virus came to be. It took 14
years to find a single bat population containing the necessary
genetic components of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that caused the
2003 SARS epidemic. Determining the origin of a virus is rarely
fast or easy and sometimes not possible. While NIH is not an
investigative Agency, we do support scientific research into
the origins of SARS-CoV-2 and will continue to make this a
priority. We are open to all possibilities, and we will follow
where the science leads us.
The body of publicly available scientific evidence thus far
suggests a natural evolution and points to the theory that
SARS-CoV-2 may have come from a wild animal market in Wuhan.
Importantly, agencies in the U.S. intelligence community agreed
that the virus was not developed as a biological weapon, and
most agencies assess that SARS-CoV-2 most likely was not
genetically engineered. A full understanding of the origins of
SARS-CoV-2 will require cooperation from other countries,
including China, and an independent investigation with
coordination from the intelligence community.
We may not know the origin of the COVID-19 pandemic yet,
but we have learned a great deal to improve the Nation's
preparedness for future pandemics. Decades of investment in
fundamental biomedical research were essential to the NIH's
rapid development of safe and effective vaccines, diagnostics,
and treatments. It took 10 years for a measles vaccine to be
approved. We had a COVID vaccine with emergency use
authorization in just 11 months. Countless lives have been
saved because of this work. The pandemic also demonstrated the
need to build, leverage, and sustain partnerships across the
U.S. Government, academia, industry, and not-for-profit
organizations to rapidly integrate clinical trial networks
across sectors streamlining and expediting research efforts
during the emergency. Data-sharing efforts supported by NIH
accelerated the field tremendously by allowing for immediate
public access to COVID-19 publications and open scrutiny of
research outcomes.
The world looks to science for definitive answers. However,
the complexities of nature take time to unravel. Scientific
discovery is iterative, and we continually try to improve
scientific approaches to drive toward more rapid, efficient,
and accurate assessments of the world around us. With your
continued partnership and support, NIH will continue to make
good on these efforts. Thank you for your time, and I welcome
your questions.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Doctor. I now recognize myself for
questions.
Dr. Tabak, we understand that the HHS has suspended
EcoHealth Federal grants and is proposing debarment, and we
appreciate that, while I understand that HHS will have to
conduct their own review before debarring EcoHealth. I
understand that. Do you think HHS would have been able to issue
this suspension without the Select Subcommittee's
investigation? And will it be helpful, the investigation today,
will it be helpful toward creating new policies going forward,
either through NIH or Congress itself?
Dr. Tabak. As you point out, Mr. Chair, the suspension and
proposal to debar is what is conducted by HHS. And so, I really
can't comment on what input they considered in preparing that
documentation.
Dr. Wenstrup. Well, I look forward to working with NIH on
proposals for better processes going forward based on what we
learned. And we have several proposals already, but we will
follow-up with you further on that. First, does this suspension
apply to Dr. Daszak personally or just EcoHealth?
Dr. Tabak. My understanding is this suspension relates only
to the organization.
Dr. Wenstrup. OK. I would ask that NIH evaluate the option
of Dr. Daszak himself. I think that we looked through some of
the findings that we have obtained to date. There may be cause
to consider a suspension on Dr. Daszak himself. Next, the ARM,
the Action Referral Memorandum, only mentions three active NIH
grants, but it doesn't mention the R01 that was used to involve
the Wuhan Institute of Virology and not the grant in
conjunction with Colorado state to start a bat colony. Does the
suspension include those grants as well? Did we miss that?
Dr. Tabak. The suspension includes all grant activities for
that organization.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Dr. Tabak, EcoHealth, like every
other NIAID grantee, was required to submit a 5-year progress
report, as you know. This report was submitted nearly 2 years
late. Dr. Daszak testified that EcoHealth had tried to submit
the report on time but was locked out of the NIH system. Dr.
Lauer testified that a forensic audit was conducted, and no
such system error was detected. Is NIH willing to share the
findings of this forensic audit with the Select Subcommittee?
Dr. Tabak. We certainly will work together with you to
obtain things that you require, sir.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Does the audit indicate that
EcoHealth could have submitted their report on time?
Dr. Tabak. That is what our audit indicates, yes.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. When EcoHealth eventually
submitted its year-5 report, Dr. Daszak testified it took 11
days to unlock the NIH system. Is this true?
Dr. Tabak. We have no evidence of that.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Does NIH allow grantees to update
progress reports with information gathered outside the scope of
the applicable budget period?
Dr. Tabak. It has happened in the past. Occasionally
investigators will for context add in additional information,
so that is possible.
Dr. Wenstrup. Despite what Dr. Daszak testified, the Select
Subcommittee recently uncovered an email that he wrote on
October 1, 2021, to the personal email of Dr. David Morens. He
said, ``Here's the truth behind this mystery. We got our report
ready to file for the Year 5 grant, but when it was funded, we
assumed we didn't need to. It was the first time we had a
renewal. We then had our grant terminated by Trump and assumed
we definitely wouldn't need to at that point.'' Does this sound
like a more accurate description of events as opposed to a
system lockout?
Dr. Tabak. I can't comment on his email. All I can say to
you is that our system did not lock them out, and there was no
impediment for them to provide that report on time.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Are grantees still required to
submit progress reports, even if they receive that year's
funding?
Dr. Tabak. They are indeed.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. One of the reasons for the
debarment was a dispute regarding whether an experiment that
showed unexpected viral growth was conducted in Year 4 or 5 of
that grant, unexpected viral growth, basically increased
pathogenicity. Would you agree with that?
Dr. Tabak. No. Again, just to put a finer point on it,
increased viral growth does not necessarily mean increased
pathogenicity. It just simply means that the virus is growing
more rapidly.
Dr. Wenstrup. OK. I appreciate that clarification. So,
going back to that, whether it was conducted in Year 4 or 5 of
the grant, what is NIH's determination? Did it occur in Year 4
or 5?
Dr. Tabak. It was our evaluation that it occurred in Year
5, but because of the uncertainty, we asked for the original
metadata, that is the electronic records, and the actual lab
notebooks that would have memorialized the actual events. And
as you know, we never received those.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Dr. Daszak wrote in an email that
he ``verified'' this experiment by calling Dr. Shi at the Wuhan
Institute of Virology and asking her. Is that alone sufficient
to meet his requirements to oversee subgrantees?
Dr. Tabak. It is not, sir, which is why we asked to see the
metadata, electronic records, and the laboratory notebook.
Dr. Wenstrup. Were the lab notebooks that Dr. Daszak failed
to produce, provide information that may potentially validate
this experiment?
Dr. Tabak. I certainly hoped they would, yes.
Dr. Wenstrup. And he never produced those to you?
Dr. Tabak. That is correct.
Dr. Wenstrup. OK. Thank you. I would now like to recognize
the Ranking Member for questions.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you. As I have said from the outset of the
Select Subcommittee's work last year, better understanding the
origins of the COVID-19 pandemic is essential for preventing
and preparing for future pandemics. Dr. Tabak, regardless of
whether the novel coronavirus came from a lab or from nature,
do you agree that we can better protect the American people if
we understand the risk factors leading to either potential
pathway?
Dr. Tabak. Yes, absolutely.
Dr. Ruiz. So, for the past 15 months, my Republican
colleagues have demonstrated that they are more concerned with
proving their extreme narrative about Dr. Fauci orchestrating a
coverup of Federal funding causing the COVID-19 pandemic than
they are with conducting an objective, balanced analysis of the
pathways by which the novel coronavirus could have emerged. But
three-quarters of the way through this Congress, Select
Subcommittee Republicans still have not succeeded in
substantiating their allegations that NIH and NIAID through a
grant to EcoHealth Alliance created SARS-CoV-2 and conspire to
cover it up.
And while we can agree that EchoHealth Alliance has defied
its obligations to be a transparent steward of taxpayer
dollars, let me be clear about this. No evidence provided to
the Select Subcommittee demonstrates that Dr. Fauci lied about
gain-of-function research in Wuhan. No evidence demonstrates
that Dr. Fauci and NIH lead a coverup of any kind, and no
evidence demonstrates that work performed under the EchoHealth
grant, including at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, led to the
creation of SARS-CoV-2. To date, my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle have been unable to demonstrate that any of
the viruses studied under the grant could even possibly have
been SARS-CoV-2's progenitor virus.
Dr. Tabak, in October 2021, you sent a letter and analysis
to then Oversight Committee Ranking Member, James Comer,
regarding the EchoHealth Alliance grant. That letter and
accompanying analysis in your words ``demonstrated that the
naturally occurring bat coronaviruses used in experiments under
the NIH grant from 2014 to 2018 are decades removed from SARS-
CoV-2 evolutionarily.'' In the letter, you also confirmed that
those viruses ``could not have been the source of SARS-CoV-2
and the COVID-19 pandemic.'' That was more than 2 years ago,
and the majority still has not identified a single virus
related to the grant, whether in Wuhan or elsewhere that could
be the progenitor virus. Dr. Tabak, could you remind us why
none of the virus as studied under the EchoHealth grant could
have been the progenitor virus to the SARS-CoV-2?
Dr. Tabak. The viruses that were approved for study under
the EchoHealth grant are very removed, evolutionarily speaking,
from SARS-CoV-2. It would take many, many years for a virus of
the type that they use to evolve into SARS-CoV-2.
Dr. Ruiz. OK. And is it correct that the closest known
viruses to SARS-CoV-2 are the RaTG13 and the BANAL-52 viruses,
neither of which were discovered or created with NIH funds?
Dr. Tabak. That is correct. Those two viruses are 96 and 97
percent identical, and although that may seem close, in fact,
that is very far apart.
Dr. Ruiz. OK. And you already made all of this known to
Oversight Committee Republicans almost 3 years ago in October
2021, correct?
Dr. Tabak. That is what the letter outlined, yes.
Dr. Ruiz. Yes. So, it is unfortunate that for the past year
and a half, the Select Subcommittee has fallen short of its
obligation to objectively promote the Americans public's
understanding of the viruses origins. And Dr. Tabak, in your
view, what actions should Congress take to better understand
the origins of the novel coronavirus and to prevent and prepare
for future pandemics?
Dr. Tabak. Well, again, we need to continue the studies
about the evolution of these viruses. We have to somehow
encourage foreign partners to engage because it is only through
engagement of foreign nations that we are going to truly get to
the bottom of this. As you know, these viruses do not originate
in this country. They originate in Southeast Asia.
Dr. Ruiz. OK. Well, let me just be clear once again that it
could have been lab leak, and it could have been zoonotic,
although what we haven't proven because so far there is no
evidence, is that it was created from grant money from NIH or
NIAID to EchoHealth, and that there was a coverup, which is
what my colleagues on the other side have been repeatedly
mentioning throughout these investigations. So, I do think that
we need to continue to do the research to investigate if it was
a lab leak, where and how, and how to create better biosafety,
which is what the administration is currently undertaking. I
think it would be helpful to hear from them their efforts and
what we can do to bolster the administration's efforts to keep
lab safety a priority in our country and in our efforts in
other countries. And I think we should also have more hearings
on zoonotic high-risk detection in other countries so that we
can set up better systems to build capacity to identify
emerging novel viruses immediately and contain them at the
source site. So, with that, I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Ms. Malliotakis from New York
for 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Malliotakis. Thank you. Dr. Tabak, Dr. Daszak came
before us and said he was not sure of all the work, or all the
research being conducted at the WIV. Are you aware of all the
work that was being done at the WIV?
Dr. Tabak. Certainly not. We just have a window into what
we support.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. Are you aware or were you aware that
the CCP, the military wing, was doing work at the WIV?
Dr. Tabak. I am not personally aware of that.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. And just for the record, Dr. Collins
came before us and said that the hypothesis that the COVID-19
pandemic was a result of a lab leak or lab-related accident is
not a conspiracy theory. Would you agree with that?
Dr. Tabak. I think it is just an alternate theory that
needs to be considered.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. And we also had the former head of the
CDC come before us and say that it was American tax dollars
that went to the WIV, and it wasn't just NIH funding. It was
funding from Department of State, Department of Defense, USAID.
Are you aware of that?
Dr. Tabak. I am aware that they received funding from other
organizations, but I don't know the specifics.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. So, there is still the possibility
that American tax dollars didn't make their way to the WIV and
that this was a lab leak, and we can put together the dots
here, but aside from that, I want to actually focus on NIH.
When NIH certified EcoHealth's compliance and we negotiated the
grant, was NIH aware of the EcoHealth would still be
communicating with the debarred Wuhan Institute of Technology?
Last year was when they were debarred, and they were still
obtaining data and conducting experiments with that
information.
Dr. Tabak. Once they were debarred, I do not believe that
there is any requirement that they can no longer have
conversations with WIV. Is that the timeframe----
Ms. Malliotakis. Well, no. Well, WIV was debarred----
Dr. Tabak. Right.
Ms. Malliotakis [continuing]. And EcoHealth was still
talking to them. Are we certain that no Federal funds have gone
to the WIV since the debarment?
Dr. Tabak. No NIH funds have gone to the WIV since the
debarment.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. And is that possible that it has gone
through the EcoHealth to WIV as a subgrant? I'm saying----
Dr. Tabak. We checked USAID spending, and to my knowledge,
no funds, once they were debarred, went to WIV from NIH.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. Well, that is why Ways and Means
yesterday passed a bill to make sure that all this information
is made public, these subgrants, so we know exactly where this
money is going once they are given because we don't believe
EcoHealth should have received this money, No. 1. No. 2, the
fact that they were working with this lab in Communist China
that had subpar conditions is very disturbing. But we also know
that at least 20 more EcoHealth research projects received
funding since March 2020. And they are conducting research,
NEPA, zoonotic viruses, bat coronaviruses, MERS. They are doing
a lot of this research, mostly actually in Third World
countries, subpar safety conditions.
How do you ensure that our Federal dollars are not going to
do risky experiments in countries where there are subpar safety
regulations, and do you believe that that should be a criteria
that is put forth to ensure that the money doesn't?
Dr. Tabak. Well, again, once we established special
conditions for award on EcoHealth Alliance, we have monitored
them very carefully with regard to expenditure and with regard
to their various administrative processes. There was never a
concern with the danger, if you will, of the experiments that
NIH approved for EcoHealth Alliance to work under sub-award
with WIV. As I just indicated, the viruses that they were
working with are nonhuman pathogens that presented no threat.
Ms. Malliotakis. But you said that you don't know all the
work that was being conducted at WIV.
Dr. Tabak. I can only speak to the funds that NIH approved
and the work that we approved. I cannot speak to the other
side.
Ms. Malliotakis. How are you sure about the work that we
approved? Did you go there? I mean, did you talk to WIV
officials? How did you confirm that the money was not used?
Dr. Tabak. We monitor reports. We monitor their publication
record.
Ms. Malliotakis. The WIV's reports?
Dr. Tabak. The EcoHealth Alliance----
Ms. Malliotakis. OK.
Dr. Tabak [continuing]. Reports because as a sub-awardee,
we do not directly connect to WIV.
Ms. Malliotakis. I just have one last question. In October
2021, NIH changed the website for the definition of a ``gain-
of-function.'' Who authorized that change?
Dr. Tabak. I don't know if anybody specifically authorized
it.
Ms. Malliotakis. Who made the change?
Dr. Tabak. The change was made by our communications
department because of the confusion that people have about the
generic term of gain-of-function and the specific term gain-of-
function.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. So, you don't know who specifically
made the change?
Dr. Tabak. It was done by our communications office that
wrote----
Ms. Malliotakis. The communications office is
communications and not scientists, so somebody must have gave
him the----
Dr. Tabak. The content was vetted.
Ms. Malliotakis. By who?
Dr. Tabak. By individuals who are subject matter experts.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. Well, we would like to find out who
that person is, who is the subject matter expert, if you could
let the committee----
Dr. Wenstrup. OK. Now I recognize Ms. Castor from Florida
for 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Tabak, in your
transcribed interview of January 5th, 2024, you shared that
during the COVID-19 pandemic, we happened to know a lot about
coronaviruses because of a lot of antecedent work. How did
Congress' years of investment in basic research accelerate
NIH's ability to respond to the pandemic, and what would have
been different had those investments not happened?
Dr. Tabak. In many ways, the congressional investment
allowed NIH to understand the biology of the SARS family
viruses. It allowed us to understand how they are able to
attach the host, how they are able to infect and then induce
pathogenesis. It enabled us to understand better how the host
would respond to the virus. So, it gave us insight as to what
potential targets there might be in order to develop
therapeutics, as well as vaccines. The spike protein, which
many people have heard about, represented such a target for a
vaccine, and indeed that turned out to be the case. It also
laid the groundwork for rapid testing for the virus, which was
important as well as we sought to control the pandemic.
Ms. Castor. I also think it demonstrated how vital it is
that American scientists and our agencies are able to monitor
new potential public health threats because right now, we are
faced with an avian flu, and we are monitoring of course, new
COVID-19 and flu variants and measles outbreaks. Just in my
time in Congress, we have had to deal with outbreaks of Zika
and monitor Ebola in other countries. So confronting public
health threats requires a strong, resilient NIH, which is why I
was so disappointed when my Republican colleagues proposed in
the last Fiscal Year to slash the budget of NIH by almost $4
billion because as you stated, this reliable support has helped
accelerate our response to COVID-19, and it will continue to
lay the foundation for response to future pandemics.
Dr. Tabak, what would be the effect of slashing $4 billion
from NIH? What would be the effect on our preparedness for the
next pandemic?
Dr. Tabak. Obviously, with fewer resources, our progress
would be slowed.
Ms. Castor. In your transcribed interview, you also shared
examples of what productive cross-departmental coordination to
tackle disease threats look like. In some parts of the country,
including my home state of Florida, we learned the hard way
what a failure to collaborate and coordinate looks like when
Governor DeSantis deliberately hid death and infection
information from the public. More people died in Florida from
COVID-19 after a safe and effective vaccine was available, and,
I believe, largely due to the state's disinformation campaign.
Democrats in the Energy and Commerce Committee tried to
implement the lessons learned through the reauthorization of
the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act. A lot of the
things that Dr. Ruiz mentioned, we tried to develop plans for
public-private partnerships and also focus on data sharing
across local, state, and Federal Government. Unfortunately,
Energy and Commerce Republicans refused to work with us on this
critical legislation.
In your transcribed interview, you shared that we as a
country have had a mixed response when it comes to applying the
lessons learned from COVID-19 and that we can't become
complacent as the pandemic wanes. Aside from maintaining
critical funding, what does NIH need to see from Congress in
order to help the Agency best implement the lessons learned
from COVID-19?
Dr. Tabak. Well, I think the forward thinking of making the
fundamental investments so that we can investigate the
remaining viral families of concern. Sometimes it is difficult
to understand why such basic research is critical when at the
end of the day where is the vaccine, where is the therapeutic.
But until you have that fundamental knowledge, you can't get to
that final step, which is so crucial. I think also in
facilitating in whatever way the Congress has at its disposal,
to cross departmental integration of things which is very
helpful. We did that. We came together to do that, and
hopefully we are able to stay in that in the future and do it
in even better ways.
Ms. Castor. We still have time in this Congress to
implement a bipartisan bill and to establish new policy on
lessons learned from COVID-19. We have learned a lot, and I
want to thank you again for your service and urge my colleagues
to work in a bipartisan way on the real solutions. Thank you,
and I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Mrs. Lesko from Arizona for 5
minutes of questions.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Dr. Tabak, did the NIH
fund the gain-of-function research at the Wuhan Institute of
Virology through EcoHealth?
Dr. Tabak. It depends on your definition of gain-of-
function research. If you are speaking about the generic term,
yes, we did, but the generic term is research that goes on in
many, many labs around the country. It is not regulated, and
the reason it is not regulated is it poses no threat or harm to
anybody.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you. Dr. Tabak, since COVID-19, we have
seen many problems with the Wuhan Institute of Virology and the
Chinese Communist Party hiding information and refusing to
provide data to the United States. Do you believe this lack of
transparency cost Americans their lives?
Dr. Tabak. I can't speak to that directly. I can tell you
that the failure of the Wuhan Institute of Virology to provide
us with the data that we requested and the lab notebooks that
we requested certainly impeded our ability to understand what
was really going on with the experiments that we have been
discussing this morning.
Mrs. Lesko. And because of that, do you think NIH should
continue to provide grants where lab work will be done in
China?
Dr. Tabak. Well, as you know, the Wuhan Institute of
Virology has been disbarred, so we will not do----
Mrs. Lesko. How about any other labs? Should we fund any
work in labs in China?
Dr. Tabak. I think if you look at the new policy that has
just been released, there is mention of consideration for
funding in countries of concern, and China is one of those
countries.
Mrs. Lesko. So, I don't understand your answer. Does that
mean you don't want to fund labs in China anymore?
Dr. Tabak. That would have to come under very, very high
scrutiny before it was done.
Mrs. Lesko. Dr. Tabak, at the time of funding to EcoHealth,
did the NIH have a concrete, understandable definition of risk
of concern, gain-of-function research throughout NIH?
Dr. Tabak. I can't talk for the whole of NIH, but certainly
the organizations that support this type of research, I don't
understand.
Mrs. Lesko. All right. In the United States, what level of
biosecurity would be used for the type of research that was
being done at the Wuhan Institute of Virology under this
subgrant from EcoHealth?
Dr. Tabak. There were two types of experiments they did.
The experiments involving cell culture would likely be done at
a BSL-2 level, and the experiments involved with mice would
likely be done at a BSL-3 level.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you. And how much time do I have? Oh, I
got some time, good.
NIH boasts a rigorous grant review process. Dr. Morens, a
senior advisor to Dr. Fauci, stated the following about Peter
Daszak, the President of EcoHealth: ``Peter Daszak is one of my
oldest and best friends, and I talk to him all the time.''
Indeed, after one of Dr. Daszak EcoHealth grants from NIH was
suspended in response to EcoHealth's violation of grant
policies, Dr. Morens wrote to Dr. Daszak from his private Gmail
instead of his official email. It appears from what our
committee has learned that Dr. Morens and Dr. Daszak regularly
conspired to reinstate Dr. Daszak's grant, all while avoiding
Federal records laws and the transparency of FOIA. My question
is, do you believe these statements that were made and actions
between Dr. Morens and Dr. Daszak undercut NIH's claim of a
rigorous grant review process?
Dr. Tabak. I can't speak to the specifics because I am not
privy to any of this, but certainly, one would not have a
Federal official having discussions of that type with a
potential grantee.
Mrs. Lesko. And does Dr. Morens still work for NIH?
Dr. Tabak. Dr. Morens is an employee of NIH, yes.
Mrs. Lesko. And was there any repercussions for him using
private emails and avoiding FOIA?
Dr. Tabak. We do not discuss personnel issues, as you know.
Mrs. Lesko. Well, I certainly hope that when somebody
violates Federal law, that there should be some type of
repercussions, so it seems very convenient that you can't tell
us anything, but I thank you, and I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Mrs. Dingell from Michigan
for 5 minutes of questions.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Internal documents
and testimony provided by EcoHealth Alliance, and the NIH, and
the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases--
NIAID--officials demonstrate potential efforts on EcoHealth's
part to mislead the Federal Government. As Democrats stated in
our recently released staff report, these efforts raise serious
questions about EcoHealth's credibility as a continued
recipient of taxpayer funding. For example, EcoHealth has
argued to this committee NIH that they are not at fault for
submitting their Year 5 progress report nearly 2 years late.
One of EcoHealth's defenses is that NIH Report Submission
System locked them out from submitting the report. NIH
investigated EcoHealth's claims.
Dr. Tabak, we spoke to Dr. Michael Lauer, the NIH official
responsible for overseeing EcoHealth's compliance with NIH
grant policy. He testified that NIH performed an electronic
forensic investigation and found no evidence that the system
had locked out EcoHealth. Do you have any reason to dispute Dr.
Lauer's testimony about the electronic forensic investigation
that NIH conducted?
Dr. Tabak. None at all.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. When it was finally submitted, the
Year 5 report ended up becoming a point of disagreement between
NIH and EcoHealth. EcoHealth makes certain representations
about the results in that report, and for good reason, it
appears that NIH is not entirely convinced. For example,
EcoHealth has argued that its viruses did not grow in excess of
permitted thresholds, and, therefore, EcoHealth had no
obligation to immediately notify NIAID. Dr. Tabak, in October
2021, you wrote to then Oversight Ranking Member, James Comer,
that EcoHealth had failed to immediately report the Year 5
results as was required by the terms of the grant. EcoHealth
submitted its Year 5 report nearly 2 years late. Do you
consider that immediate notification?
Dr. Tabak. Certainly not.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. So EcoHealth has argued they did
immediately notify NIAID of the experiments in the Year 5
report because those were the same experiments in the Year 4
report. Now, if you are watching the C-SPAN, I want to tell you
something. EcoHealth's argument is as convoluted as it sounds.
Dr. Tabak, at your transcribed interview, you testified that
NIH disagrees with EcoHealth and thinks that Years 4 and 5
reports probably show two different sets of experiments. Is
that still NIH's view today?
Dr. Tabak. That is our view, and that is why we requested
the electronic records, metadata, and lab notebooks so that we
could reconcile this issue.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. When misconduct in EcoHealth's
part has been identified, NIH worked in good faith to ensure
improved transparency and compliance. For instance, NIH
required EcoHealth to submit all of its sub-award agreements,
to submit invoices for work performed as NIH determined
appropriate reimbursement, and to submit two progress reports
per year. Dr. Tabak, do you agree that those special
conditions, like the general conditions on all grants, helped
to ensure the grantee was a responsible steward for American
taxpayer dollars?
Dr. Tabak. They certainly are designed to do that, yes.
Mrs. Dingell. We have some issues, and we are all talking
to him about them. Prior to his hearing, just a couple of weeks
ago, EcoHealth president, Dr. Peter Daszak, submitted written
testimony to the Select Subcommittee stating that because of
the additional conditions NIH instituted to monitor EcoHealth
grants, no other research organization in the United States has
more oversight than EcoHealth. Yesterday, HHS announced that it
would proceed with disbarment proceedings against EcoHealth and
bar the organization from receiving Federal funding. Pursuant
to that announcement, HHS has suspended Federal funding
immediately and noted the many decisive actions NIH took to
investigate EcoHealth's contact and use of taxpayer dollars.
I believe we have worked constructively on a bipartisan
basis. I know we all here are deeply concerned on a bipartisan
basis to examine EcoHealth's potential misconduct, and I
commend the administration for taking the action that you now
have to ensure that all Federal grantees use Federal taxpayers'
dollars responsibly and transparently. And that is what we all
must guarantee going forward. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am out
of time, and I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize the Chairman of the Full
Committee, Mr. Comer from Kentucky, for 5 minutes of questions.
Chairman Comer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Dr. Tabak, I
want to thank you for being here today representing NIH. I want
to ask both about the situation regarding EcoHealth and a few
questions regarding the Institute's record retention policies.
Starting with EcoHealth, yesterday HHS proposed debarring them
from receiving Federal funds. Does NIH agree with this
decision?
Dr. Tabak. Yes, we do.
Chairman Comer. Back in 2020 when NIH originally terminated
and then suspended the EcoHealth grant, many scientists were
outraged. We have emails where Dr. Daszak called NIH actions
Stalinesque. He called you ``NIH Acting Dentist Director
Tabak'' and your oversight actions as ``an anti-science
shitshow''. And that is a quote. It is not my word. Dr. Tabak,
do you agree with the request NIH made of EcoHealth?
Dr. Tabak. Oh, absolutely.
Chairman Comer. Dr. Tabak, do you agree with the actions
NIH has taken against EcoHealth?
Dr. Tabak. Completely.
Chairman Comer. Is anyone entitled to receive Federal
funds?
Dr. Tabak. Of course not. You have to demonstrate your
ability to oversee them correctly.
Chairman Comer. And did EcoHealth fail to satisfactorily
answer NHI's request?
Dr. Tabak. They have.
Chairman Comer. So, NIH reinstated EcoHealth's grant on the
condition that there would be no work in China and the Wuhan
lab had already been debarred. Dr. Daszak testified that since
then and during the course of the grant, he spoke routinely
with the Wuhan Institute of Virology to get data and publish
papers. Did Dr. Daszak ever inform the NIH that he would keep
working with the Wuhan lab even though they were debarred?
Dr. Tabak. Not to my knowledge.
Chairman Comer. Shifting to some questions regarding NIH's
document retention policies. Dr. David Morens, a senior advisor
to Dr. Fauci for decades, wrote in an email to Dr. Daszak, ``I
learned from our FOIA lady here how to make emails disappear
after FOIA but before the search starts, so I think we are all
safe. Plus, I deleted most of those earlier emails after
sending them to Gmail.'' Is that consistent with NIH document
retention policies?
Dr. Tabak. It is not.
Chairman Comer. Does the NIH FOIA Office teach employees
how to avoid transparency?
Dr. Tabak. I certainly hope not.
Chairman Comer. He also later wrote Dr. Daszak, ``We are
all smart enough to know to never have smoking guns, and if we
did, we wouldn't put them in emails. And if we found them, we
would delete them.'' Is that consistent with NIH document
retention policies?
Dr. Tabak. It is not.
Chairman Comer. Finally, emails show that Dr. Morens would
share internal discussions regarding upcoming FOIA releases
with Dr. Daszak. He would then help Dr. Daszak craft responses
to documents being released in these FOIAs. Are those actions
consistent with NIH policies?
Dr. Tabak. If those actions occurred, they would not be
consistent.
Chairman Comer. So, do these actions concern you, Dr.
Tabak?
Dr. Tabak. It does indeed.
Chairman Comer. What is Dr. Morens' current employment
status?
Dr. Tabak. He is an employee of NIH.
Chairman Comer. Well, I think you see where my lines of
questioning were leading. We have some serious concerns. We
have fought in this Select Subcommittee, the Oversight
Committee on obtaining information. And here you have admission
of deleting information, going to great lengths to not be
transparent in an apparent coverup of something that, I think,
we would agree in a bipartisan manner, is one of the most
serious issues that our country has ever faced, the COVID-19
pandemic. So, I appreciate the work of the Chairman Wenstrup
and the full committee here to try to get to the truth, give
the American people the truth because that is what they want
and that is what this committee's role is, but we also want to
hold people accountable for wrongdoing. So, we look forward to
working with you to help us achieve what the American people
want us to achieve in this Select Committee. With that, Mr.
Chair, I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Ms. Ross from North Carolina
for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Dr.
Tabak, for being with us today.
As we have heard earlier and really ever since COVID came
to light, there has been a lot of controversy and confusion
about gain-of-function research. And I think some of that has
been caused by the fact that we have heard different people use
the same term to mean completely different things with
completely different definitions. But as an institution, it
seems like you and your colleagues at NIH and NIAID have been
fairly consistent in that your North Star with respect to
proposed research has consistently been the context of the
Federal regulation. Is that correct?
Dr. Tabak. It is.
Ms. Ross. And I would like to turn to the definition of
gain-of-function research that Republicans raised at your
transcribed interview. Republican questioning referred to it as
a broad definition, and it defined gain-of-function research as
a type of research that modifies a biological agent, so it
confers new or enhanced activity to the agent. I believe that
the definition existed at some point in a digital media kit on
NIH's news and events webpage. And I understand that you are
several levels removed from where the assessments like this are
made, but for the purpose of the NIAID staff assessing whether
the proposed research is or is not gain-of-function research,
did that very broad definition have any regulatory
significance?
Dr. Tabak. It does not. The broad definition is unregulated
because those types of experiments are conducted in virtually
every lab across the country with no consequence of safety to
anybody.
Ms. Ross. And in your experience as deputy director of NIH,
if you are interested in getting government guidance or
regulations relevant to an issue, would that news and events
webpage maybe be your first stop?
Dr. Tabak. It likely would be one of the stops, yes.
Ms. Ross. And with respect to EcoHealth Alliance's grant,
program staff had to assess at different points in time whether
the proposed research was or was not gain-of-function research.
At those different points of time, did staff refer to
government guidance and regulation, such as the P3CO framework
when making their assessments?
Dr. Tabak. Yes, once it was instituted, that is correct.
Ms. Ross. And the definitions for gain-of-function research
provided in government guidance and regulations were very much
different than that broad definition we discussed earlier. Is
that correct?
Dr. Tabak. That is correct.
Ms. Ross. And did NIAID staff ever use the broad definition
when assessing proposed research as far as you know?
Dr. Tabak. No, it wouldn't be applicable.
Ms. Ross. So, I think there is a natural logic to that
process. NIAID as the regulator refers to regulation when
determining whether proposed research is within the scope of
the regulatory term of art. And just to be clear, each time
NIAID program staff was asked to answer whether the proposed
research on the EcoHealth grant met the regulatory definition
of gain-of-function research, the answer was no. Is that
correct?
Dr. Tabak. That is correct.
Ms. Ross. So, I am just going to end by saying that I
believe it is a disservice to our Nation's scientific
enterprise when there are attempts to make regulators judge
research outside of the regulatory context. And if we want to
have a serious conversation about regulation, we can do that,
and the Democrats support those conversations. That is why the
Biden administration recently announced a new policy for
overseeing high-risk research that could otherwise cause the
next pandemic. Dr. Tabak, I want to thank you for your many
years of service and for appearing before the committee today,
and I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Dr. Joyce from Pennsylvania
for 5 minutes of questions.
Dr. Joyce. Thank you, Chairman Wenstrup, for convening this
hearing. Thank you, Dr. Tabak, for taking time to speak with us
this morning. I think it is time to really reset the table of
what the core agenda of this Select Subcommittee is. We want to
evaluate how the effects of the COVID virus affected America.
We want to come up with best practices, and we want to see what
investing in a Chinese Communist Party-guided Wuhan Institute
of Virology, what those effects were, and how our taxpayer
dollars were spent.
Earlier this month, we heard from Dr. Peter Daszak before
this committee and examined how he misled the NIH to secure
taxpayer funds which were used to perform gain-of-function
research at the Wuhan Institute of Virology. The important work
of this committee has led to HHS suspending all active grants
to EcoHealth and commencing formal debarment proceedings. We
must now scrutinize the system that allowed the reinstatement
of Federal funds to EcoHealth. During questioning about the
term of EcoHealth's renegotiated grant with NIAID, Dr. Daszak
revealed that EcoHealth continues to communicate with the Wuhan
Institute of Virology and relies on them for the data required
to carry out the reinstated grant. This level of communication
and reliance on Wuhan Institute of Virology to meet grant terms
is alarming. And based on this information, I questioned how
EcoHealth could have fulfilled grant requirements without
violating the terms of the Wuhan Institute of Virology's
debarment.
Dr. Tabak, at the time NIH certified EcoHealth's compliance
and NIAID renegotiate the grant, was NIH aware that EcoHealth
would still be in communication with the Wuhan Institute of
Virology?
Dr. Tabak. Not to my knowledge.
Dr. Joyce. At the time that the NIH certified EcoHealth's
compliance and NIAID renegotiated the grant, was NIH aware that
EcoHealth would rely on data from the Wuhan Institute of
Virology to meet the aims of the grant?
Dr. Tabak. To put a point on it, data that they already had
in their possession or data that they had yet to gain?
Dr. Joyce. Both.
Dr. Tabak. We assume that they would use data that was
already in their possession, but we did not assume that they
were still interacting about data that they did not yet have
and----
Dr. Joyce. So, there was no awareness of continued
interaction?
Dr. Tabak. I had no awareness of that, no.
Dr. Joyce. Does the NIH consider that ongoing relationship
and reliance on the WIV as a violation the WIV's debarment?
Dr. Tabak. I would have to consult with attorneys, but it
would seem to me that that would be inappropriate.
Dr. Joyce. It certainly seems to this Subcommittee Member
that it is. Is the NIH certain that no Federal funds have been
obligated to the WIV or in furtherance of the WIV's research
activities since it was debarred?
Dr. Tabak. I have been told that there have been no funds
issued to the WIV since their debarment by NIH.
Dr. Joyce. I think one of the key components of what we
have learned from the Select Subcommittee hearing is that no
taxpayer dollars should go toward research by the Wuhan
Institute of Virology or EcoHealth. The NIH must improve their
grant processes to ensure that information relied on for
funding is truthful and that information is complete. While it
is apparent that Dr. Daszak and EcoHealth did make false
statements during the grant negotiations, NIH must ensure that
the grants that they provide are responsible use of the
taxpayer dollars. This Select Subcommittee, I will reiterate,
looks to learn the lessons and be prepared for best practices
in the face of any future attack by a virus from within these
borders or from outside these borders. I thank you again for
being here to present to us this morning, and, Mr. Chairman, I
yield.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Dr. Jackson from Texas for 5
minutes of questions.
Dr. Jackson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, sir, for
being here today. I just wanted to start off just to make a
point that Federal money doesn't grow on trees around here in
D.C., despite what people around here sometimes think. It is
provided by hardworking Americans, and the Constitution
entrusts Congress with the responsibility to utilize public
dollars to provide for the national defense and to create
programs that benefit those who are paying for them in the
first place, in the case of NIH and critical research that is
beneficial to the citizens of this country.
Dr. Daszak and EcoHealth Alliance were dishonest in their
stewardship of taxpayer dollars, and, ultimately, they were
caught and tried to find ways to cover this up, and that is
pretty obvious from what we have heard today. Dr. Daszak's
testimony in front of this committee contradicted statements of
the National Institute of Health and the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Disease, and we appreciate you, Dr.
Tabak, for taking time to clarify the record today.
However, we are having this hearing today because of the
NIH's failed policies and procedures and lack of oversight that
granted EcoHealth Alliance dollars to conduct dangerous gain-
of-function research in the first place. And despite what you
hear from colleagues on the other side of the aisle, often
hear, I am astonished that they continue to bury their head in
the sand on this issue. The evidence is overwhelming, from what
we have heard on this committee, that the virus did not evolve
naturally but was a result of some sort of gain-of-function
manipulation.
It is not logical to assume at this point that this is a
total coincidence and that it just happened to emerge in Wuhan,
China, and it just happened that Dr. Fauci, Peter Daszak, and
NIH, and EcoHealth Alliance just happened to be funding gain-
of-function research on a coronavirus with U.S. taxpayer
dollars, and that is becoming more and more obvious every day.
We saw that the funding was suspended by HHS just yesterday.
I have an article here that I was reading online just
before coming in here that was published last night. It says,
``For years now, EcoHealth has generated immense controversy
for its use of Federal grant money to support gain-of-function
research on bat coronaviruses in the Wuhan lab.'' It goes on to
say, ``In a memo justifying its funding suspension, HHS said
that EcoHealth had failed to properly monitor the work it was
supporting at Wuhan. It also failed to properly report the
results of experiments showing that the hybrid viruses it was
creating there had improved the ability to infect human
cells.'' That is from HHS. And then it goes on to describe some
of the research and what it was intended to do, and then it
says, ``Soon enough EcoHealth used some of the viruses that
they collected to create chimeric or hybrid viruses that might
be better able to infect human lung cells in genetically
engineered humanized mice.''
I think that in my particular opinion, it has become
obvious that NIH has become too independent, too rogue, and too
unregulated at this particular point. There needs to be a
complete audit of the policies and procedures and proper
oversight from outside entities at this point. It has become
obvious that NIH is just another government bureaucracy, to
some extent, that is too large and refuses to hold those who do
wrong accountable. This is evidence, in my opinion, by what we
have heard today from you, unfortunately, with the continued
employment of Dr. Morano, and your insistence that you have no
obligation to discuss ``personnel matters'' with Members of
Congress that provide millions and millions of dollars to
perform research and pay for the salaries of employees such as
Dr. Moran.
I want to ask you, in August 2021, the NIH finally received
EcoHealth Alliance's 5-year annual progress report, nearly 2
years after the September 2019 deadline. In September 2023, the
Wuhan Institute of Virology, which was funded by EcoHealth
Alliance, was disbarred from receiving Federal funds because of
the implications in the development of the COVID-19. Then on
November 14, Dr. Daszak testified that samples from experiments
funded by the United States are in possession of the Chinese
Communist Party in the Wuhan Institute of Virology. Today some
of the samples remain under the custodianship of the CCP.
Dr. Tabak, in your opinion and with this information, was
Dr. Daszak a good steward of taxpayer dollars?
Dr. Tabak. He was not.
Dr. Jackson. OK. I am running out of time here, so I am not
going to ask the following questions. I will just submit those
for the record.
Dr. Jackson. But I just want to reiterate that one of the
things that drives me crazy on all the committees I am on, this
one included, is the complete lack of accountability when
things go wrong. I think there has to be accountability. I
think that when we come up with stuff here that is a danger to
our country, when we find out that we are on the wrong path on
something like this research that was happening in NIH, that we
were funding what was going on in Wuhan Institute of Virology,
that we have to make corrections, that it has to be bipartisan
efforts to do that. And that entities like NIH and people like
you that are in leadership roles have to have the level of
responsibility, there has to be some accountability, and you
have to be accountable, not only to yourself and to your
Institution, but to Members of Congress. Thank you. With that,
I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Ms. Tokuda from Hawaii for 5
minutes of questions.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Dr. Tabak, I want to
quickly clarify for the record a crucial distinction regarding
the relevance of different definitions of gain-of-function
research. To make it abundantly clear, under the regulatory
definition of gain-of-function, which is the applicable
definition for the purposes of evaluating and funding
proposals, NIH and NIAID at no point funded gain-of-function
research through the EcoHealth Alliance grant. Is that correct?
Dr. Tabak. That is correct.
Ms. Tokuda. And the website's broad definition, the non-
regulatory definition, is not relevant for these purposes. Is
that correct?
Dr. Tabak. That is correct.
Ms. Tokuda. OK. Thank you. I want to move on now to some of
the comments we received last week. During the Select
Subcommittee's last hearing with EcoHealth's president, Dr.
Daszak, it became abundantly clear that he and EcoHealth had
fallen markedly short of their obligation to use taxpayer
dollars transparently and with care and so truly appreciate the
initiated debarment proceedings that are currently underway.
With my time today, I would like to make sure the record is
clear about an issue that I discussed with the doctor. That
issue involves representations he made to NIAID officials
regarding EcoHealth's access to key samples when their grant
was being considered for reactivation.
In transcribed interviews, NIAID officials told us that
part of the logic in reactivating the EcoHealth grant was
preserving access to the grant's bat samples previously
collected by the Wuhan Institute of Virology. However, it
appears that Dr. Daszak may have misrepresented his access to
the samples. The truth is Dr. Daszak did not have access to the
samples as they are currently sitting in freezers in Wuhan.
That truth notwithstanding, it seems that Dr. Daszak told NIAID
division director that he had access to the samples. We spoke
to the NIAID division director, and she explained that Dr.
Daszak had directly informed her he had access. She further
explained that had she known that the samples were in Wuhan and
inaccessible to EcoHealth, NIAID would have reconsidered
reactivating EcoHealth's grant. When Dr. Daszak appeared before
this committee 2 weeks ago, he suggested that the NIAID
division director may have mistaken sequences for samples
during their conversation.
Dr. Tabak, do you think it is likely that the director of
NIAID's Division of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases does
not understand the difference between sequences and samples?
Dr. Tabak. I am sure she does.
Ms. Tokuda. And that would make sense to all of us here and
given the work and expertise she has. In our conversation with
the division director, she demonstrated no lack of
understanding that we saw for the difference between bat virus
sequences and bat samples. We are concerned about the apparent
gap in understanding between NIAID and EcoHealth regarding the
location of previously collected bat samples and EcoHealth's
access to them, particularly when we step back and consider all
the other instances mentioned today and during our last hearing
that draw into question EcoHealth's integrity and professional
conduct as a grantee. Dr. Tabak, do you share our concerns?
Dr. Tabak. I do.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you very much. Chair, I yield back the
balance of my time.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Dr. Miller-Meeks from Iowa
for 5 minutes of questions.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Dr. Tabak, for testifying before the Select Subcommittee this
morning. As you have heard and as you know, Dr. Daszak
testified in front of the Select Subcommittee on May 1st and
clearly highlighted the need for more effective oversight of
Federal grants, as has been elucidated by my colleagues.
In 2024, the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, NIAID, awarded EcoHealth Alliance almost $4 million
for understanding the risk of bat coronavirus emergence, which
included the collection of coronaviruses at the Wuhan Institute
of Virology. While Dr. Daszak denied using American taxpayer
dollars for gain-of-function research, the evidence indicates
otherwise, and it has been incredibly challenging obtaining
information from both EcoHealth and the NIH. Members of this
committee on both sides of the aisle were right to question Dr.
Daszak's integrity and handling of funds, which also
highlighted NIH's sloppy oversight process. Dr. Tabak, are you
aware of the different definitions various Federal agencies use
to define gain-of-function research?
Dr. Tabak. I am aware of two different definitions, one
very broad and generic, which is unregulated, and one more
precise and certainly regulated.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. So, it seems to me that this is sort of
like what the definition of ``is'' is. Do you believe having
one definition that is universally employed would be more
effective?
Dr. Tabak. The broad definition is lab jargon. It is just
the way scientists speak. The precise definition which is
regulated, of course that is the important one because that is
the one that regulates the experiments that people are
concerned about.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. Well, it seems that there was gain-of-
function research occurring but denied that it was occurring
because it didn't meet that precise definition. Do you believe
that having multiple definitions of gain-of-function research
has led to gaps in oversight?
Dr. Tabak. I believe it leads to confusion. I think those
who are regulating things understand that they need to use the
regulatory framework.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. Have grant recipients like EcoHealth
exploited these inconsistencies?
Dr. Tabak. I can't speak to that. I don't know.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. As I mentioned, the understanding the
risk of bat coronavirus emerging grant was almost $4 million
grant that partially went to the Wuhan Institute of Virology
and the Wuhan University of Public Health. Do you believe this
grant was an effective use of taxpayer dollars and would you
support issuing the same grant today?
Dr. Tabak. Well, with the benefit of what we know today,
no, of course not.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. There is great concern with Dr. Daszak's
interaction with NIH and NIAID pertaining to the one long
growth term of the award. The NIH relied on Dr. Daszak to
monitor and report virus growth after being a month late on his
annual reporting requirements, which were outlined in the
grant. Dr. Tabak, looking back, did the NIH rely too much on
Dr. Daszak's self-reporting information?
Dr. Tabak. Again, with the benefit of hindsight, we did
because we never received the information, unfortunately.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. Well, as an ophthalmologist, hindsight is
always 20/20.
Dr. Tabak. Indeed.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. Was the information NIH received
accurate?
Dr. Tabak. From Dr. Daszak, we don't think so, and that is
why we asked for the additional materials, the metadata, the
electronic records, the laboratory notebooks, which hopefully
would have been able to clarify all of these issues.
Dr. Miller-Meeks. And I think it is one of the reasons why
HHS yesterday took the extraordinary step, after the great work
of this Select Subcommittee under Dr. Wenstrup's leadership,
took the extraordinary step of defunding EcoHealth, which was
appropriate given the inconsistencies, inaccurate information,
and denial of research. With that, I yield. Thank you.
Dr. Wenstrup. I now recognize Dr. McCormick from Georgia
for 5 minutes of questions.
Dr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I love that statement
about the ophthalmologist and hindsight being 20/20. In the ER,
we just say I have no idea what is just about to happen. I am
happy to have you here today. Thank you for your testimony. We
have a lot of things to sort out here, and I just want to make
sure we are getting things in order. I am hoping you can
provide some clarity on some previous statements that were made
by both Dr. Daszak and other folks that are coming together
right now, some things you have already testified on.
Dr. Tabak, when the National Institute of Health requested
the notebooks from EcoHealth, was EcoHealth required to produce
them under its grant's terms?
Dr. Tabak. Yes, they were.
Dr. McCormick. OK. Thank you. When NIH requested notebooks
from EcoHealth, should EcoHealth have been able to access them
or already have access to them?
Dr. Tabak. That is correct.
Dr. McCormick. OK. Thank you. Did EcoHealth ever produce
the requested notebooks?
Dr. Tabak. They have not.
Dr. McCormick. Never did. Thank you. Dr. Daszak testified 2
weeks ago that he was not required to produce the lab
notebooks. Would NIH disagree with that testimony?
Dr. Tabak. Yes, we disagree with that testimony.
Dr. McCormick. Thank you, Dr. Tabak, for clarifying that.
The testifying here today clarifies the inconsistency between
Dr. Daszak's testimony and the testimony of numerous NIH
officials and NIAID officials, also including yourself. Dr.
Daszak continues to talk congressional oversight through
semantics and outright dishonesty, quite frankly. He has
routinely failed to produce pertinent documents and made
countless misleading statements to the Select Subcommittee
right here. I think he needs to be held accountable, Mr. Chair.
I am looking forward to that, and with that, I yield.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Thank you for coming before the
Select Subcommittee this morning, Mr. Tabak. We appreciate your
testimony. We are pleased that the American people had a chance
to hear from you directly today. The purpose of today's hearing
was to have a transparent examination of the process in which
NIH awards Federal grants and conducts oversight on these
grants. If we find things that we can do better, then that is
where we want to go, and we are all subject to that.
It was important to hear from the deputy director directly
on this matter, especially as it pertains to EcoHealth
Alliance. While investigating the origins of COVID-19, we
uncovered very concerning behavior and wrongdoing by EcoHealth
Alliance and its President Dr. Peter Daszak. It was made all
the more troublesome as EcoHealth had been awarded Federal
funding taxpayer dollars and were conducting research at the
Wuhan Institute of Virology. Our investigation was essential, I
should say, for uncovering this behavior and for laying out the
facts for all to see because just 2 weeks after publishing a
report on EcoHealth wrongdoing, they now face an immediate
governmentwide suspension and hold on all taxpayer funds
pending a formal debarment investigation. That is appropriate
and a good result in my opinion. I want to reiterate my
proposal that NIH consider personally suspending EcoHealth
president, Dr. Peter Daszak, in addition to EcoHealth, from
receiving Federal funds and also be immediately suspended from
the current Federal funding.
We understand based on past history, the possibilities of
natural origins of COVID and pandemic type of viruses. We
recognize the need for surveillance, the benefits of enhanced
predictability. We applaud those efforts. What is new and in
need of greater study is the culpability and the capability of
creating a pandemic or creating a pathogen that is capable of
being more infectious. Even in 2012 in an interview when Dr.
Fauci was questioned about gain-of-function research and the
question was, aren't you concerned about something getting out
of the lab and creating a pandemic, he felt at that time that
the benefits outweighed the risk and that the risk was small. I
think we have greater concerns today when it comes to biosafety
standards. And so there is a concern about biosafety standards
throughout the world being inadequate. We need to address that
as best we can as a Nation, not having control over other
nations. That is a concern on who we engage with, so that is a
concern throughout the world.
So I appreciate, Dr. Tabak, you testifying today, that not
only is a lab leak theory not a conspiracy, but it is a
hypothesis, and I will use your words, that should be
considered. I agree with you 100 percent, and I have felt that
way from the beginning. And I have said in this committee from
the very beginning that we need to consider nature, and we need
to consider a lab because the capabilities of creating
something in lab didn't exist 100 years ago when we had a
pandemic, they didn't exist 50 years ago, but they do exist
today.
Look, I believe the origins of COVID will likely only be
potentially resolved through intelligence, as testified by
former CDC Directors Redfield and Walensky. That is where we
are going to figure it out. Why? Because China is not
cooperative. And I agree with that because China has not been
transparent, they have not been accountable, so it makes it
very difficult. The threats of existing gain-of-function
technology in the hands of bad actors is and should be a huge
concern to every American and freedom loving people everywhere.
This is not to be taken lightly.
And when we had Dr. Fauci in transcribed interview he said
that the conspiracy theory is possible, but I asked him if he
reviewed studies or scientific evidence related to that
possibility of creating this in the lab, and he said no. I
asked him, I said, are you familiar with the published research
onsite-directed mutagenesis. He said, no, I am not. Well, if
you are open to that, we should be researching it. We should be
looking at it, and many of us have been. I have since 2020,
when I discovered that Ralph Baric with Zhengli Shi in China
created a chimera. That concern has been there for me since
that time.
We don't know all the viruses that EcoHealth and/or the WIV
either with EcoHealth Alliance or independently or possibly
with the PLA, or with their Academy of Military Medical
Science, we don't know all the viruses that they created. So,
for some here to say that it is impossible for COVID-19 to have
originated from this work, it is possible it didn't come from
their work directly. But that is inconsistent with unknown
unknowns, including testimony from numerous public health
officials and from Dr. Peter Daszak himself. So, I appreciate
Dr. Tabak testifying that we do not know everything that was
occurring at the WIV and that we just had a window of insight.
It is important that we recognize our vulnerabilities, so that
we can improve upon them in the future.
I appreciate you, Dr. Tabak, and I appreciate you
clarifying that the NIH found that their reporting system did
not, in fact, lock Dr. Daszak and EcoHealth out of their
account which impeded them from submitting their report on
time. That honesty is tremendously welcomed here. The more we
look into Dr. Daszak and EcoHealth, the more concerned I get
and the more untruths it seems to uncover, and we will continue
our work.
Today's hearing was important as we continue our
investigation into the origins of COVID and the effects of the
pandemic on the United States in the world, and work to uncover
any impropriety by public health officials or grantees in a
government of we, the people, truth, justice, transparency, and
accountability matter. And on that note, I thank you for being
here today, Dr. Tabak.
With that and without objection, all Members will have 5
legislative days within which to submit materials and to submit
additional written questions for the witnesses, which will be
forwarded to the witnesses for their response.
Dr. Wenstrup. If there is no further business, without
objection, the Select Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:31 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
