- MEMBER DAY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MEMBER DAY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

DECEMBER 11, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-81
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-393 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Michael Cloud, Texas                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Ro Khanna, California
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Katie Porter, California
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Cori Bush, Missouri
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Jimmy Gomez, California
Byron Donalds, Florida               Shontel Brown, Ohio
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
William Timmons, South Carolina      Robert Garcia, California
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Maxwell Frost, Florida
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Greg Casar, Texas
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Dan Goldman, New York
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Nick Langworthy, New York            Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
Eric Burlison, Missouri
Mike Waltz, Florida

------
Mark Marin, Staff Director
Jessica Donlon, Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel
Ryan Giachetti, Counsel
Christian Hoehner, Policy Director
Lauren Lombardo, Deputy Policy Director
Lauren Hassett, Professional Staff Member
Mallory Cogar, Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5074

Julie Tagen, Minority Staff Director
Contact Number: 202-225-5051

------
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

Page

Hearing held on December 11, 2023................................     1

WITNESSES

----------

The Honorable Mike Ezell, Member of Congress, (MS-04)
Oral Statement...............................................     2

The Honorable Lucy McBath, Member of Congress, (GA-07)
Oral Statement...............................................     3

The Honorable Katie Porter, Member of Congress, (CA-47)
Oral Statement...............................................     5

Opening statements and the prepared statements for the witnesses
are available in the U.S. House of Representatives Repository
at: docs.house.gov.

INDEX OF DOCUMENTS

----------

* Member Day Follow Up Letter; submitted by Rep. Langworth.

* Witness Statement; submitted by Rep. Ezell.

* Witness Statement; submitted by Rep. McBath.

* Witness Statement; submitted by Rep. Mfume.

* Witness Statement; submitted by Rep. Porter.

The documents listed are available at: docs.house.gov.

MEMBER DAY

----------

Monday, December 11, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Oversight and Accountability

Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 4:13 p.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. James Comer
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Comer, Raskin, Norton, and Porter.
Chairman Comer. The Committee on Oversight and
Accountability will come to order. I want to welcome everyone
here.
Without objection, the Chair may declare a recess at any
time.
Pursuant to Subsection (h) of House Resolution 5, the
Committee convenes this Member Day hearing of the 118th
Congress. A member day hearing provides Members an opportunity
to discuss legislation and Member priorities within the
jurisdiction of this Committee. Today, I look forward to
hearing from members of the House, my colleagues, on the
proposals they wish to bring before the consideration of this
Committee.
The first order of business is to welcome Representative
Waltz of Florida to the Committee and to welcome back
Representative Cloud of Texas. Congressman Waltz has served in
the House since 2018. Prior to the House, Congressman Waltz
spent 27 years serving his country both in the U.S. Army and
the National Guard, serving as a Green Beret in multiple tours
of duty across the world. He has also served as a defense
policy director at the Pentagon for Secretaries Rumsfeld and
Gates, as well as Counterterrorism Advisor to then Vice
President Cheney. We want to welcome Congressman Waltz to the
Committee.
Congressman Cloud is a familiar face, having previously
served on the Committee. Congressman Cloud has served in the
House since 2018. Last Congress, he served on this committee as
the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Economic and Consumer
Policy. We want to welcome Representative Cloud back.
Congressman Waltz and Cloud are replacing Congressman Chuck
Edwards of North Carolina and Congressman Kelly Armstrong of
North Dakota. I would like to thank both Congressmen for their
invaluable service to this Committee.
Next order of business is ratifying the new Subcommittee
roster. The clerks have distributed the roster electronically.
I ask unanimous consent that the Committee approve the
appointments and assignments as shown on the roster.
Without objection, the Subcommittee roster is approved.
I now recognize Ranking Member Raskin for any opening
statement he would like to make.
Mr. Raskin. I just want to welcome the witnesses and thank
them for their testimony, and thank you for calling the
hearing, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Comer. The gentleman yields back. We have
circulated a list of Members who will be testifying today, and
any written testimony provided by those Members will be added
to the official record. Each Member will be given 5 minutes to
discuss their proposals and field questions as needed.
I now recognize Mr. Ezell of Mississippi for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE EZELL

A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS

FROM THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI

Mr. Ezell. Thank you, sir. I want to express my gratitude
to the Chair and Ranking Member of the House Committee on
Oversight and Accountability for giving me the opportunity to
address critical issues in Mississippi's 4th congressional
District.
Mr. Chairman, to say the least, I am frustrated. For 708
days, the residents of Poplarville, Mississippi have been
without a permanent post office. This started when the
Poplarville Post Office's roof collapsed on January 2, 2022 due
to termite damage. Almost a year later, the original post
office was deemed unable to save. In the meantime, the United
States Post office has set up two temporary mobile vans,
similar to ice cream trucks, at the bottom of the hill.
Unfortunately, these vans are essentially inaccessible to most
of the population. Additionally, postal workers are working in
substandard conditions, including no restroom and a broken air
conditioner amid Mississippi summer heat.
But my constituents were told not to worry, that this will
be just a short-term situation while a permanent building is
located. Well, I am here to tell you that I must have a
different definition of ``short term'' because temporary trucks
are still in use. And just today, I received information that
the heater in the truck died, forcing postal workers to work
without heat, and it was 31 degrees this morning in
Poplarville, Mississippi, and several of the senior citizens
fell walking up the hill trying to get to the mail. This is not
the first time elderly have fallen since this temporary deal
has been set up. As you can see, over these 708 days, my
constituents have faced nearly unimaginable challenges, yet the
post office still claims they are providing convenient access
to postal services.
I recently visited the city, and I witnessed the horrible
conditions firsthand. That particular day, rain made the
situation worse, creating a somehow even more dangerous
environment. As you can imagine, I have attempted numerous
times to get updates from the post office. I have requested a
briefing on the situation, sought a meeting with the vice
president of facilities, and consistently asked for updates,
yet I sit here today with still no information as to when a
permanent, adequate building will be ready and have not been
granted one meeting request, which includes being denied any
meeting at all with these folks. This process is taking
forever, and I am committed to ensuring it has to come to an
end. Equally frustrating, the post office apparently is
ignoring the severity of the situation or simply does not care.
I urge the Committee to seriously consider implementing
some guidelines for situations like Poplarville. Such
guidelines could include mandating the United States Postal
Service to communicate with local leaders and requiring that a
solution must be agreed upon within 180 days of determining
that an old post office is no longer usable. The residents of
Poplarville, Mississippi deserve better than this.
Thank you again, Chairman Comer and Ranking Member Raskin.
I stand ready to assist.
Chairman Comer. The gentlemen yields back, and I want to
thank you for being here and sharing your frustrations with the
Committee. Your constituents deserve a convenient place to
receive their mail, and Postal Service employees in your
district deserve a safe place to work. Like you, I represent a
rural district, mine in Southern Kentucky. I understand the
challenges and importance rural constituents have in trying to
access a suitable post office.
So, my staff is scheduling a briefing with the Postal
Service where they will inquire about the use of temporary
suspensions and prioritize your district's challenges,
specifically. I also want to thank you and your staff for their
helpful outreach and diligent work with my staff on this issue.
While we cannot immediately promise a timeline for finding an
adequate replacement property, we will work to keep this
process transparent for you and your constituents.
Do any other Members wish to speak or ask questions for
Congressman Ezell? The Chair recognizes the Ranking Member.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to
associate myself with your remarks, and, Mr. Ezell, thank you
so much for joining us and for your great representation of
your constituents. And we will do everything in our power to
see the situation is rectified. I yield back.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you very much.
Chairman Comer. Seeing no further questions, I now
recognize Mrs. McBath of Georgia for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. LUCY MCBATH

A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS

FROM THE STATE OF GEORGIA

Mrs. McBath. Good afternoon, and thank you, Chair Comer and
Ranking Member Raskin, for hosting today's Member Day for the
Oversight Committee. I am here to discuss the Federal Prison
Oversight Act. My bill, co-led by Representative Armstrong, is
currently awaiting consideration by this Committee.
The Federal Prison Oversight is a bipartisan and bicameral
bill with just one goal in mind: increasing transparency and
accountability across our Federal prison system. My legislation
will establish a Federal framework for comprehensive, risk-
based inspections of Federal prisons to identify areas of
improvement to make our Federal prisons safer for staff and
also for the inmates. As we evaluate and improve our Federal
prison system, it is absolutely necessary that we take a
wholesome approach and identify the best and most effective
Federal prison practices implemented at the administrative
staff and inmate levels.
This bill provides for recommendations in many areas, such
as revamping our recidivism reduction programs, improving
working conditions for staff, and adequately responding to
incidents of violence and abuse against both staff and inmates.
Moreover, this legislation prioritizes the safety of everyone.
The inspector general at the Department of Justice can analyze
a long list of areas and include them in their report. Our
prison system has a notorious reputation for unhealthy
conditions, abuse, and neglect, and this bill aims to combat
that. Our Federal prison system, holding over 150,000
individuals and employing about 35,000 individuals, should be
transparent, should be accountable, effective, but, more so,
safe.
So many of our criminal justice issues could be improved if
our prisons had more accountability and more transparency. The
caliber of improvements that could arise from this oversight
would be life changing for everyone encountering our Federal
prison system. Staff would face better working conditions, and
inmates would have a better opportunity to have humane
treatment.
I encourage the Oversight Committee to consider the Federal
Prison Oversight Act, which, I might add, has no effect on
direct spending or revenues, as estimated by the Congressional
Budget Office. I look forward to working with this committee to
bring accountability and transparency to our Federal prison
systems. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. Thank you, Congresswoman McBath. Your lead
co-sponsor, Congressman Armstrong, has also spoken with me
about this legislation. This Committee is dedicated to
providing the American people with oversight and transparency
into every government agency, and that includes the Bureau of
Prisons.
Members on both sides care about the basic health and
safety of inmates, as well as improving rehabilitation, with
the goal of making our communities safer. Friends and family
members of incarcerated individuals should have a mechanism to
submit complaints if they feel their loved ones are not being
treated with respect and dignity. More oversight mechanisms
within the Federal prison system could also create a safer
environment for correctional officers and staff. So, I am
interested in exploring the bill's reporting requirements and
the creation of an independent ombudsman. I invite my
colleagues and the Ranking Member to further explore this with
me and my staff.
Do any other Members wish to speak or ask questions of
Congresswoman McBath?
[No response.]
Chairman Comer. Well, thank you very much, Congresswoman.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you.
Chairman Comer. I now recognize Ms. Porter of California
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. KATIE PORTER

A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS

FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Porter. Thank you very much, Chairman Comer. When
Democrats and Republicans cast their ballots in November 2024,
what is the one thing that they will agree on? This is not a
riddle. It is not even a clever joke. Really, there is
something. Regardless of party affiliation, every voting
American wants to be confident that their ballot will get
processed, will be counted. No matter who we vote for, we all
want our ballots to get smoothly to their final destination.
After all, this desire applies to anything important that we
want processed.
When was the last time anyone here sent a family heirloom
through the mail to a relative without getting a tracking
number, and who has not tracked their order of clothing or
medicine at least once? Heck, which kids do not watch Santa
Claus on the tracker? I do not know about you, but for me, it
is comforting to know where my purchases are and when they are
being shipped. That way, I know they are truly on their way,
and I can anticipate their timely arrival.
When something is important, Republicans and Democrats
alike want to know it is in good hands, and our ballots are no
exception. Fortunately, the United States Postal Service
created a tracking barcode for mail-in ballots, but
unfortunately, not everyone gets to use ballot envelopes that
meet the U.S. Postal Service design requirements, and we need
to fix this problem. That is why I joined with Representatives
Mace, Mfume, Donalds, Connolly, Fitzpatrick, Norton, and
Ciscomani to introduce the Vote by Mail Tracking Act.
Under our bill, every ballot envelope will meet Postal
Service standards and get a tracking barcode. Voters of all
political stripes can then do the oversight to be sure that
their vote reaches its final destination. That transparency is
a necessary step to make Republicans and Democrats alike
confident in our elections, and that is exactly why this bill
is led by four Republicans and four Democrats. It is not
partisan. It is just good policy. If I can track that my
purchase is on its way, we should all certainly be able to do
the same for our ballots. And this bill does not just make
things more streamlined for the American people, it also makes
processing easier for the Postal Service, reducing its burden
and making efficient use of tax dollars.
Chairman Comer and Ranking Member Raskin, I thank you both
for your support of this commonsense legislation. I know this
is a priority for you as well, and I look forward to working
with you to pass this bill through our Committee and onto the
House Floor early in the New Year. And to my fellow Committee
Members, you would be in great company, joining eight
bipartisan Members and both the Chairman and Ranking Member in
supporting this bill. I urge every Member of the Committee who
has not done so to co-sponsor this legislation.
I thank the Committee for its time and consideration of the
Vote by Mail Tracking Act, and I yield back.
Chairman Comer. Thank you, Congresswoman Porter, for
sharing your views on your bill, the Vote by Mail Tracking Act.
And you and I have spoken about this bill a number of times on
the House Floor. I have also supported this bill in the past,
which requires all mailed ballots to use a Postal Service
barcode. I believe such a requirement for barcodes will allow
the Postal Service to better track each ballot through the
mail.
I have to say this, we all have horror stories with the
post office, but the post office has done a commendable job
delivering election mail in recent elections. According to a
report from the Postal Inspector General, the Postal Service
has consistently delivered election mail on time in recent
years. In 2018, over 95 percent of election mail was delivered
on time, and over 96 percent of election mail was delivered on
time in 2020, and over 97 percent of election mail was
delivered on time during the 2022 election. Still, I am in
favor of making this process more transparent. American
citizens should have confidence that their ballot has securely
traveled through the postal system to the board of elections. I
will work with staff to advance this bill's reforms.
And, you know, one thing, people get nervous when you talk
about mail-in ballots for various reasons. Where I grew up in
the foothills of Appalachia, there were always, it seems like,
every other election cycle, local elections, there was some
type of election contest, lawsuits, election fraud allegations,
sometimes credible allegations, and almost a hundred percent of
the time, the election fraud was through absentee ballots. And
I think that the more transparency we have, because, as you
mentioned earlier, the old way of doing things, putting a stamp
on something important and hoping it gets there, that business
model is kind of obsolete now. And then there are a lot of
questions about absentee ballots and validity and things like
that.
So, I think that this is a good step, and, again, it is
transparent. I know my predecessor, Chairwoman Maloney,
supported this legislation as well, so you have my commitment.
We will continue to work to try to see this bipartisan bill
through. With that, I yield to the Ranking Member.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much, and, Ms.
Porter, thank you for this terrific initiative, which is
drawing support from all across the aisle and all across the
country. I hope the idea of having a verifiable barcode
connected to every postal ballot just makes great sense and
will help us to get past a lot of the fear and suspicion and
paranoia that has spread around voting by mail. So, I will
associate myself with the remarks of the Chairman and yield
back to you.
Chairman Comer. Does any other Member wish to speak on
Representative Porter's bill?
[No response.]
Chairman Comer. All right. Thank you very much. In closing,
I want to thank the Members for their testimony today. Mr.
Raskin, do you have any closing remarks?
Mr. Raskin. I have no closing, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
calling the hearing. Oh, actually, I do have one unanimous
consent request, which is Congressman Mfume's testimony, which
he was hoping to give in person. He was unable to do it, and I
would just ask that we submit it to the record.
Chairman Comer. Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman Comer. With that and without objection, all
Members will have 5 legislative days within which to submit
additional testimony.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:31 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[all]
