- ACCOUNTABLE ASSISTANCE: REVIEWING CONTROLS TO PREVENT MISMANAGEMENT OF FOREIGN AID

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

.                         ACCOUNTABLE ASSISTANCE:
REVIEWING CONTROLS TO PREVENT
MISMANAGEMENT OF FOREIGN AID

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SECURITY,
THE BORDER, AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND ACCOUNTABILITY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 21, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-97

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-221 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Michael Cloud, Texas                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Ro Khanna, California
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Katie Porter, California
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Cori Bush, Missouri
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Shontel Brown, Ohio
Byron Donalds, Florida               Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Robert Garcia, California
William Timmons, South Carolina      Maxwell Frost, Florida
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Greg Casar, Texas
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Dan Goldman, New York
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
Nick Langworthy, New York            Ayanna Pressley, Massachesetts
Eric Burlison, Missouri
Mike Waltz, Florida

------
Mark Marin, Staff Director
Jessica Donlon, Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel
Kaity Wolfe, Senior Professional Staff Member
Grayson Westmoreland, Senior Professional Staff Member
Lisa Piraneo, Senior Advisor
Mallory Cogar, Deputy Director of Operations and Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5074

Julie Tagen, Minority Staff Director
Contact Number: 202-225-5051
------

Subcommittee on National Security, the Border, and Foreign Affairs

Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin, Chairman
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Robert Garcia, California, Ranking
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Minority Member
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Dan Goldman, New York
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Katie Porter, California
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Cori Bush, Missouri
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Maxwell Frost, Florida
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Vacancy
Vacancy                              Vacancy

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

Page

Hearing held on March 21, 2024...................................     1

Witnesses

----------

Jim Richardson, Former Director, Office of Foreign Assistance,
U.S. Department of State
Oral Statement...................................................     5
Max Primorac, Senior Research Fellow, Margaret Thatcher Center
for Freedom, The Heritage Foundation
Oral Statement...................................................     7
Charles Kenny (Minority Witness), Senior Fellow, Center for
Global Development
Oral Statement...................................................     8

Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are
available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

* Statement for the Record, by Ted Yoho; submitted by Rep.
Grothman.

* Article, Center for Immigration Studies, ``Biden Admin. Sends
Millions to Nonprofits for Illegal Migration''; submitted by
Rep. Biggs.

* Article, Heritage, ``Foreign Aid Can't Stem Illegal
Immigration''; submitted by Rep. Biggs.

* Article, NewsNation, ``NGOs Use US Tax Dollars to Relocate
Migrants''; submitted by Rep. Biggs.

* Dataset, Ukraine Oversight Dashboard; submitted by Rep.
Garcia.

* Report, ``When the Dominoes Fall--Guatemala'', submitted by
Rep. Garcia.

* Article, The New York Times, ``Special Envoy Israeli Strikes
on Police Hindering Aid''; submitted by Rep. Porter.

* Report, Guttmacher Institute, ``Unprecedented Expansion
Global Gag Rule''; submitted by Rep. Porter.

* Article, Center for Immigration Studies, ``UN Budgets
Millions for U.S.-Bound Migrants in 2024''; submitted by Rep.
Sessions.

* Article, ``UN Grantee Uses Tax Dollars for Illegal
Immigration''; submitted by Rep. Sessions.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Kenny; submitted by Rep.
Garcia.

Documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

ACCOUNTABLE ASSISTANCE:
REVIEWING CONTROLS TO PREVENT
MISMANAGEMENT OF FOREIGN AID

----------

Thursday, March 21, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Oversight and Accountability

Subcommittee on National Security, the Border, and Foreign Affairs

Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:50 p.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Glenn Grothman
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Grothman, Sessions, Biggs, LaTurner, Fallon,
Perry, Garcia, Lynch, and Porter.
Mr. Grothman. The Subcommittee on National Security, the
Border, and Foreign Affairs will come to order. Everyone,
welcome.
Without objection, the Chair may declare a recess at any
time.
I am going to recognize myself for the purpose of making an
opening statement.
Good afternoon. I want to welcome everyone to the hearing
before the Subcommittee on National Security, the Border, and
Foreign Affairs. Today's hearing is an examination of concerns
of waste, fraud, and abuse, and mismanagement of America's
foreign aid, something that people back home love to hear
about. I would like to take a moment to thank our witnesses for
being here today. It is my hope we can have a productive dialog
on the mechanisms needed to oversee how American taxpayer
dollars are being spent on foreign aid. The World Bank, even
the World Bank, estimates that 20 percent of foreign aid is
lost to corruption each year and that 30 percent of foreign aid
fails to reach its intended target.
The Committee has a long history of conducting oversight on
how few guardrails are in place when it comes to vetting
contractors and grantees, leaving foreign assistance vulnerable
to exploitation and undermining U.S. strategic goals. Today, we
will examine whether, and if so, how the U.S. Government
ensures that taxpayer-funded foreign aid achieves its
objectives while safeguarding those dollars from being diverted
to unintended or unlawful purposes. We will examine how USAID
and Department of State monitor and evaluate their programs to
make sure they are meeting their intended goals.
Recently, the USAID Inspector General has cautioned that
foreign aid going to Gaza and the West Bank is at an extremely
high risk of waste, fraud, and abuse. In 2022 and 2023, the
United States donated over $700 million to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency, an organization created and intended
to provide humanitarian relief for the Palestinians. What did
we find out? We now know the Hamas compound was located under
an UNRWA building in Gaza City. Further evidence surfaced that
some UNRWA employees participated in the devastating October 7
Hamas attack against Israel on Israeli soil.
Unfortunately, the Biden Administration has been sending
taxpayer dollars to UNRWA since 2021, despite concerns that
funds were being diverted to support terrorist activities. That
is why the previous Administration had held funds from UNRWA.
The Biden Administration unwisely reversed this decision, and
taxpayer dollars were released to UNRWA without adequate
guardrails to ensure the funds went for humanitarian relief
rather than Hamas terrorists, and were only paused again after
reports about UNRWA's support for terrorist activities surfaced
a few weeks ago. That is why I led a request with Committee
Chairman Comer and other Republican Members of this Committee
to Secretary Blinken requesting documents and information about
the Biden Administration's 2021 decision to restore funding to
UNRWA. Understanding this decision will hopefully help us
better understand if, and if so, how the Administration tracks
foreign assistance in other places around the world.
The Committee's oversight of foreign assistance is
critically important not only to ensure taxpayer dollars are
being well spent, but also to know whether the Federal
Government is providing foreign assistance from falling into
the hands of terrorists or other malicious actors. A recent
poll by the Associated Press found that 4 in 10 U.S. adults
said foreign policy should be a top priority for the U.S.
Government. That is twice as many who mentioned the topic on
the same survey conducted in 2022. This poll shows the
increased anxiety the American public feels when it comes to
how the U.S. conducts itself on the world stage. Unfortunately,
this Administration made another reckless decision. During his
recent State of the Union speech, President Biden announced
plans for the U.S. military to build a temporary port to
deliver more humanitarian assistance to Gaza. The President has
decided to maroon approximately a thousand American uniformed
men and women off the coast Gaza to build, using taxpayers'
dollars again, a supposed humanitarian aid port without
providing assurances that Hamas will not attack our troops or
those receiving the aid, or that Hamas will not divert that aid
for its own evil purposes.
Foreign aid to Gaza is not the only area of foreign
assistance that requires scrutiny here today. The U.S. heavily
relies on direct budget assistance to foreign governments. It
is vital that Congress and the Administration establish robust
oversight mechanisms to prevent corruption and diversion of
these funds. It always kind of amazes me these countries always
say they need funds, but they seem to disappear. Any assistance
to Ukraine must also be conditioned on the principle that they
will allow full transparency, commit to tracking weapons and
equipment, and open their books to the U.S. Government.
Additionally, most of the money going to the Ukraine flows to
the World Bank or other public international organizations. We
owe it to the American people to demand greater accountability
and transparency for multilateral organizations to ensure their
operations align with our national interests and values.
Last, we cannot ignore the allegations of political abuse
surrounding the Biden Administration's use of foreign aid. The
politicization of aid distribution, including the imposition of
conditions based on ideological agendas, including DEI goals
and left-wing climate policies, threatens to undermine the
credibility and effectiveness of our foreign assistance.
Oversight of foreign assistance is not merely a matter of
fiscal responsibility, but a reflection of strategic goals.
Today's hearing represents an opportunity to identify
shortcomings, proposed reforms, and ensure that USAID serves as
a force of good in the world. I look forward to the insights
and recommendations that will emerge from today's discussion
and our esteemed witness panel.
I would now like to recognize the Ranking Member for the
purpose of making an opening statement.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We obviously know that
oversight of our Federal budget is very important, and it is
certainly important that part of that oversight is foreign aid.
Foreign aid, we know, is about 1 percent of the Federal budget,
comparable to defense spending, which we know is about 12
percent of the budget. That 1 percent makes an incredible
impact across the world, certainly not just, obviously, in some
of the conflict zones where foreign aid oftentimes is really
critical, but also in building our relationships with our
allies, but also strengthening our position across the globe.
We know that as we speak, foreign aid is also critical in
some of our conflict zones, and unfortunately, my friends in
the majority right now are currently blocking about $60 billion
of support to Ukraine in our fight against Russia. This is aid
that is absolutely crucial to help the Ukrainian people defend
themselves. Ukrainians are fighting for their freedom and
democracy against Vladimir Putin, a world criminal who has
attacked America's democracy as well. And here are some facts.
Our government has more than 400 people working to oversee
foreign aid. The inspectors general from the Defense
Department, State Department, the U.S. Agency for International
Development all work with 20 other Federal agencies and the
Ukrainian Government. There is deep oversight with how we spend
our support and our tax dollars from here at home.
I also want to make sure that I ask for unanimous consent
to enter into the record this list of more than 145 completed
ongoing and planned oversight reports and investigations from
the Special Inspector General for Operation Atlantic Resolve.
Mr. Grothman. Without objection.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you.
The Ukrainians themselves are fighting for their existence.
They want and need our aid to make the biggest possible impact
as well. Now, Transparency International's 2023 report on
international corruption reported that Ukraine has made
significant progress, taken on corruption even during the
challenges of war. Now, wartime Ukraine climbed 12 places in
the 2023 edition of this annual survey. Now, the report found
that ``Ukraine's growth by 3 points is one of the best results
over the past year in the entire world.'' Now, we know there
are challenges, and certainly a lot of folks like to point out
where there are areas that we can improve, and conducting
oversight in a war zone is hard when we cannot access, of
course, the front line, but this foreign aid is critical,
especially at this moment.
Now, at the outset of the conflict, U.S. personnel in
Ukraine had to be evacuated. We all know this. Over the course
of the next 6 months, U.S. agencies worked diligently to
establish logistic hubs in partner nations to oversee the
transfer of aid and equipment. It is important to note that up
until this conflict, end use monitoring of defense articles had
only been executed in a peacetime environment, which meant the
U.S. Government could conduct site visits and have greater
access. Now, our agencies conducting oversight of aid to
Ukraine had to develop entirely new procedures for conducting
this work in a hostile environment.
Now, my friends in the Majority like to, of course, also
talk about issues around the border, and we, of course, have
not had a single hearing on push factors that drive people to
migrate. But we know that foreign aid and additional foreign
aid would also have a huge impact on what is happening along
the border, and certainly to help the people of Mexico, Central
America, and South America. We should have a hearing that
examines the root causes of our global problems and work to
remediate those. Now, our humanitarian aid fights displacement
by addressing these root causes. Poverty and climate change, we
know, are also huge factors, and when we look at migration that
is happening, for example, in Guatemala or Honduras, there are
huge challenges that could also be addressed with support from
the United States and the world as it relates to humanitarian
aid.
The humanitarian crisis in Venezuela has been an enormous
driver of folks coming to the border. We used to have thousands
of folks from Venezuela come to the border, and now we have
had, in some years, hundreds of thousands of folks from
Venezuela coming to the border. We know that in countries where
criminal gangs may control the police or the government, our
U.S. assistance is vital to also fight corruption and
insecurity.
In Guatemala, for instance, we funded a U.N. commission of
independent prosecutors that helped prosecute, take on military
death squads, take on rogue police officers, drug cartels, and
even two presidents. That commission helped cut homicides, by
the way, by 32 percent, dismantle 60 criminal networks, and
catalyze the indictment of 680 bad actors across the country.
President Biden has fought to strengthen that commission even
when he was vice president. So, there is a lot of work that we
can do around human aid.
I want to ask also for unanimous consent to introduce this
report from the Washington office of Latin America called,
``When the Dominos Fall, Cooption of the Justice System in
Guatemala,'' into the record.
Mr. Grothman. Without objection.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you.
So, just like in Ukraine, there are attacks by some on
foreign aid that has harmed innocent people, weakened American
values, and harmed our national interests. Foreign aid is
critical in our success as a country and in our national
security interests as well. And with that, I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Grothman. I am pleased to introduce our witnesses
today. First of all, going across here, Jim Richardson,
Executive Director to former Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and
Chairman of the Pompeo Foundation. Previously he was the
Director of the Office of Foreign Assistance at the Department
of State and has decades in private and government service.
Next, Max Primorac, a Senior Research Fellow at the Heritage
Foundation's Margaret Thatcher Center for Freedom. Previously,
he was the acting Chief Operating Officer at USAID during the
Trump Administration. And finally, Charles Kenny, Senior Fellow
at the Center for Global Development, previously worked for the
World Bank, focusing on anticorruption relating to
infrastructure and natural resources. Again, I want to thank
all three of you for being here today.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 9(g), the witnesses will please
stand and raise their right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony that you
are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
[A chorus of ayes.]
Mr. Grothman. Good. We keep the record going. Let the
record show that the witnesses answered in the affirmative.
Thank you. You may take a seat. We appreciate you being here
and look forward to your testimony.
Let me remind the witnesses that we have read your written
statement, and it will appear in full in the hearing record.
So, if you can, try to limit your opening statement to about 5
minutes. As a reminder, please push the button on the
microphone in front of you so that is on, and the Members can
hear you. When you begin to speak, the light in front of you
will turn green. After 4 minutes, the light will turn yellow.
When the red light comes on, your 5 minutes are up, and wrap up
as quickly as you can.
I will now recognize Mr. Richardson for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF JIM RICHARDSON

FORMER DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF FOREIGN ASSISTANCE

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Richardson. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking
Member, Members of the Committee. I appreciate the opportunity
to discuss how we can improve U.S. foreign assistance. As the
Chairman said, my name is Jim Richardson, and it is a great
honor to be back here in the House, having spent much of my
career in Rayburn before heading to the executive branch during
the Trump Administration.
My first stop was to reorganize the U.S. Agency for
International Development, undertaking one of the largest
reorganizations of the agency in history. We moved to a more
data-informed and goal-oriented approach and worked to realign
our structures, people, and systems to match. After USAID, I
was the Director of the Office of Foreign Assistance at the
State Department. There, I coordinated assistance across USAID
and state on behalf of the Secretary. Needless to say, I have
encountered lots of obstacles and a lot of potential in our
foreign aid. As we discuss how to improve it, I want to impress
three things: one, strategic alignment; two, a renewed focus on
effectiveness; and No. 3, a careful selection of our partners
and instruments to maximize the impact of our assistance and
ensure that it does not fall into the wrong hands.
First and foremost, we must see our foreign aid as a tool
of our national security efforts and ensure complete alignment.
We are seeing foreign aid be used to advance narrow political
ideologies, as the Chairman mentioned. This is both wasteful
and dangerous. Our Nation is facing real challenges, from China
to drug cartels to terrorism to mass migration on our Southern
border. With limited resources, it is imperative that we
carefully choose where and how to employ our foreign assistance
to achieve our national security goals.
Second, we have to demand maximum impact from our foreign
assistance programs. Progress must be measured against
specific, meaningful benchmarks that drive toward concrete
outcomes. Whether facilitating self-reliance, promoting
bilateral trade, or advancing strategic goals, our assistance
must produce measurable results that actually matter to the
American people. We must constantly reevaluate existing
programs, stop ineffective ones, and embrace innovative ideas
that suit the unique circumstances of each situation. This
includes shifting toward more conditional assistance,
partnerships, loans and investments, and away from more
traditional approaches that have often proven ineffective. Take
Ukraine, for instance, a topic of conversation already here
today. Here, economic development is robust, and so instead of
providing economic assistance grants, we should transition to
more of a loan-based assistance. Loans can foster economic
self-reliance and encourage responsible fiscal management.
Finally, I want to touch on how we engage with those who
implement our assistance. As you know, the United States
utilizes a wide variety of nonprofits, for-profits, and
international organizations to implement its programs. First,
we need to reduce our reliance on public international
organizations--PIOs--specifically, the U.N. family. Working
directly through the PIOs is inherently less transparent and
less accountable. Instead, we should select partners who can
best accomplish the task with maximum control and
accountability. This is often a local partner, which has an
added benefit of building the capacity of the host country.
Once identified, rigorous vetting processes are essential to
ensure the suitability and integrity of our partners. We must
ensure that all partners, including PIOs, are subject to the
same vetting standards.
Given what happened in Gaza, as the Chairman mentioned, it
is essential that we vet our PIOs. If we have to use them, they
have to be vetted, and that includes the NGOs that work with
them that the PIOs actually fund. Furthermore, we must vet
partners beyond just ties to terrorism, which is our current
standard. While terrorism remains a paramount concern, we want
to make sure that American taxpayers do not remain at the hands
of a wide range of bad actors, including drug traffickers and
wildlife poachers.
Foreign assistance is an incredibly complex topic, so I
appreciate your willingness to hold this hearing, and I look
forward to your questions.
Mr. Grothman. OK. Thank you very much. Now, I would like to
recognize Mr. Primorac for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MAX PRIMORAC

SENIOR RESEARCH FELLOW

MARGARET THATCHER CENTER FOR FREEDOM

THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION

Mr. Primorac. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member,
and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, to speak about
America's foreign aid apparatus. Again, my name is Max
Primorac. I work at the Heritage Foundation. The views I
express here, testimony, are my own and should not be construed
as representing any official position of the Heritage
Foundation.
Mr. Chairman, I have spent over 30 years in the foreign aid
sphere as an NGO practitioner in the Balkans, as USAID
contractor in Afghanistan, think tank expert, and also as a
senior official at the U.S. Agency for International
Development as well as U.S. Department of State. I served as an
envoy of the Vice President to carry out his counter genocide
programs in Iraq. It is, however, with great sadness that I
must describe our foreign aid apparatus as broken and even
corrupt.
Foreign aid is a tool of foreign policy. As Jim has
mentioned, its purpose is to promote the national interest of
the United States. In the past, foreign aid helped curb the
spread of communism. After the fall of communism, it helped
integrate Central and Eastern Europe into NATO and become
strong allies. Millions of lives have been saved by our global
disaster responses, but the foreign aid budget has become too
big. Our Federal agencies cannot fulfill their management and
oversight functions. The result is substantial waste, fraud,
and abuse. A well-financed and politicized aid industrial
complex lobbies Congress for higher foreign aid budgets and
against reforms to hold them accountable. Worse, foreign aid is
misused to export radical ideas that offend many Americans,
erode our talent base in our aid work force, and trample on the
religious beliefs in countries where we provide aid. This
benefits communist China.
So, what reforms are needed to restore the critical global
role that U.S. foreign aid once played in advancing America's
national interest? First, Congress must make deep cuts in the
international affairs budget to a level our Federal agencies
can reasonably manage. When I launched the new Bureau for
Humanitarian Assistance and its $8 billion portfolio, I was
impressed by the response capabilities of our work force but
deeply troubled at the inability to track where this aid was
going. Mr. Chairman, as you have mentioned, American taxpayers
now know that millions of dollars of USAID to Gaza was diverted
to Hamas to finance a terror network that led to the October 7
massacres of over 1,000 Israeli citizens. Through aid
diversion, we are also financing terrorists in Yemen, Syria,
and Afghanistan. Years of humanitarian aid have destroyed the
ability of countries to feed themselves. While on special
assignment to Haiti, I asked local entrepreneurs why their
farmers could not feed their country. Their dry response was
that it is hard to compete against free food.
Second, defunding the climate agenda will reduce global
poverty and hunger. Foreign aid policy discourages countries,
especially poor countries, from developing their fossil fuel
industries to secure cheap energy, generate revenues to finance
their own social services, and reduce the cost of food.
Instead, we are forcing these countries to rely on communist
China to meet their wind and solar equipment needs. Third, we
need more transparency and accountability. Congress must
require that all aid awards and sub-awards be made public. A
recent government audit found that USAID did not know the
overhead charges of almost $142 billion in awards. Procurement
fraud by international organizations has become endemic.
Instead, we should increase funding to church-based local NGOs
rather than expensive U.N. agencies and for-profit contractors.
Fourth, we must de-radicalize our aid programs. We must
stop pushing DEI, abortion, and other gender policies overseas,
norms that contradict those in Africa, Latin America, and Asia.
Last, we must refocus our foreign aid approach toward
partnership with America's private sector to increase trade and
investment with the global south. To do this, we must amend the
BUILD Act to strengthen the U.S. International Development
Corporation as a counter-China tool and expand the role of the
Millennium Challenge Corporation, which rewards economic
reformers.
To conclude, the objective of foreign aid must be to end
the need for it. Thank you, and I look forward to your
questions.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. Now, Mr. Kenny, your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF CHARLES KENNY

SENIOR FELLOW

CENTER FOR GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Kenny. Chairman Grothman, Ranking Member Garcia,
Members of the Subcommittee, thanks very much for inviting me
today. I am a Senior Fellow at the Center for Global
Development, but I am speaking very much on my own behalf
today. I have spent a number of years researching corruption in
foreign aid and aid effectiveness more generally, and in
previous work for the World Bank, I managed aid programs,
including some in fragile states.
I want to make two points. First, corruption and financial
mismanagement is a real problem globally, with negative
implications for both development and foreign assistance, but
it does not stop that assistance having a major impact. Second,
reducing upstream bureaucracy and focusing on impact through
transparency and tracking results is the best way to deliver
more effective aid.
Every year, the global total of bribe payments may be as
high as 2 percent of GDP. Beyond corruption, considerable
government finance is wasted on projects that do not deliver
what they promised due to factors ranging from incompetence to
fraud. And U.S. Government spending, including U.S. foreign
assistance, is not immune from those problems. That said, U.S.
civilian aid is some of the most closely monitored of all
government spending, and that monitoring suggests that while
malfeasance does occur, it is comparatively rare on average.
Let me provide some examples.
Between 2012 and 2020, SIGAR, the Special Inspector General
for Afghan Reconstruction, issued 176 audit reports covering
$8.5 billion in costs for Afghanistan reconstruction, and only
about 0.4 percent of the audited costs were eventually
disallowed. Again, the Ukraine Special Inspector General report
of February this year noted that USAID carried out spot checks
that trace expenditures reported by the Ukrainian Government to
verify that direct budget support was received by intended
beneficiaries. Of 475 spot checks, all were carried out without
any major issues identified.
Of course, special inspectors general and integrity
departments do not and never will be able to audit every penny
to the last recipient. Whatever the level of control, we will
never be able to ensure zero waste or fraud, but what we can
say is that leakage rates are usually low, and, again, we can
say it with more confidence about civilian foreign assistance
flows than we can about a lot of other government finance.
But take Afghanistan again. When assistance failed, and
surely a lot of assistance failed in Afghanistan, not least,
for example, when it came to helping the Afghan National Army
become an effective fighting force, it was because of problems
that do not appear in financial audit reports. Conversely, a
lot of aid with somewhat inadequate paperwork managed to have a
very meaningful and positive impact. For example, starting in
2002, USAID supported the Afghan Ministry of Health, delivering
a basic package of healthcare services to 90 percent of the
country at a cost of about $4.50 per person per year. USAID
focused on results and used independent evaluations to ensure
that the vaccinations happened and that services were provided.
The results speak for themselves. The proportion of kids
who died before their 5th birthday in Afghanistan fell from
about 13 percent in 2001 to about 6 percent in 2020. That
declining mortality rate is saving more kids each year in
Afghanistan than the total number born in Nebraska, Nevada, and
Kansas combined, and U.S. assistance can take a big part of the
credit. It is these results that matter, that aid is saving
lives and promoting economic growth. Getting these results is
why we provide the assistance in the first place, and an excess
focus on monitoring receipts and processes can get in the way
of achieving that.
Back in 2010, Andrew Natsios, USAID Administrator under
President George W. Bush, complained of the counter bureaucracy
of excessive process and control mechanisms fighting against
aid effectiveness. Natsios suggested a third or more of USAID
staff were hired purely to deal with compliance issues, and he
asked, are we creating a system where every taxpayer dollar is
accounted for, that it is incapable of carrying out its
national security tasks? I think that question is even more
urgent today.
Congress has put in place some of the underpinnings for a
results-based accountability agenda, including the Foreign Aid
Transparency and Accountability Act, but I would urge you to go
further. Rather than an accountability model excessively based
on processes and receipts, we should rebalance. We should be
doing more to survey beneficiaries. We should do more to
physically audit infrastructure financed under all aid
projects. Where possible, rather than paying for potential
outcomes, we should be basing payments on achieved results.
Combined with transparency and project delivery targets that
allow beneficiaries themselves to act as monitors, these
approaches can ensure impact. Thank you very much.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. I will now recognize myself for 5
minutes. First of all, we will start with Mr. Primorac.
In the report you authored released in May 2022, called,
``Congress Must Stop Biden's Misuse of U.S. Foreign Aid to
Impose His Radical Social Agenda,'' and by the way, part of the
fault has to come from Congress, who wanted him to do that,
U.S. foreign aid has become an appendage of one political party
seeking to advance its radical global agenda of ideological
indoctrination. That is what you said. Can you elaborate what
you meant by that?
Mr. Primorac. Yes, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for raising that
issue. I think that Chairman Mike McCaul of the House Foreign
Affairs Committee put it well when he learned, for example,
that the State Department was spending a massive amount of
money, not only in the past, but in the future, in
strengthening its DEI structures within state. The same thing
is over at USAID, and he commented how DEI, as enforced, now
foreign aid and civil service officers must pledge allegiance
to the DEI agenda or else risk not being promoted.
One of my colleagues, formerly of USAID, looked at FEC,
Federal Election Commission, data regarding political
contributions, and at the State Department and at the USAID,
you are talking about 97, 94 percent to one party. When you are
looking at the top contractors for USAID and you are talking
about companies that are earning billions of dollars, again,
you look at their FEC contributions, it is almost 100 percent,
and on and on and on. What this has done has really harmed our
work force in which anybody who does not agree with this
Marxist-inspired DEI and other radical ideology is not
welcomed. So, you basically have a one-party aid industrial
complex, both in the bureaucracy but also in the aid community.
I will just read to you really quickly, for instance,
Interaction is a coalition of a humanitarian aid organizations.
Their DEI statement is that anti-Blackness is rooted in White
supremacy and refers to a White gaze--G-A-Z-E--that places
people of color against a model of Whiteness. You have another
major coalition of USAID contractors talking about self-
identity as Black, indigenous, and people of color, BIPOC
women, gender queer, non-binary, LGBTQIA+, people with
disabilities, and those from formerly or currently colonized
countries. Basically, what this industry has told America, that
if you are conservative, if you are Republican, if you are
independent, you are a moderate Democrat, which is the vast
majority of America, there is no place for you to work in this
industry. Thank you.
Mr. Grothman. Very illuminating. I personally believe the
reason we could not get along with the people in Afghanistan is
these State Department types were what most people around world
would be considered left-wing extremists. Next question. Well,
first of all, I guess you gave me some. Can you give me any
other examples of how the administration weaponizes foreign aid
programs?
Mr. Primorac. Well, I can give you an example of one
project that is stunning. It is a $45 million 5-year program to
support global NGOs around the world. And I remember reading
about this project and looking at requests for applications,
looking at a footnote and mentioning that the inspiration for
the theory working behind it was an Italian Marxist. And I
looked at some of her work, and one of her panels that she led
was titled, ``Marxism in Social Movements: Is Marx Back in
Social Theory?'' We are literally financing a global network of
anti-American, anti-capitalist, anti-Western NGOs.
Mr. Grothman. It does not surprise me, but it is horrible.
Mr. Richardson, a lot of Members of this body are concerned
about the amount of foreign assistance we are giving around the
world when we have our own crisis at the Southern border. Can
you discuss how the U.S. should be monitoring the works of
public international organizations involved at our Southern
border? How do we ensure these PIOs are not working against
U.S. interests, and can you give me examples where you think
they are?
Mr. Richardson. Yes, absolutely. Thank you for that. Yes, I
think the bottom line is that you have a lot of PIOs, and a lot
of the U.N. family organizations are providing billions of
dollars in funding to NGOs to help migrants make the journey
north. And obviously, there is a lot of cash assistance, food
support, but they are encouraging, in a way, the migration from
the South. Obviously, that goes against, I think, what most
Americans are looking for, which is a decrease. In fact, it is
against what even the Biden Administration is saying, that they
do not want these migrants to come, and yet we are continuing
to fund the PIOs that, ultimately, are doing this.
The challenge, as I mentioned in my statement, the
challenge with working with PIOs and the U.N. family, in
particular, is once you give the money, you almost lose all
visibility and transparency and accountability. It goes into a
big pot, and then the U.N. folks get to decide how and where to
use it. Furthermore, as I mentioned in my statement, we do not
currently vet PIOs or the people that they work with, so the
money just goes to the U.N. organizations. We have no idea who
these people are, who are ultimately getting these funds. We
cannot track it. We do not know if these organizations are
attached to cartels or human smugglers. It would be pretty
smart if they were because, obviously, knowing the flow of
resources in humans would be pretty interesting to human
traffickers. But it is that type of challenge that we cannot
even solve because we do not have any visibility into what is
happening.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. We are paying for our own noose.
Mr. Lynch.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Kenny, I would like
to talk about Ukraine a little bit. So, look, I have been on
this Committee for over 20 years. The Oversight Committee's job
is to oversee how that foreign aid gets spent. So just myself,
I have led between 40 and 50 CODELs to Iraq--probably did 20
trips to Iraq--Afghanistan, Somalia, Ukraine, Syria, Sudan, for
the purpose of making sure that our money is going to the right
places, and I have to say, you know, Iraq was a mess, you know.
We had a horror show there. We were handing out, you know,
duffel bags full of cash that went God knows where. There was
$9 billion that the Bush Administration misspent in the
original surge to go in there.
But since then, you know, from my own observation, since
then, things have gotten much better. You know, the situation
in Afghanistan, much more closely watched, much more
documented, and going forward to Ukraine. I just want to point
out that the $60 billion in the President's budget for Ukraine,
90 percent of that will be spent in the United States. So, this
is munitions for Ukraine and to replace munitions that the
United States has already given to Ukraine for their own
defense. Compared to the other foreign aid packages that we
have seen out there, this one has the most visibility because
it is going to be spent, you know, by buying munitions from
General Dynamics, Raytheon. American companies staffed by
American workers, that is where Ukraine is going to spend 90
percent of its money.
The other piece of this is what is going on in Ukraine and
with our oversight there. You know, we have got people on the
ground. I was just there recently, met with President Zelensky
and his defense minister, talked about the need that we cannot
have a bad story about U.S. aid to Ukraine. You need to make
sure that every single dollar is tracked in terms of how it is
spent, and he obviously brought up the point that he is
spending it in the United States, you know, 90 percent of it.
And we have a good set of oversight protocols here in the
United States to make sure that that money is spent properly.
You know, for 80 years, we have been preparing this
country. Our national security strategy has been to prepare our
country to respond to a ground war in Europe. All those
trillions of dollars over the last 80 years, we have been
trying to prepare to respond to a ground war in Europe. Now we
have one, and my Republican colleagues refuse to bring a bill
up that would actually go toward defending Europe and Ukraine.
You know, the EU has already contributed more than the United
States has toward Ukraine. The EU has contributed, and largely
Germany and the U.K., our British allies, have contributed $93
billion directly to Ukraine. Now, people will say, well,
naturally, they are European countries, and they are fearful
for their own security. That is right, but they have been all
in on this, and what Ukraine is asking for is the ability to
defend itself.
So, can you talk a little bit in this last minute about
what it means to U.S. national security and U.S. prestige in
the world, U.S. leadership in the world, this refusal of the
United States to step up and defend a democracy that is
fighting for its life against a brutal criminal gangster
dictator in Vladimir Putin? What does that mean?
Mr. Kenny. I am an economist, not a national security
expert, but I will say that I think the U.S. leadership in
Ukraine really matters worldwide. It is of intense interest, as
you say, to some of the United States' closest allies. I would
also say that Ukraine is spending this money really effectively
and well. It has one of the world's best systems for spending
money. ProZorro has been universally admired. So, the
combination of it being a really important place to spend money
and a really effective place to spend money.
Mr. Lynch. Let me ask you, you know, according to the
witness from the Heritage Foundation, the Trump Administration
justified cuts because they wanted to ``avoid injecting
divisive sociopolitical issues into its humanitarian, global
health, and development responses.'' Mr. Kenny, what is
divisive about funding global health programs that promote the
safety and well-being of women and girls? Because that is a lot
of what I have seen overseas--you know, down in Sudan, we did
an HIV clinic to stop the spread of HIV and AIDS on the
continent. What is divisive about that?
Mr. Kenny. I think all the panelists would agree that
PEPFAR has been a massive success and I think is a model for
the world and shows incredible U.S. leadership. I would also
say that PEPFAR gets a bit less effective when a whole load of
the usual providers cannot be used, because, as it happens,
they also advise on sexual and reproductive health, and they
are taken out of the picture. It actually makes PEPFAR's work
more difficult. Frankly, it also leads to more abortions
worldwide. We see when the global gag effect comes in, that
because the United States is such an important funder in this
area, countries get less in the way of sexual and reproductive
health services, including contraceptives, and the result is
that the abortion rate goes up.
So, I would love to see this not be quite the political
football it is and turn into something where, you know, the
United States has shown such fantastic leadership on this. It
is saving hundreds of thousands of lives in a really cheap and
effective way. Anything that stands in the way of that seems to
me a real shame.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back, and I
thank you for your courtesy.
Mr. Lynch. Thanks. Mr. Sessions?
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much, and my
dear friend who has just spoken did politicize this activity.
So, I would ask each of you, what about the Inspector General
who tried to find out about the debacle that happened in
Afghanistan and was completely blocked from receiving
information about what United States spent their money doing,
not just in the war, but in aid also? Do any of you have
insight into that?
Mr. Primorac. I would be willing to speak about the aid
piece since the debacle. There was a recent report from the
Inspector General that mentioned that $3 billion worth of cash
disbursements in Afghanistan, that they cannot account for
really where it went. Keep in mind, in order to have----
Mr. Sessions. So, that kind of matches what the gentleman
was talking about, all this cash that disappeared under George
Bush, so it is a rough business. Is that right?
Mr. Primorac. The problem with Afghanistan is we do not
have anybody on the ground, so there is absolutely no one on
the ground to see where the money is going or to be able to
verify with partners, or even who the partners are.
Mr. Sessions. And there was never going to be anybody
there----
Mr. Primorac. Yes.
Mr. Sessions [continuing]. And they gave the $3 billion
anyway.
Mr. Primorac. They gave the $3 billion. Every year, we have
spent billions of dollars in Afghanistan, and the Special
Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction has repeatedly
explained to Members of Congress that he cannot guarantee that
we are not financing the Taliban.
Mr. Sessions. Yes. Gentlemen, by the way, thank you for
being here, each of you. I think what our young Chairman is
doing is a very valuable hearing, and I could not wait to get
here. I am sorry. We were at votes. Conversation from you, are
any of you aware of Center for Immigration Studies? Mr.
Richardson, talk to me about them.
Mr. Richardson. They are a nonprofit think tank that
focuses on lower migration numbers. They state that they are
pro-immigrant.
Mr. Sessions. Center for Immigration Studies produced a
paper January 24. Mr. Chairman, I would like unanimous consent
to enter this into the record.
Mr. Grothman. Without objection.
Mr. Sessions. Gentlemen, immigration, let us see, the
Federalist.com. Anybody aware of them? Mr. Richardson?
Mr. Richardson. I am not sure I am following that one, sir.
Mr. Sessions. OK. I do. I will put myself in that category.
I do. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous consent,
``United Nations Grantee Uses U.S. Tax Dollars to Fund Illegal
Immigration.'' I would like to enter that into the record also.
Mr. Grothman. Without objection.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, I know that there are lots of
things always that we could disagree with, but one thing that,
living in Texas, I cannot agree with is the way we have a
political philosophy by the Democratic Party that we are going
to open up completely our borders without regard for national
security, without regard for the law, without regard for common
sense, and not only place Americans in a difficult position,
but using our money to get that done. Who is the largest
organization that we think, NGO, that we pay money to, to
encourage this sort of activity, at least in our Southern
border. Do any of you have any heads up on that? Mr.
Richardson?
Mr. Richardson. Well, the International Organization for
Migration is one of the largest, again, a U.N. family
organization. They are spending, I think it is $1.6 billion.
They just stated they are looking to raise money in order to
fund a myriad of nonprofits. As I said in my testimony, we have
no idea who these people really are. We cannot dive deep into
making sure that these are the right types of people we should
be providing. But beyond that, they are encouraging migration
by making it----
Mr. Sessions. Illegal immigration or migration.
Mr. Richardson. Illegal immigration. They are encouraging
illegal immigration into the United States by funding and
making it easier for people to make their way north, and it is
so apparent to me that I do not think it is a question of
whether that is true or not.
Mr. Sessions. Yes. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for
having this hearing today, and I want to thank our witnesses
for being here. I just think that this is all courtesy of the
Democratic Party, and we should understand that elections have
consequences. Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
Mr. Grothman. Ms. Porter?
Ms. Porter. On October 7, 2023, Israel endured a
devastating terrorist attack by Hamas. I support Israel's right
to defend itself against terrorism, and I would say the same
for any other country. That is because Israel should be treated
like any other country. That is what Israel tells Congress, and
I fully support that. As we consider aid to our allies,
Congress should hear every country out. Israel should be
treated like any other country, and that is why I signed the
discharge petition for President Biden's aid package so that we
can have that debate about appropriate aid on the House Floor,
and when we do give foreign aid out, we verify that our allies
are following the rules. The Leahy laws are supposed to verify
that every country is meeting the same human rights standards.
Under these laws, again, Israel should be treated like any
other country, but is it? Is the vetting process really the
same for all countries? Let us pull back the curtain.
Mr. Richardson, does the United States vet each unit of a
country's military individually before they receive security
assistance?
Mr. Richardson. Our vetting process is focused on non-U.S.-
based NGOs, and so does not include PIOs and generally does not
include foreign militaries, the way that we do partner vetting
in sort of a foreign assistance way.
Ms. Porter. But do you vet at the individual? Does the
Leahy law generally require individual unit-level vetting?
Mr. Richardson. I am not aware of the military vetting on
an individual unit basis, no.
Ms. Porter. You were in charge of foreign assistance at the
Department of State, and the budget for security assistance was
about 30 percent of your total budget.
Mr. Richardson. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Porter. So, let me help you out on how it is supposed
to work.
[Chart]
We are supposed to do unit-level vetting to make sure that
each military unit that gets assistance is not violating the
law, and that is the way it works, except--this whiteboard is
big--except for 15 countries. Fifteen countries. Fifteen
countries that include a whole number of other countries, and I
am happy to read them off, but there is a long list of them, 15
countries. So, I am curious if other countries are getting
special treatment. Let us say there is potential evidence that
a unit of a country's armed forces has committed a human rights
violation, and there are exceptions for these different
processes. So, the special processes call into question if a
single objection is enough to stop aid. Is that true? If there
is a single objection that there is a human rights violation,
does that stop aid?
Mr. Richardson. When there is an accusation of abuse or
misuse of U.S. resources in the security space or in the
development space for that matter, you do have the ability to
raise that, and that gets vetted throughout multiple processes.
Ms. Porter. Right. That is how it works, except for who?
Except for what countries? Do you know?
Mr. Richardson. I am sorry. I do not, ma'am.
Ms. Porter. Except for Israel, Ukraine, and Egypt, except
for those countries. Generally, units would stop receiving
assistance immediately, but there is that important concern.
So, when does aid stop immediately? State Department says that
aid should stop immediately if there is a problem. Does it?
Mr. Richardson. It totally depends on the circumstances and
situations.
Ms. Porter. Does it depend on the country that is getting
the aid?
Mr. Richardson. It also depends on the country receiving
the aid, yes.
Ms. Porter. So, what country does aid not stop immediately
under Leahy?
Mr. Richardson. I would have to go back and look through my
notes.
Ms. Porter. You do not know what country that is. It is
only one in the entire world. Guess what? Except for Israel.
So, look, Congress has been told time and time and time again
that the Leahy laws apply to everyone, to every country, and on
paper they do. But when we pull back the curtain, when we do
some oversight, not all countries are being treated equally
when the Leahy law is being implemented, especially our ally,
Israel.
Look, if Israel wants to be treated equally, which I am
for, then let us do it. Let us see the Israel Leahy vetting
forum standard operating procedure so that we can see exactly
how it works, how it is different from other countries, and
what would the Department of State would need to change to
treat Israel equally. I yield back.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. Mr. Fallon?
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do not have a marker
board, so.
Ms. Porter. I feel bad for you.
Mr. Fallon. Well, I will just leave it there. This is my
concern, that we live in a very small world now, and foreign
aid, I think, is critical. Not all my colleagues agree with
that, but I have seen, being an amateur student of history,
what happened after World War I. We became very isolationist.
We got these big two moats, the Atlantic and the Pacific. We
feel very safe, and all we got was a worse war 20 years later,
so I do not want that to happen again. But we also have a
geopolitical competitor that has 4-and-a-half times the
population that we have and nearly the same GDP, in China, and
it is very worrisome.
So, we need to take heed of what China is doing with their
Belt and Road Initiative and make sure that we administer our
foreign aid very, very well, very precisely, and also, here
domestically, acknowledge that we have a spending problem, we
have a debt problem, we have a deficit problem on a yearly
basis. And one of the first things that is going to go, when
that problem becomes too large to ignore and we hit austerity,
is foreign aid, and then China is going to rule the roost
around the world. So, all these issues are interrelated.
And then another concern I have is this foreign aid that
is, I feel, very critical, I do not want to see it weaponized,
and I think this Administration, unfortunately, has done that
with taking these concepts that are not even largely agreed
upon in this country, and certainly different cultures find
some of this stuff very alarming when you are talking about
promoting abortion, and gender identity ideology, and sometimes
the climate. Obviously, we need to be concerned about climate,
but not climate alarmism. We have to live within the bounds of
reality, and this leftist shift in the foreign aid direction is
very troubling to me. I think it needs to be more about
promoting and projecting U.S. security and our prosperity and
our democratic values, and not spreading ideologies that are
truly fringe concepts, not only in this country, but
particularly in other countries that have different cultures.
So, another very alarming issue to me, and I went on a
CODEL with Chairman Lynch to Eastern Europe and Ukraine, was--
and I do not want to see--because if enough Ukrainian aid falls
into the wrong hands, particularly any kind of lethal aid, they
are going to lose the war. Because we are going to demand, on
both sides of the aisle, that we do not give them any weaponry
anymore, and then Kiev is going to fall, Putin is going to win.
I do not want to see that.
And what I wanted to ask the witnesses, and thank you all
so much for being here today, is do you feel that the Biden
Administration has done a good job in conducting the oversight
of this aid? Mr. Kenny, you can go first, and just kind of a
quick ``yes'' or ``no'' or maybe a couple of sentences.
Mr. Kenny. I cannot speak to the military aid. On the
economic aid side, yes.
Mr. Fallon. You think it is? OK.
Mr. Primorac. So, across the board, I would say no,
unfortunately.
Mr. Fallon. No? Mr. Richardson?
Mr. Richardson. No.
Mr. Fallon. And that is the thing. Look, I am rooting for
Ukraine, and I want them to get the aid that they need. I think
it is an extreme position to do what this Administration has
done with giving them basically an open checkbook. At the same
time, I think it is an extreme position to do absolutely
nothing and let Putin win. So again, we need to thread a needle
there.
This is what is concerning to me. On the 11th of January
this year, the Inspector General of the DoD released a report
evaluating the DoD's of defense articles provided to Ukraine.
In the report, the DoD IG determined that as of June 2023,
``the serial number of inventories for more than'' a little
over a billion dollars, 59 percent of the total that they
checked, which was $1.7 billion, ``of the EEUM designated
defense articles were delinquent.'' That quote is directly from
DoD's very own press release. I mean, that is 59 percent. And
then the IG went on to say, IG Storch said, ``Persistent gaps
as identified in our evaluations may correlate with an
inability to maintain complete accountability for this critical
U.S. security assistance.'' So, knowing that, do you believe
that this is a smart investment? Mr. Richardson, you can start.
Mr. Richardson. At the end of the day, we cannot allow
Putin to dominate Ukraine or invade Eastern Europe, and so I
think you do have to thread that needle. I think there are ways
to have greater control. Cutting out more of the U.N.
organizations is certainly a good step. I would advocate for
more loans versus direct assistance, having more control over
our military sales, all good ways, but I think you can do it. I
think we have to do it. We have to find a way.
Mr. Fallon. Sure.
Mr. Primorac. I would say that in order to be effective,
you need to have a strategy. What is the strategy of the
Administration? I am not clear. When you are having programs in
foreign aid, you need to have an outcome-based approach toward
it. Otherwise, they become long-term entitlement programs that
actually can do more harm than good.
Mr. Fallon. Mr. Kenny?
Mr. Kenny. Again, on the economic side, I think that the
spot checks that USAID are doing are the right approach, and
there could be more of them, right? Most of the economic
support is going through the World Bank that, I think, has
quite good systems in place, and then on to largely pay
salaries. There is a very easy way to check if that money has
got where it is meant to go. You ask people, did you get paid?
And I think USAID is doing some of that. It could do more, and
that would be a great solution, but I think so far, from the
evidence we have, the money is getting where it is meant to, on
the civilian side.
Mr. Fallon. And, Mr. Chairman, just as a final note, I
mean, Ukraine has the fourth most natural resources of any
nation in the world. Loans are something that is very
intriguing because it does help them defeat Putin. At the same
time, the American taxpayer can get their money back on a true
investment. And they will not have the means to repay now,
maybe not in 5 years, but they will eventually, because when
this war is over, I do think they are going to be a successful
economy. They are 30 years into a 50-year journey, typically.
If you look at South Korea and Taiwan as a model of going from
authoritarian to a functioning democracy, they are not there
yet. They were getting there. Putin stood in their way, but I
think, eventually, that may be a solution that saves the day.
Mr. Chairman, thank you so much. I yield back.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. We have a quick request from Ms.
Porter.
Ms. Porter. Oh yes. I would like to ask unanimous consent
to enter into the record an article from the Guttmacher
Institute, titled, ``The Unprecedented Expansion of the Global
Gag Rule: Trampling Rights, Health, and Free Speech.''
Mr. Grothman. So ordered. Thank you.
Ms. Porter. And also, I ask unanimous consent to enter into
the record this article from The New York Times, stating that
the United States does not have any evidence to suggest that
aid has been diverted or stolen.
Mr. Grothman. OK. Thank you. We will order that, too.
Mr. Perry.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. All right. I guess, Mr.
Richardson, maybe this is coming to you. A few months ago, the
Department of Defense Inspector General reported that the DoD
had failed to work with the Ukrainians on tracking weapons and
equipment going to Ukraine, and that the DoD IG reported that
nearly 60 percent--that is a lot--60 percent of advanced
weapons and equipment remain unaccounted for. Now, Ukrainians
are fighting a war, right? They are fighting for their lives,
and I do not know if we are collecting dunnage. I do not know
if we are collecting brass to know how many rounds were fired.
I do not know how they are accounting for this equipment. It
says, ``weapons and equipment.'' ``Advanced weapons and
equipment.'' You can understand expendables like rounds. You
can understand, potentially, weapons being destroyed,
especially small arms. Start getting into artillery pieces,
tracked vehicles, it happens, but they should be able to be
accounted for, right? There are ways of doing that, even from
far away. Are we relying on the Ukrainians to account for these
weapons? I imagine they can assist us, but, you know, we are
continually asked. We have been asked for half a year now to
provide more money to Ukraine. Sixty percent unaccounted for.
Look, it is hard to go back to your constituents who get up
in the morning, pack a lunch, and head off to work to earn
money to pay their bills, which they cannot afford right now,
and then this Administration, the Biden Administration, says,
well, we need $65 billion to send to Ukraine, and our people
are saying 60 percent of it, we do not know where in the hell
it is. What is going on?
Mr. Richardson. I cannot speak to the specifics of what is
exactly happening in Ukraine. This all happened after I had
left the Administration. But I will say that there is a small
contingent in Kiev at the embassy that will be responsible for
tracking of equipment. It clearly is completely insufficient,
as well as the processes that you would need to put in place in
order to have appropriate tracking. These are mostly DoD
personnel that would be responsible. It is very hard to get
outside of Kiev. I assume you have been there. It is hard to
get to the front in order to do those types of tracking, but
that is true across the spectrum. And also, on the development
side or the economic side, we do not have people, Americans or
people that we trust, that can go and verify because they are
mostly kept captured in Kiev and been unable to get out and see
what is actually happening.
Mr. Perry. So, the system that you described, is this
something new, or is this a system that currently exists, or at
least existed during this audit, this report, these findings?
Mr. Richardson. So, in Ukraine, you know, this would have
been based upon ever since Putin launched his second attack
during the Biden Administration, this would have been unique to
this circumstance. But I would say the challenge with foreign
aid, the way you get to the most corruption, most waste, fraud,
and abuse, is when you operate in nonpermissive environments,
like Gaza, like Afghanistan, like Ukraine, where you cannot get
out and sort of do the monitoring and evaluation that is
required in order to provide confidence into the system.
Mr. Perry. I mean, I got to tell you, your answer that, you
know, kind of the way it is, and it is not just this way with
weapon systems, it is this way with economic aid, and the
other----
Mr. Richardson. It is a real problem.
Mr. Perry. You know, it does not engender a lot of
confidence that I should spend six cents or $6 or $60, let
alone $65 billion of the people that I represent, my bosses,
they are out there working their tails off and cannot afford
their electricity bills, cannot afford their grocery bills,
cannot afford, you know, a mortgage on a new home. And you are
not selling me right now. I hate to tell you, you are not
selling me. I mean, we have got technology.
I bet if we told Amazon or Mastercard to track every single
one of these things, whether it was a dollar, a penny, or a 1-
5-5 round, I suspect they would track it as long as they were
getting paid, and somehow the Federal Government cannot find
its rear end with both hands, but they sure have a way of
coming in and telling all the folks in this Committee and
across Congress, we got to send billions and billions of more
dollars to Ukraine.
Mr. Richardson. I a hundred percent agree that we have to
have more command and control and more monitoring and
evaluation of foreign assistance, and I go back to the loan
idea as well that President Trump has floated. I think you have
to have more skin in the game, more ownership by the
Ukrainians, more responsibility from the EU. This is ultimately
going to impact them the most. You know, this problem did not
start, you know, 2 years ago. This problem started because NATO
failed to meet its 2-percent obligation. It is very much a
whole approach that we have to bring back responsibility and
accountability into the system.
Mr. Perry. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
Mr. Grothman. I am glad we have Mr. Perry on this
Committee, but we are going on to Mr. LaTurner.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to all of
our witnesses for being here today as we discuss our Nation's
foreign assistance programs. Foreign aid is not merely an act
of goodwill. It is a strategic investment in global stability,
security, and prosperity. It enhances our diplomatic relations,
expands free markets, and promotes humanitarian values, all
while being cheaper and safer than war. The money the U.S.
spends on foreign aid around the world is a worthwhile
investment when it does what it is intended to do. In 2023
alone, the U.S. spent $52 billion in foreign assistance to over
200 countries and regions. As Members of this Committee, we owe
it to our constituents to ensure these funds are used
responsibly, transparently, and effectively to achieve their
intended goals.
Under the Biden Administration, this has not been the case.
One of President Biden's first actions was to reverse a
decision made under the Trump Administration and restore
funding to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency, despite
mounting evidence tying the organization to Iran-backed Hamas
terrorists. It is now being reported that at least a dozen
UNRWA employees willingly participated in the murder, rape, and
kidnapping of innocent Israelis on October 7. Further, since
President Biden's botched withdrawal from Afghanistan, the U.S.
has provided $11.3 billion in foreign aid to the region. This
past August, the Special Inspector General for Afghanistan
Reconstruction, John Sopko, testified before this Committee. In
his testimony, he stated, ``It is clear from our work that the
Taliban is using various methods to divert U.S. aid dollars.''
Not only did President Biden and his Administration leave
behind billions of dollars in military equipment to the
Taliban, but now our tax dollars are helping fund their
ruthless operations.
The Biden Administration has also weaponized U.S. foreign
aid to force their liberal agenda on the rest of the world,
pushing taxpayer-funded abortion, climate alarmism, and DEI
initiatives. The status quo from President Biden is
unacceptable and unsustainable. We need to uphold our
commitment to our allies while cutting wasteful and ineffective
spending to better protect Americans' hard-earned tax dollars.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses.
Mr. Richardson, it is clear that our foreign aid efforts
involved a multitude of offices, agencies, spanning the
government. I want to talk about the coordination happening
across these entities. Currently, there are over 20 U.S.
Government agencies engaged in our foreign assistance efforts.
What can we do to ensure that our efforts among these agencies
are strategically aligned and coordinated to maximize the
impact and efficiency?
Mr. Richardson. Yes. Thank you for that statement and for
the question. As you mentioned, there are over 20 Federal
Government agencies responsible for foreign assistance. So, we
talk about USAID, State, MCC, DFC, but we have got Treasury out
there, Commerce, Agriculture, Justice Department, DHS. They are
all sort of operating in a complete stove-type manner, and it
is supposed to be coordinated at the post, so it is supposed to
be coordinated by the Ambassador at a particular mission. The
problem is it does not happen that way, and, ultimately, the
Ambassador has lots of things they are focused on, and God
bless them, they are doing hard work, but the funding decisions
about what types of programs are going to these posts are
happening here in Washington.
So, you really need to centralize it, have a director of
foreign assistance who is actually accountable, can bring all
the foreign assistance agencies together, be very clear about
what we are trying to accomplish, be clear that this is aligned
to our national security goals, as you mentioned. How do we
counter China? How do we bolster trade? How do we create
prosperity here in America? And then making sure that all
Federal Government is working together to achieve that.
Mr. LaTurner. I appreciate the answer and look forward to
talking to you more offline about this. Let us switch gears
real quick. President Trump has floated the idea of loaning
money in Ukraine. Can you elaborate on why loan-based and
conditional assistance can be useful in certain circumstances?
Mr. Richardson. Yes, absolutely. I really think this is a
larger question, not just of loans in Ukraine, but we really
have an opportunity to reexamine how we give assistance more
broadly. We have been so accustomed to writing a check to the
U.N. or to an NGO or to a for-profit company, and that is just
the way it always works. We really need to think about
conditional assistance, holding countries accountable, doing
more investments. When it comes to loans, you have an
opportunity to make sure that Ukraine has more skin in the
game, it brings in more accountability, it drives the
Ukrainians to actually care more about these dollars than they
would today, and that is really what you want. And as your
colleague mentioned, Ukraine is going to succeed if they can
win this war and they can keep Russia out of their backyard.
They really have an opportunity to be very prosperous. That is
great, we should encourage that, we should want that, and then
the American people should be paid back for every dollar that
they spent in Ukraine.
Mr. LaTurner. Mr. Primorac, I have a whole host of
questions for you, but I have run out of time, so I will be
submitting those.
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Grothman. Mr. Biggs.
Mr. Biggs. Thanks, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses. I apologize. I am in a markup next door and have
been there a better part of the day. So, I want to talk about
something slightly different, perhaps. It has been well
documented that nongovernmental organizations are down at the
Southern border in my home state of Arizona and other border
states, including south of the border, helping to facilitate
and escalate the Biden border crisis. DHS Secretary Alejandro
Mayorkas was a board member at one of those NGOs, HIAS, an
organization which in Fiscal Year 2022, received nearly 50
percent of its revenues from grants from governmental agencies,
including the State Department and Department of Homeland
Security. HIAS publicly congratulated Secretary Mayorkas for
his appointment, specifically noting that he was a primary
architect of the DACA program. In turn, with this web of
coordination between the Biden Administration, the NGOs, and
the cartels, it encourages more unchecked and unfettered
illegal immigration, all at the expense of the American people.
So, Mr. Richardson, please explain to me how these NGOs are
coordinating with Secretary Mayorkas and the Biden
Administration to continue with this illegal mass migration.
Mr. Richardson. Yes, you bet. The coordination is happening
in two ways. The U.S. Government, mostly through the State
Department, but other avenues as well, will fund IOM, the
International Organization of Migration. They in turn have a
network of NGOs that they directly fund. So, these NGOs are
getting funding directly from the State Department, USAID,
Homeland Security, and 20 other government agencies, most
likely. Probably no one knows who is getting multiple U.S.
Government grants all at the same time. And then they are also
receiving funding from the U.N. Obviously, the problem is that
these organizations are encouraging and abetting illegal
immigration into our country, which the Biden Administration
keeps saying that it is opposed to doing it and yet continues
to support organizations that are doing just that.
Mr. Biggs. And FEMA also helps provide them dollars as
well. Another NGO, Lutheran Immigration Refugee Services,
reported more than $93 million in U.S. Government grants in its
2021 financial statement, meaning that taxpayer-funded grants
accounted for more than 80 percent of its total support.
Additionally, a DHS OIG report found that 18 different NGOs
receiving a total of $66 million in funding did not always
comply with funding and application guidance. Are there any
accountability measures in place for NGOs who misuse taxpayer
funds to prevent them from receiving future dollars, or is
Congress and the Biden Administration going to continue to fund
this illegal mass migration operation? And I think we all know
the answer to that.
Mr. Richardson. Yes. Like, at the end of the day, the Biden
Administration seems committed to funding these NGOs. If there
are documented problems, there are processes in order to sort
of blacklist an NGO, but these NGOs are doing exactly what the
Biden Administration wants, which is to provide comfort and
support for illegal immigration across our Southern border.
Mr. Biggs. Yes. It is an organized, well-oiled machine
working to carrying out this mass migration. Mr. Primorac, is
that how you say it?
Mr. Primorac. Yes.
Mr. Biggs. What are these NGOs specifically doing to help
illegal migrants once they cross into the U.S. or even as they
travel up to the United States?
Mr. Primorac. Congressman, what I would like to do to
answer that question is to start in Central America,
specifically, where the root causes strategy in which we are
spending, you know, billions of dollars in order to prevent
them to coming up in the first place. But when you start
looking at what the programs are, for instance, it is a $50
million regional center to promote gender equity. There is one
to promote intersex legal reforms. These are the kind of
projects that we are pushing. And second, no matter how much we
are going to spend in foreign aid in Central America or other
places, when you look at the remittances that go back to
Central America, you are talking a fact of tens of billions of
dollars, so a factor of 20, 30, or 40 times more than the
foreign aid that we are providing these countries, so it does
not work. It is simply a waste of money.
We need a strong border. That is what is going to prevent
them from coming into the United States, but there is no
incentive for these countries to reform economically as long as
they see billions and billions of money, of dollars coming in
from remittances, whether they are legal or illegal immigrants.
Mr. Biggs. And I would say tacitly, that indicates that
there is, if not direct coordination, there is certainly
complicity with the cartels who are managing our Southern
border, and that is a critical component to why we should not
be doing this. Thank you for entertaining my questions.
Mr. Chairman, I have some UC requests.
Mr. Grothman. OK.
Mr. Biggs. I would like to introduce into the record three
different articles. One, ``NGOs Use American Tax Dollars to
Relocate Migrants.'' One called, ``Biden Administration Sends
Millions to Religious Nonprofits Facilitating Mass Illegal
Migration.'' The third one by actually one of our witnesses
today, is, ``Foreign Aid Can't Stem Illegal Immigration: The
Case of Guatemala.''
Mr. Grothman. So ordered.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Grothman. OK. I am just going to give myself 3 more
minutes, and then I guess we will wrap it up. It was a very
interesting hearing, but we will give a question, I guess, to
you, Mr. Richardson. Over the years, there have been several
witnesses before this Committee and Subcommittee emphasizing
the need to monitor and evaluate the contractors and grantees.
Mr. Richardson. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Grothman. The Special Inspector for Afghanistan
Reconstruction told us instances where contractors with
questionable backgrounds still were getting lucrative contracts
and were later found to have engaged in corrupt practices or
even supported insurgent groups. Like Afghanistan, the USAID
Inspector General testified in 2019 before the Approps
Committee that USAID, their limitations in mitigating
implemented risks, have contributed to corrupt schemes across
Iraq, Syria, and Africa. Can you tell us what tools we can use
for USAID and the State Department to vet these contractors and
grantees better?
Mr. Richardson. Yes. So, there is a very limited vetting
program for partners that is focused exclusively on terrorism
and only in a certain number of countries, all in the Middle
East. I would strongly argue that we really have to expand the
vetting process, make sure that everyone that receives U.S.
taxpayer dollars, we know who they are, but not just the main
contract, right? So, we will submit a contract for $50 billion
with an organization. They will then, in turn, give 50 percent
of that to other folks. We need to know who those other folks
are. We need to know who is actually implementing assistance on
the ground and be able to track who these people are. Are they
bad actors, not just related to terrorism, but cartels, human
traffickers, poachers. There is a whole host of folks who want
to be inside our system who could manipulate our system.
The other thing I would say is when we talk about
monitoring and evaluation, what the development people are
really telling you is that if I purchased an apple, you give me
an apple, and that means we have success. Well, what is the
goal? What are we trying to accomplish in that country, in that
region, globally, and how does that apple add up to anything?
We do not track that. That is the big missing middle in terms
of our strategies. These countries, our host countries, our
Ambassadors, our teams, will create lofty goals about what we
are trying to do, and then every one of these little programs
will do monitoring and evaluation that just proves that they
are accomplishing something, but they are not actually proving
that they are accomplishing a larger objective.
For the next stage of monitoring and evaluation, I really
encourage the Congress to pass legislation to really force the
Administration to align projects to actualize strategic goals.
Mr. Grothman. We will see if we can do something
statutorily. I guess that is it. I wish we had another half an
hour, but we are not going to.
OK. In closing, I want to thank our witnesses once again,
for their testimony. I yield to Ranking Member Lynch, I guess,
for the second here. Do you want to do any closing remarks?
Mr. Lynch. No, I am good. Thank you.
Mr. Grothman. OK. I will recognize myself. OK. I would like
to thank you all for being here. I think we have covered so
many different areas. We are weighing in on social issues that
I wish we could spend more time on that on countries abroad
where we are just attacking their religion and trying to drive
their children away from what would be traditional values, even
traditional values in this country. We are wasting money right
and left. We are spending money, say, in the Middle East, to
undermine our ally, Israel. In this country, we are spending
money to encourage more people to come across the line. I mean,
there is almost nowhere I have seen since in Congress that we
have money spent more, not only frivolously, against our own
interests, and I think we are going to do some follow-up
questions here eventually, but either way, I wish all of you
luck in trying to get the whole foreign aid establishment back
on the straight and narrow.
So, with that and without objection, all Members have 5
legislative days within which to submit materials and
additional written questions, which will be forwarded to the
witnesses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:11 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
