- SAFEGUARDING THE FEDERAL SOFTWARE SUPPLY CHAIN

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SAFEGUARDING THE FEDERAL SOFTWARE
SUPPLY CHAIN

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY, AND GOVERNMENT INNOVATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND ACCOUNTABILITY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

NOVEMBER 29, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-77
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-310 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Ro Khanna, California
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Katie Porter, California
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Cori Bush, Missouri
Byron Donalds, Florida               Jimmy Gomez, California
Kelly Armstrong, North Dakota        Shontel Brown, Ohio
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
William Timmons, South Carolina      Robert Garcia, California
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Maxwell Frost, Florida
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Greg Casar, Texas
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Dan Goldman, New York
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Chuck Edwards, North Carolina        Rashida Tlaib, Michigand
Nick Langworthy, New York
Eric Burlison, Missouri

------

Mark Marin, Staff Director
Jessica Donlon, Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel
Raj Bharwani, Senior Professional Staff Member
Lauren Lombardo, Deputy Policy Director
Peter Warren, Senior Advisor
Mallory Cogar, Deputy Director of Operations and Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5074

Julie Tagen, Minority Staff Director

Contact Number: 202-225-5051
------

Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government
Innovation

Nancy Mace, South Carolina, Chairwoman
William Timmons, South Carolina      Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Tim Burchett, Tennessee                  Ranking Minority Member
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Ro Khanna, California
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Chuck Edwards, North Carolina        Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Nick Langworthy, New York            Jimmy Gomez, California
Eric Burlison, Missouri              Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Vacancy                              Vacancy

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on November 29, 2023................................     1

Witnesses

----------

Dr. James Lewis, Senior Vice President and Director, Strategic
Technologies Program, Center for Strategic and International
Studies
Oral Statement...................................................     3

Mr. Jamil Jaffer, Founder and Executive Director, National
Security Institute, Antonin Scalia Law School, George Mason
University
Oral Statement...................................................     4

Mr. Roger Waldron, President, The Coalition for Government
Procurement
Oral Statement...................................................     6

Ms. Jennifer Bisceglie (Minority Witness), Founder & CEO,
Interos, Inc.
Oral Statement...................................................     7

Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are
available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

* Statement for the Record; submitted by Rep. Connolly.
* Questions for the Record, to Ms. Bisceglie; submitted by Rep.
Mace.
* Questions for the Record, to Ms. Bisceglie; submitted by Rep.
Connolly.
* Questions for the Record, to Mr. Jaffer; submitted by Rep.
Mace.
* Questions for the Record, to Mr. Jaffer; submitted by Rep.
Connolly.
* Questions for the Record, to Dr. Lewis; submitted by Rep.
Mace.
* Questions for the Record, to Dr. Lewis; submitted by Rep.
Connolly.
* Questions for the Record, to Mr. Waldron; submitted by Rep.
Mace.
* Questions for the Record, to Mr. Waldron; submitted by Rep.
Connolly.

Documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

SAFEGUARDING THE FEDERAL SOFTWARE
SUPPLY CHAIN

----------

Wednesday, November 29, 2023

House of Representatives

Committee on Oversight and Accountability

Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government
Innovation

Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:21 p.m., in
room 2247, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Nancy Mace
[Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Mace, Timmons, Langworthy,
Connolly, and Lynch.
Ms. Mace. Good afternoon, everyone. The Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government
Innovation will now come to order.
And good afternoon. We welcome everyone who is here this
afternoon.
Without objection, the Chair may declare a recess at any
time. And I will recognize myself for the purpose of making an
opening statement.
Good afternoon, and welcome to this hearing of the
Subcommittee of Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and
Government Innovation.
Today more than ever, Federal agencies rely on information
technology to carry out core functions of government. Digital
information systems are used to help provide healthcare to
veterans, pay Social Security beneficiaries, protect the
homeland, administer our system of justice, and much more. The
broad deployment of IT systems creates efficiencies and
streamlines the government service delivery process. So, there
is no disputing the gains from digital government are real, but
so, too, as you all know and why you are here this afternoon,
are the risks.
Our increase in dependence on computer hardware and
software has created an irresistible target for malicious cyber
actors. These include foreign enemies who seek to do us harm
and domestic activists bent on disruption, along with criminals
chiefly seeking to line their own pockets. We know these risks
from hard experience. A series of hacks have exploited
vulnerabilities in software used to operate major Federal and
non-Federal computer systems.
For example, the 2020 SolarWinds breach, many of you are
aware of, amongst the largest ever, was perpetrated by Russia-
based cyber criminals who gained access to systems and data by
injecting malware into a widely used software update.
More major software hacks have followed since then. That
includes one involving Log4j, a common software component. And
this past May, the popular file transfer software, Moveit, was
compromised.
These intrusions disrupt operations, they are costly and
time-consuming to address for companies of all sizes. And they
risk the exfiltration of sensitive data, including the personal
identifiable information of millions of Americans. Ultimately,
they erode trust and the ability of our government to execute
its core functions reliably and securely.
So, we need to ensure the software we use is safe. It is a
challenging risk; the Federal Government spends about a hundred
billion annually in IT goods and services, including software.
When you acquire a product, you inherit any risks associated
with its supply chain. And the software supply chain is often
opaque, its providence is often unclear, including that of the
underlying source code. And even if the origins are known, it
could also have been later altered or tampered with.
Congress has taken some steps to shore up the software
supply chain. Section 889 of the 2019 NDAA prohibited Federal
agencies from buying certain telecom and video surveillance
equipment, including that made by specific companies tied to
China. Congress also authorized the creation of Federal
Acquisition Supply Council or FASC as a centralized interagency
hub to identify and mitigate government IT procurement risks.
One way to make the software supply chain more transparent
is through SBOMs. An SBOM, or Software Bill of Materials is
analogous to a food nutrition label. It reveals the origin and
component elements of software, as well as modifications later
made. An SBOM can help government purchasers identify software
vulnerabilities, like source code originating from China or
Russia. The goal is to secure the software supply chain without
unduly shrinking the pool of software providers and products
available to the government. We do not want to give up the
benefits we all gain from software-driven efficiencies,
including the savings they yield to taxpayers. That is why we
have a representative of the Federal contractor community
testifying here today, along with experts on the methods and
intentions of cyber threat actors.
But before we hear from them, do you want to make an
opening statement.
Mr. Lynch. I think the Ranking Member will be along. So, if
we could go to introduction of the witnesses.
Ms. Mace. We will pause. When Mr. Connolly gets here, he
will do his opening statement.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
Ms. Mace. All right. So next, I am pleased to introduce our
witnesses for today's hearing. Thank you for being jammed up
there today. You guys look super cozy. Small desk, four people.
Our first witness is Dr. James Lewis, Senior Vice
President, Director of Strategic Technologies Program at the
Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Our second witness is Mr. Jamil Jaffer, founder and
Executive Director of the National Security Institute at George
Mason University's Antonin Scalia Law School.
Our third witness is Mr. Roger Waldron, President of The
Coalition of Government Procurement.
And our fourth and final witness today is Ms. Jennifer
Bisceglie, founder and CEO of Interos, Inc.
Welcome, everyone, and we are pleased to have you this
afternoon.
So, pursuant to Committee Rule 9(g), the witnesses will
please stand and raise your right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you God?
Let the record show the witnesses all answered in the
affirmative. We appreciate all of you being here today and look
forward to your testimony. I will remind our witnesses--I do
not know what that was--we appreciate everybody being here
today. I will remind the witnesses that we have read your
written statements, and they will appear in full in the hearing
record. Please limit your oral statements to 5 minutes. And as
a reminder, please press the button on the microphone in front
of you so that it is on, and everyone can hear you. When you
begin to speak, the light in front of you will turn green. And
after 4 minutes, the light will turn yellow. When the red light
comes on, your 5 minutes has expired, and I will politely ask
you to stop, to please wrap up.
So, our first witness, Dr. Lewis, I invite you to please
begin your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JAMES LEWIS

SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT

AND DIRECTOR

STRATEGIC TECHNOLOGIES PROGRAM

CENTER FOR STRATEGIC & INTERNATIONAL STUDIES

Dr. Lewis. Thank you, and I thank the Committee for the
opportunity to testify. Forty-five years ago, China's leaders
realized that the economy was in shambles, and they decided to
open China to the West. This economic opening created immense
business opportunities for the world, and the U.S. expected
that the relationship with China would steadily improve. It was
profitable for both sides, but there were always problems, and
chief among those problems was that China decided that to
modernize and grow, it needed to acquire technology. China did
this in many ways, but chief among them is cyber espionage.
China leads in intellectual property theft and now collects
the personal information of American citizens. Chinese
intelligence services exploit information technology, including
devices, software, internet apps, and the cloud. Anything that
connects to the internet creates an opportunity for spying. And
when China provides the software, it makes this task easier.
The way that software is built creates opportunities.
Software products blend code from a variety of sources. This
could include software from China or other hostile nations. One
concern is the use of Chinese software development kits,
basically chunks of code that can be inserted into bigger
programs. This has been done in many U.S. commercial products.
The use of Chinese software creates opportunities for espionage
and the disruption of services. A Federal user may download a
shopping or travel app for personal use and not know that it
includes Chinese software.
The problem is that the U.S. and China have deeply
interconnected supply chains. This interconnection creates
vulnerability and risks, but they cannot be undone overnight.
We can, however, manage this risk.
Since the 2021 SolarWinds incident, the U.S. has taken a
number of steps to improve software supply chain security--
changes to the Federal acquisition regulations, and to FedRAMP,
will lead to acquisition of more secure software and services.
Other important measures include the Software Bill of
Materials process that you mentioned, SBOM, managed now by the
Department of Homeland Security, and the new Department of
Commerce Office of Information and Communications Technology.
SBOMs provide insight into the source of the software products.
We often do not know where the code came from. And since there
can be multiple participants--a prime, a sub, tertiary
suppliers--SBOMs are crucial. It lets the U.S. identify
software that comes from risky sources in a way we cannot now
do. Commerce's ICTS office will review information technology
subject to its jurisdiction and can prohibit or impose measures
on transactions that create risk.
The office was really created to deal with TikTok, to make
an approach to TikTok that would withstand judicial scrutiny.
So, they are beginning their work. I think everyone is
optimistic about them. The office also builds on the work of
several executive orders in this Administration, and its
predecessor, issued in the last few years.
Safeguarding the Federal software supply chain points to
the need for a thorough review of software applications and
internet-connected devices acquired by the Federal Government.
SBOM, the new office, the executive orders, and changes in the
acquisition regulations will let the United States better
manage a complex national security problem. But we are only at
the start. I thank the Committee for the opportunity to testify
and look forward to your questions.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I will now recognize Mr. Jaffer for
your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JAMIL JAFFER

FOUNDER AND EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

NATIONAL SECURITY INSTITUTE

ANTONIN SCALIA LAW SCHOOL

GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY

Mr. Jaffer. Chairwoman Mace, Ranking Member Connolly, and
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today about the threat facing our Nation from potential
vulnerabilities in the Federal software supply chain.
Let me start out by saying we are in a constant, if low
level, state of conflict with adversaries in a cyber domain
today. Russia has come after our government, our think tanks,
our universities, our critical infrastructure. They are deep
inside our systems. They have long-term sustained access to
almost every aspect of the U.S. Government and the private
sector, including our water supply, our electric supply, our
banking system.
The same is true of China. China is deep inside our
networks and has been for years. They look to exploit that--
both Russia and China today look to exploit that capability
primarily for intelligence collection and to establish a
capability to remain on our infrastructure to use in the case
of conflict. They do not attempt today to use it for that
purpose.
Other nation state actors, unfortunately, likewise have
significant capability. The Iranians and North Koreans, while
being somewhat further behind than the Russians and Chinese,
have today a significant capability to access and influence our
critical infrastructure and our government.
This is a challenge because today the world is on fire. We
have a war going on in the heart of Europe between Russia and
Ukraine. We have a war going on between Israel and Hamas, a
nation state Iranian-backed threat actor. We also see constant,
consistent threats to our allies and partners in the Indo-
Pacific, including Taiwan, Japan, South Korea, and Australia by
China, and a consistent set of launches of ballistic missiles,
nuclear capable ballistic missiles by North Korea. Each of
these nation states has cyber capabilities. Many of which they
deploy today across the globe and here in the United States by
exploiting software vulnerabilities in the supply chain.
So, the challenge we face is one that is not insignificant,
to the contrary it is one that is massive, serious, and present
today, and we must address. Now, there are a number of things
that we as the Federal Government can do to address these
problems and a number of important steps that the Chairwoman
herself mentioned--section 889 is a step in the right
direction. We have also banned certain types of capabilities.
The U.S. Government once bought Russian antivirus software
in the form of Kaspersky. We have now barred that from U.S.
Government systems, and that is a good thing. As are the bars
on Huawei, ZTE, and other Chinese capabilities.
But the problem goes deeper, as Jim has correctly laid out,
a number of nation state actors play in the open-source
software space, and they engage in efforts to exploit providers
in the U.S. Government. We saw that perhaps famously in the
case of the SolarWinds hack that the Chairwoman referred to
earlier. But we also saw it long before that in the case of the
NotPetya attack conducted by Russia against Ukraine, but that
spilled worldwide and caused over $10 billion of damages.
So, the government can take action to strengthen its own
systems. We can talk about buying software that is secure by
design and resilient by design. These are things that the
government and today the Administration has talked about
extensively. CISA has put out guidance on secure by design. The
National Cybersecurity Strategy refers to resilience by design
concepts as well.
But it goes beyond simply buying better and more capable
software. It requires our government actors and our government
procurers to be able to procure the leading edge of software
technology to buy from U.S. startups. We have talked for
decades about the need for the U.S. Government to be more
forward leaning and more capable and more flexible when it
comes to buying capabilities.
The challenge, of course, is one of priorities and one of
risk-taking. Our Federal Government officers should not be
risk-taking when it comes to buying foreign software. They
should, however, take risks and lean forward when it comes to
buying American startup software and capabilities as we think
about how to better defend the Nation and cyber domain. That
requires culture change within the executive branch and culture
change within the executive branch's overseers here in
Congress.
Finally, the U.S. Government cannot simply remain on the
defensive. If we are going to really effectively address
threats to our government and industry in the cyber domain, we
have got to go on the offensive. That requires taking the fight
to the enemy. We have done quite a bit of that by leaning
forward on active defense and persistent engagement. We need to
do more. It does not work when our government is unwilling to
lean forward, take the fight to the enemy in any domain, much
as in cyberspace. Deterrence can and does work in the cyber
domain. We just do not practice it.
Thank you for the opportunity to address the Committee, and
I look forward to your questions.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I will now recognize Mr. Waldron for
your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ROGER WALDRON

PRESIDENT

THE COALITION FOR GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT

Mr. Waldron. Good afternoon, Chairwoman Mace, Ranking
Member Connolly, and Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
the opportunity to appear before you to address the Federal
software supply chain. The Coalition for Government Procurement
is a nonprofit, nonpartisan association of firms selling
commercial services and products to Federal Government. Our
members collectively account for more than $145 billion in
mission support for the Federal customer. Our members include
small, medium, and large business concerns from across the
commercial market. They include software, commercial software
firms, cloud providers, system integrators, and IT suppliers.
As such, they are well aware of the challenges involved in
addressing vulnerabilities in the Federal software supply
chain.
The threat for near-peer adversaries and other bad actors
has made cybersecurity and supply chain risk management
fundamental to Federal procurement in the commercial sector.
Recognizing the importance of this matter, there are three
points I would like to make.
First, the government should continue prioritizing buying
commercial solutions where appropriate. The Federal Acquisition
Streamlining Act of 1994 established a preference for the
acquisition of commercial items. This preference reduces risk,
increases competition, improves pricing, provides greater
access to innovation, and it improves security. Commercial
software firms recognize that security failure risks
reputational harm which would translate into loss of business.
For this reason, drawing on their experience across industry
sectors, like healthcare, banking, finance, and energy, they
understand that they must invest in security, and they do so.
Government should capitalize on this expertise.
Second, cybersecurity requirements reporting and other
administrative compliance regimes should not burden commercial
firms unnecessarily. Some requirements are necessary, but
unnecessarily burdensome requirements drive companies out of
the government marketplace, reducing government access to the
innovation and capabilities of the commercial market.
As the Administration's recent draft memo on the Federal
Risk and Authorization Management Program, FedRAMPs stated:
``Unthinking adherence to standard agency practices in a
commercial environment could lead to unexpected or undesirable
security outcomes.''
Some government mandates for certifying commercial products
could create compliance risks when the mandates are not
required outside of the government or are ambiguous. The
government should accept commercial standards whenever
possible, and required certification should focus on what is
being provided actually meets those standards.
Third, and finally, the Federal cybersecurity and software
supply chain framework is in a state of flux and coordination
is needed. There are various pending rules and regulations,
like FedRAMP; first cloud cybersecurity; CMMC, the
Cybersecurity Maturity Model Certification that DOD contractors
are going to have to sign up to; NIST 800-171 is in the process
of being rewritten; software bill of materials. There are
several proposed FAR cybersecurity clauses and more to come.
Section 889, any activities of the Federal Acquisition Security
Council, all of which are in various stages of government
review and/or public comment.
The government has the opportunity here to provide needed
harmonization of these rules and regulations to assure an
efficient and consistently implemented cyber regime.
Coordination could be achieved by further establishing roles
and responsibilities for CISA and for the activities of the
Federal Acquisition Security Council to manage cybersecurity
and supply chain obligations and reporting for Federal
contractors. This will reduce duplication and overlap in the
cybersecurity and software supply chain framework. Such
consistency will assure that all stakeholders understand the
rules of engagement in the government space and will be more
able to easily adjust as those rules evolve to meet the
challenges of a dynamic cyber and supply chain environment.
In closing, Chairwoman Mace, Ranking Member Connolly, and
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today. I look forward to addressing any
questions you might have.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I will now recognize Ms. Bisceglie for
your introductory statement.

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER BISCEGLIE

FOUNDER & CEO

INTEROS, INC.

Ms. Bisceglie. Thank you. And good afternoon, Chairman Mace
and Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me to
testify as a subject matter expert on supply chain risk
management with today's focus on securing the Federal software
supply chain.
My company, Interos, is built on almost 30 years of
personal experience in global supply chain risk management.
Over the past 19 years since I started Interos, I have seen the
discussions turn from a lack of understanding of this issue to
simple compliance and resiliency, and now the product integrity
or software pedigree or SBOM to preempt and protect from
intentional, malicious attack.
To support our customers, Interos began to build out of
what is now the world's largest business relationship graph.
Using artificial intelligence, we are responsible for mapping
and continuously monitoring the business relationships,
business dealings, and supply chains of more than 300 million
businesses around the world and the billions of relationships
between them.
I will first share two of our observations, and then follow
those with four recommendations. First, we believe we are still
struggling with finding a common definition for the supply
chain risk management as well as a standard way to measure the
challenge. And I think you heard that from my peers on the
panel today.
As we tend to separate hardware from software from service
supply chains, we will continue to create artificial silos and
increase the available attack vector for both the intended and
unintended enemy. When in actuality, all we are talking about
is simply who is doing business with each other and what risks
those relationships might entail.
Our second observation is that supply chain risk management
must be viewed as an investment versus an expense. Interos is
the technology of choice for the only true supply chain
mismanagement shared service in the world currently hosted by
the U.S. Navy to help them provide the transparency and
pedigree of what is coming into various offices in the Navy, as
well as the ongoing monitoring of said national security
systems in a proactive and information sharing way. However,
none of this is happening through a federally funded program of
record. We are still handling supply chain security across the
Federal Government as a rob Peter to pay Paul fashion.
We have four recommendations for the Committee to consider
to better protect our Nation's critical infrastructure. First,
awareness in education are critical to communicate that supply
chain risk impacts everyone within the Federal infrastructure
which actually instructs the private sector.
Second, actually fund the programs. Assign someone within
the agency to only issue and measure the success. Even with
reports from GAO, updates to FITARA and FISMA, the various
executive orders, we can point to the prioritization without
alignment or uniform rollouts, which drives up the costs and
makes management as well as effectiveness very difficult.
Third, make automated supply chain security for hardware,
software, and services be the cost of doing business, not only
with the Federal Government, but also between private sector
organizations. How many more examples of the ripple effect of
our business connections and how easily disturbances can be
shared. Everything from NotPetya, to the Target Breach, to
Log4j, Moveit, SolarWinds, not to mention as already been
mentioned today, we are also targets for countries such as
China, Russia, and Iran. Why do we let public and private
sector organizations continue to fund service-based supply or
risk assessments and not leverage technology for continuously
monitoring the problem?
Finally, and simply, implement contractual language that is
effective and will actually be used. In addition, there are
multiple industry associations working on standards for supply
chain mismanagement, such as those in the room today. Doing as
much as possible via internal policy changes and contractual
language as a way to inform suppliers of how to do business
with you and to mitigate risks coming into your organization is
a much less expensive way to approach the problem than
regulation and legislation.
In conclusion, the solution needs to be viewed as an
investment in national security, not just an expense, which
moves us into the offense position, as was just mentioned, and
needs to include upscaling the people responsible for buying
and using software supply chain security requirements, not just
putting the requirement in a contract as wording. It is the use
of the SBOM--to KNOW/PREVENT/FIX, as Google likes to say--will
make the difference for the Federal software supply chain, this
country's security posture, and our global competitiveness.
Thank you for the opportunity to present our views, and I look
forward to answering any questions.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I would now like to recognize myself
for 5 minutes of questioning. I will start with you, Mr.
Jaffer, and good afternoon.
Your written testimony states that for far too long the
U.S. has been taking cyber attacks and hacks on the chin with
limited response. In the cyber domain, we have largely been
unwilling to establish, much less enforce effective red lines.
My first question to you, Mr. Jaffer, this afternoon.
Should this Administration draw a line in the sand to deter
cyber warfare launched from China, Russia, and other enemy
nation states?
Mr. Jaffer. Thanks, Chairwoman. Yes, I absolutely think we
need to make very clear our red lines in the cyber domain. Part
of the challenge that I think that we face in this domain is
that we talk about our concerns, but we do not actually
effective them. We do not talk about what our capabilities are
on the cyber domain. We do not talk about what our red lines
are. We do not talk about what we would do if those red lines
are crossed. And then worst, the world is seeing on the rare
occasion the U.S. established red lines, we do not enforce
them. And that is the real fundamental failure. The reason why
deterrence is not working in the cyber domain, and we keep
getting hit over and over, and our adversaries come at us even
more in a more challenging way is because they are testing our
boundaries. Until we set clear boundaries and enforce them,
this will continue and get worse. That actually makes it more
dangerous----
Ms. Mace. How do we change the behavior?
Mr. Jaffer. Look, I think we have to extract consequences
and costs, and we have to do it in a way that is seen not just
by that threat actor, but by other threat actors as well. That
is the only way we are going to see real deterrence in this
domain. Frankly, it applies across the board, not just in
cyber, but it is more present in cyber than others.
Ms. Mace. Yes. Government purchasers need to take more
risks and being willing to buy from small American startup
companies. As you mentioned before in your testimony, how would
taking those risks help safeguard the software supply chain,
for example?
Mr. Jaffer. Well, you just heard about what Interos does
and the capabilities it brings to bear. This is the kind of
company and other companies like it that have leading-edge
capabilities. Whether it is software supply chain management or
in actual defensive capabilities or, you know, lean forward
offensive capabilities. Until we can really buy the best and
brightest in technology across the board, which is built here
in the United States, it is going to be impossible for the
government to be at the cutting edge. We do not buy it because
we have got these huge programs of record that make it easy for
people to buy from existing contractors and not lean forward.
Ms. Mace. Yes, I agree. Ms. Bisceglie, I have a couple of
questions for you. In your written testimony it states that the
use of the SBOM that will make the difference for the Federal
software supply chain, this country's security posture, and our
global competitiveness. Do you think SBOMs can make software
purchasing safe, the way that nutrition labels let us know if
the food we buy is healthy, for example?
Ms. Bisceglie. Yes, I think it is a great question. I think
it goes back to the implementation. And I think that you just
mentioned the same thing. It is not a compliance activity. And
I think we are so focused in this government, and even in the
private sector often about reputation and brand, and say, hey,
I think I did enough because FITARA, FISMA, FedRAMP, what have
you, they all said I did it, and I checked the box. That is the
problem. When you think about SBOM or a food in an ingredient
list, that is a compliance activity. It is really what is the
red line? What is----
Ms. Mace. Is FITARA outdated?
Ms. Bisceglie. Yes.
Ms. Mace. Yes, very much so. And should we update it and
maybe make it better current with the times and the technology?
Ms. Bisceglie. I think the move to look at something much
more operationally focused and dynamic versus standard based--
--
Ms. Mace. Yes, Congress just wants to do what we always
have done and that is outdated, and that hurts us, correct?
Ms. Bisceglie. I do not think it keeps up with the time
with the best and the brightest.
Ms. Mace. Yes. Thank you. Then your written testimony also
states that Interos has built the world's largest business
relationship graph. We have talked about AI before, and I am
very impressed with what your company is doing with AI and the
supply chain is extremely impressive. But it uses AI to
continuously monitor the supply chains of millions of
businesses around the world and billions of relationships
between them. So, is AI a game-changer for the supply chain
security, how do you see that, and how do we make sure the
government makes use of it?
Ms. Bisceglie. I think automation is a game-changer for
supply chain security. Because supply chains are dynamic, and
they change, and they are uncontrollable. So, we have to
leverage technology and get out of human manual processes in an
effort to make a difference. And AI is definitely the path to
do that.
Ms. Mace. OK. Thank you so much. I have a question for you,
Mr. Lewis, Dr. Lewis. Your testimony says major Chinese
software companies may be placing chunks of code in popular
apps and online services. It says they are in effect invisible,
embedded in a larger American product. So, China could use back
doors into our computer systems so they can spy on us and
disrupt file services. Would you agree?
Dr. Lewis. Unfortunately, they have created back doors in
code and used it.
Ms. Mace. Is it just the code? Is it just software? Are
they also putting software in hardware that we buy? Our
government buys Chinese hardware, don't they?
Dr. Lewis. They are a full-service intelligence operation.
But they have already used, in two cases, this kind of
software.
Ms. Mace. But I cannot understand why we buy Chinese tech
products for government agencies. It is mind-boggling to me.
All right. With that, I will yield back. And I see my
colleague, Mr. Connolly, my friend from Virginia, I would like
to recognize you.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I am
sorry I am late. We had a markup at Foreign Affairs, and
Foreign Affairs is still under construction, so we are meeting
in the big room in the visitor center. So, we had recorded
votes I had to make. So, I am so sorry.
Madam Chair, if it is more convenient for you, I can wait
on the opening statement. Whatever you wish.
Ms. Mace. Do you want to make your opening in closing?
Mr. Connolly. Yes, if that works. OK. Great. So, I will
start my questioning. Thank you so much.
Mr. Jaffer, you are a cybersecurity expert and Executive
Director of the National Security Institute at the Antonin
Scalia School of Law.
Mr. Jaffer. At George Mason University in your district.
Mr. Connolly. Also known as ASS Law. Would you agree that
adopting zero trust security model is important to supply chain
risk management?
Mr. Jaffer. Absolutely. Zero trust is a critical capability
that we need to apply across the software supply chain and more
generally across the government networks. That being said, it
is not a silver bullet. Zero trust can be applied in a million
different ways. You have got to do it. You have got to do it
right. And, frankly, you have got to buy more secure software
at the outset. And we have got to really hold the threat actors
that are coming at us accountable. Today they can exploit U.S.
Government systems with virtual impunity and pay almost no cost
and certainly no public cost. That comes at a price as well.
Mr. Connolly. How about continuous monitoring and automated
response and conducting regular security training for
employees?
Mr. Jaffer. Well, you have hit on something that I am a big
fan of. I believe continuous monitoring is critical. The idea
that we do not continuously monitor out networks or employees
is crazy given that we have complete authority to do so today.
And security training is critical. But it has got to be, again,
as Ms. Bisceglie said, it cannot be check-the-box training. It
has got to be actually consistent, capable, and the like.
Mr. Connolly. Right. Because you got to remember what the
goal is. It is not training. It is to prevent bad things from
happening.
Mr. Jaffer. Exactly. Good point.
Mr. Connolly. Do you think it would be worthwhile for
Congress to conduct oversight in how agencies are doing in each
of these categories we just discussed?
Mr. Jaffer. Of course.
Mr. Connolly. Ah. So, you are aware of the fact that the
FITARA scorecard and our bipartisan FISMA metric in fact,
already does that.
Mr. Jaffer. I am.
Mr. Connolly. Should we do more of it?
Mr. Jaffer. I think, as Ms. Bisceglie said, you can do more
of it better, I would say. It needs to be smarter, more
flexible, more capable. The problem is, say, FITARA is a check-
the-box exercise, right? It is a bunch of rules. You have got
to go through it. Everything you buy, or a lot of stuff you buy
has got to be purchased through FITARA and reviewed. The
problem is it does not really do the job effectively. So,
scorecards are great, but they have to be flexible and good.
And they have got to also allow you to buy highly capable
moderate software.
Mr. Connolly. Have you worked in the Federal Government,
Mr. Jaffer?
Mr. Jaffer. I have, unfortunately.
Mr. Connolly. I think you understand we have to get basics
first.
Mr. Jaffer. Agreed.
Mr. Connolly. And the fact of the matter is that scorecard
says $30 billion according to the GAO. I challenge anyone to
find another Federal piece of legislation that has effectuated
government savings of $30 billion.
Mr. Jaffer. Congressman, I am--saving government money and
our taxpayer dollars is 100 percent the right thing, but we
also want good security. And we want to buy modern capable
software products.
Mr. Connolly. Exactly. That is the goal, Mr. Jaffer.
Mr. Jaffer. Agreed.
Mr. Connolly. We need to retire legacy systems. We need to
make sure we are up in the 21st century. We need to make sure
everything can be encrypted and protected on behalf of the
American taxpayer. And I think that is the goal.
Mr. Jaffer. Totally.
Mr. Connolly. Ms. Bisceglie--have I pronounced that
correctly?
Ms. Bisceglie. Yes, Bisceglie.
Mr. Connolly. Ms. Bisceglie, why is it important that cloud
service providers meet certain privacy controls, like
identifying and enumerating system vendors?
Ms. Bisceglie. Oh, I think, again, it creates a red line or
a base that we all have to adhere to. And I think it is a
start. I think it is an education. And I think it gives us some
level of protection, but it does not keep you away from the
conversation you were just having with Mr. Jaffer, which
continuous monitoring in a dynamic environment is where we need
to live.
Mr. Connolly. Right. And what about developing and
enforcing risk management plans for supply chains and
establishing risk management teams for those supply chains.
Ms. Bisceglie. I could not agree more. And I think under
several administrations ago, you started seeing teams being set
up. What I shared in my testimony is that none of this is
funded. And that is a problem.
Mr. Connolly. Yes. So, we passed a bill in the last
Congress finally authorizing FedRAMP. And FedRAMP, in fact,
enforces those cybersecurity measures. Are you familiar with
those provisions?
Ms. Bisceglie. Yes. I am going through it right now.
Mr. Connolly. Good.
Ms. Bisceglie. I also think, though, again, that the
compliance activity, I think it is a good baseline. It is not
risk management.
Mr. Connolly. Yes.
Ms. Bisceglie. And you brought up a really good point a few
minutes ago. We have to remember the enemy we are fighting
against, which is not ourselves, it is not the FAR. And
necessarily, saving money could be at odds with security.
Mr. Connolly. Yes, that is true.
Ms. Bisceglie. You know, we need to remember that.
Mr. Connolly. And it is absolutely true. And I think Mr.
Jaffer was getting at the same point. You want to measure the
right things.
Ms. Bisceglie. Correct.
Mr. Connolly. And the right things we want are efficacious
outcomes. So, training and awareness is a means to that end. It
cannot be the end in and of itself. And I think previously we
have written legislation that unwittingly rewarded the wrong
metric. And so, we would have testimony from Federal agencies
coming here saying 95 percent of our staff can be trained and
made aware. And you think, OK, but are hacks more successful or
less? Are there more of them or fewer? And, of course, that was
a different question and a different answer. So, I could not
agree with you more. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I will now recognize Mr. Timmons of
South Carolina for 5 minutes.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Mr. Jaffer, you
talked about holding foreign adversaries, foreign actors
accountable, creating a policy that would create an avenue for
retribution or accountability, whatever you want to call it. I
very much agree with you. I think we have a big problem right
now because if a foreign adversary, a government fired a rocket
and blew up a building, we would make the business that owned
the building whole and then we would go to war. But if that
same foreign adversary does a cyber-attack and cost that
business hundreds of millions of dollars, their insurance is
not going to pay for it because it is foreign government, and
we are not going to do anything. So that is a problem.
So, the question then comes what do we do? And I mean I
think that the Federal Government needs to take the position
that if a foreign government engages in a cyber-attack on a
U.S. business or a U.S. entity, that they will then make the
business--the government, the Federal Government, the U.S.
Government will make that business whole, and then using
whatever mechanisms we want, get the money or get retribution
from the attacking country. Do you agree with that general
premise?
Mr. Jaffer. Look, I think as a general matter we have got
to hold foreign nation state actors that come after us, whether
it is our companies, our critical infrastructure, our
government, accountable. We do not do enough of that today,
right? That could be done in a variety of ways. It can be we
prosecute them. The Justice Department have indicted dozens of
Chinese state actors, dozens of Russian state actors. We are
never going to get them into U.S. courts, right, but it sends a
message.
The real question, though, is how do you hold them
accountable in the cyber domain or in other domains where they
actually feel the pain. And today, nobody that comes after us,
particularly the big nation states, feel any pain when they
come after U.S. Government. Rarely the President might go to Xi
Jinping and say, I have got a problem in these sectors, right?
But by and large, we do not do that, and then we do not
actually extract costs. That is the key in my mind.
Mr. Timmons. Assuming--let us just move the conversation of
attribution. Let us just say that everybody agrees that it was
China.
Mr. Jaffer. Right.
Mr. Timmons. I mean, why would we not use economic
sanctions to say: The cyber-attack costs this much. We paid
that. We are going to do economic sanctions to address this.
And if you do it again, we are going to multiply it by two.
And, by the way, any other country in the world, if you do it,
you are going to start out with a dollar for dollar, and then
we are going to do two dollars for one dollar.
Mr. Jaffer. Exactly. If we could extract that kind of cost
and make it really cost them, they are going to think twice
about using it. They might still do it at times, but it is
going to reduce the overall amount of these things happening by
a significant portion.
Mr. Timmons. How do you then reconcile the issue where a
lot of the cyber-attacks are coming from Eastern European,
Southeast Asian countries that have limited rule of law, and
the countries are not necessarily able to hold the people
accountable? I mean, I guess, in my mind, in that scenario you
say that this person at this address attacked us, and it cost
us this amount. We will give you assistance to prosecute these
people, to hold them to account. And if you want to let us help
you do that, we will not charge you any money. We will then
prosecute that person. But if you do not want to help us, if
you do not want to address the lawlessness in your country that
is adversely impacting our citizens, our economy, then we will
extract dollar for dollar from you. And if they do it again, we
will do the same thing, two for one.
Mr. Jaffer. Three quick thoughts on that. One, it cannot
just be an economic penalty. There has got to be other
consequences as well. Economic penalties are good, we need to
do more on that front.
No. 2, you know as a former prosecutor and a member of the
Air National Guard, right, we can encounter in the terrorism
scenario, right? Where countries cannot control their own
space, and it causes an impact. We say we are going to
unilaterally take action. You cannot just say it is not my
problem, right?
Then, third, I think at the end of the day, what this
really requires is the U.S. Government being clear about what
policies are, where our lines are, and what we are going to do.
And then when those things happen, we have to take action. We
have gotten too used to setting red lines or not setting them
at all because we are afraid of enforcing anything.
Mr. Timmons. I definitely agree with you on that. Are you
aware of any cyber-attack that has resulted in a loss of life.
Mr. Jaffer. So, you know we have seen a lot of these
ransomware attacks. There are a couple going on actually today,
where hospitals were affected. We have heard that at least in
one or two instances people have not made it to the hospital or
may have suffered a heart attack or died as a result. Beyond
that, right, we know that typically in the military context,
cyber is used as an enabling capability and can enable attacks
will actually have a real loss of life. So, the trillions of
dollars our economy has lost is also huge and cannot be
underestimated as a cost as well.
Mr. Timmons. My biggest fear is it is going to require a
huge loss of life such as a cyber-attack on critical
infrastructure in the Northeast during a cold spell, where we
are unable to heat our homes for millions of Americans. We
would be unable do anything to address that. So, I think that
Congress needs to act to increase the overall cybersecurity
posture of the U.S. economy and the U.S. Government. And I look
forward to working with you all in that endeavor. With that, I
yield back.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. I will now recognize Mr. Lynch for 5
minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, Ranking
Member, as well, for putting together such a great panel. We
are all aware of the Log4j mess that occurred back in 2020. And
because of the omnipresence of that software on millions and
millions of computers, it has taken us a long time to get the
patches out there and to deal with that. And now there was a
two or 3 weeks ago, we had a North Korean--a similar operation
where a North Korean connected attackers injected, again,
malicious code into a widely distributed software component in
multiple applications, and we are at this again.
So, how do we address this in a timely way so that our
response is actually effective? Because, Ms. Bisceglie, this is
only going to become more common, right? This is an activity
that is--especially with the success they are having, right?
There is no reason for them not to continue to do this for
either--I think Norton Korea is doing it to raise revenue, but
they are also doing it to get information as well.
Ms. Bisceglie. I think the thing to realize is that a lot
of the success is being enabled simply because technology
connects us all. And if we can think about what came out of
pandemic and realize that whether you are a physical supply
chain or a digital or cyber supply chain, we are just hyper
connected to everybody else. And so, the enablement is there. I
think it is the reasons that folks are doing this that need to
be considered. And I think a couple things I would like to
point out, though. One, to your point, it is not going away.
So, if you think about the fight that we have been having for
the last 10-plus years just simply on cyber hygiene, supply
chain risk hygiene needs to be leveled up. And I think the
Ranking Member brought up a really good point. It cannot be
training and awareness for the sake of training and awareness.
But folks have realized what supply chain security is about and
why they are doing it and what they are trying to protect. It
is not just nation states that are trying to get us, it is
bored 18-year-olds sitting in their parents' basements that are
seeing what they can steal, and we have seen a lot of examples
from that.
Mr. Lynch. So, what is the Navy doing that others are not
doing, and is that--can we replicate that across the
governmentwide?
Ms. Bisceglie. We absolutely can. And the contract, and the
program is set up to do that. And I want to thank a lot of the
Committee Members here for supporting it. If you think about
how we, as a Federal Government, are funded, we are normally
funded program by program. So, the Columbia class versus the
Virginia class versus the F-35, they only look at their own
discreet supply chains. And this is the very first funded
program that looks across supply chains. And so, if I were to
get very specific, we had the opportunity to support the Navy
for 6 years before the Navy actually went to an enterprise-wide
capability. We took 80 weapons programs and just leveraged our
technology to map out 3 tiers. So prime, tier 2, and tier 3,
60,000 suppliers. You can imagine how many times the same
supplier was in multiple places.
So, when SolarWinds happened, we were able to show them the
ripple effect of which programs are going to be affected. It
showed, for the first time, cross program funding and the power
of resiliency. That is what the Navy has done. And the last
Fiscal Year that we just finished, they actually extended the
capability to the Missile Defense Agency and the DOD CIO cyber
capability. So, they are already seeing cross agency success,
not just cross program, and it is absolutely set up to look
across the entire department.
Mr. Lynch. So, the efficacy of continuous monitoring, would
it be possible--I mean, is that what the Navy is employing in
order to----
Ms. Bisceglie. Absolutely.
Mr. Lynch [continuing]. Now that they are doing it across
several supply chains?
Ms. Bisceglie. They are. They are a hundred percent
continuous monitoring real time.
Mr. Lynch. And they are using AI to do that?
Ms. Bisceglie. They are.
Mr. Lynch. OK.
Ms. Bisceglie. So, you think about what happens should ACME
Incorporated have a ransomware attack. Instead of every program
having to do the research to figure out if they are going to be
impacted, the artificial intelligence platform is able to
actually alert them and tell them where the impact is coming
from. It allows them to be responsive that much faster, which
goes back to your original question, which is how do we get
better at this?
Mr. Lynch. In our contracting world, we have preferred
customers, preferred firms that we deal with. So, we could
basically say, in order to be a preferred customer, you have to
have this protocol or this framework that is in compliance with
our supply chain security. And like--I think you mentioned it
earlier in your testimony, you said make it a cost of doing
business, right? So, when a company comes to do business with
the United States as a contractor, they have to have this in
place. How disruptive would that be to our contracting process?
Ms. Bisceglie. A lot less disruptive than when something
goes wrong.
Mr. Lynch. Fair enough. Fair enough. Yes.
Dr. Lewis, anything else you would like to add to that?
Dr. Lewis. A couple points that are probably worth the
Committee looking at further. I only talked to a retired
admiral, so maybe they do not know what they are doing. But I
do not think anybody would rank the Navy in first place when it
comes to cybersecurity. Something to look at. Second, there has
been a long discussion for about a decade on the issue of
accountability, and this Administration is doing OK on it,
better than some of its predecessors, and that goes back to
Clinton.
But we are not ready to get into a game of whack-a-mole
where a Chinese company hacked somebody, and then we do
something back. Because that is not going to stop them. So, we
do need a more comprehensive approach. Just these are topics
you might want to look at because they have been discussed for
a long time. There is, just recently, the Administration had
something called the counter ransomware initiative that had 48
countries, and it talked about these issues. How do we go back
to people? And one thing to remember is other countries are not
where the U.S. is. They are not ready to go to war over a
cyber-attack. So, it is a complicated picture. Supply chain is
part of it, but just part.
Mr. Lynch. Madam Chair, thanks for your courtesy. I
appreciate that. I yield back.
Ms. Mace. Generosity. Mr. Langworthy, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Langworthy. Thank you, Madam Chair. Each year Federal
agencies spend more than a hundred billion dollars on IT and
cyber-related investments. It is not always clear, however,
that the source and providence of each technology component.
This is especially true for software. In Executive Order 14028
entitled, ``Improving Our Nation's Cybersecurity'', the
National Institute for Standards and Technology was required to
issue guidance regarding how vendors provide Federal purchasers
a software bill of materials, SBOM, essentially an ingredient
list for software that details every component, library, and
module that makes up the product.
Mr. Waldron, do you believe Executive Order 14028 is
heading in the right direction? Do you believe that the Federal
Government is considering implementing SBOM guidance or
requirements?
Mr. Waldron. Yes, it is the right direction. The question
is the execution on the contracting side. In looking at
developing some standard formats. The issue in Federal
procurement is the Federal acquisition regulation, agencies
have all kinds of supplemental regulations. When you start
developing an SBOM and a format, you have got to talk to
industry. You have got to sit down with industry, come up with
a common nomenclature, understanding what is going to--actually
what is actually going to be reported as part of those
ingredients.
Companies take this really seriously. It is a certification
in a certain sense. When you submit that to the Federal
Government, you are saying this is our software bill of
materials, and the government is going to rely on that. And it
creates compliance issues and risks for industry, too. So, they
want to get it right. So, the more government and industry can
talk about it to implement it more effectively, that is going
to be critically important moving forward.
Mr. Langworthy. And I must say that SBOM sounds a lot
cooler than S-B-O-M. Appreciate that nomenclature. Shifting
focus to you, Mr. Jaffer, could SBOMs offer a viable solution
for securing the Federal software supply chain?
And additionally, what are some of the concerns or
drawbacks associated with SBOMs as a potential solution?
Mr. Jaffer. Well, a couple of things. One, SBOMs can
certainly help, but only if you use them for a good purpose,
right? So, once you know what is in the software, people have
to do something about it. And they have to actually design
their software in a way that is secure and resilient inherently
and holding people accountable for that rather than sort of
what is in your soup. What makes the soup good is important.
The second thing is, look, by exposing everything that is
in a bill of materials, right, in the software, it also gives
our adversaries information about what to go after. So, there
are upsides and downsides. Net/net, I think SBOMs are
worthwhile doing, but I agree with what Mr. Waldron said, you
have got to do it in a smart way, in a way that is capable, and
use it for actually useful purposes.
Mr. Langworthy. Great. Code is changed regularly, so an
SBOM that is accurate 1 day may be wrong the next day or even
later that day. Are there any solutions to making this process
easier for developers, especially small business developers who
do not have the resources that the big companies and
conglomerates do that have maybe--they have turned away by
SBOMs because of the work requirement to maintain them?
Mr. Jaffer. Use technology. You can imagine these things
being updated in real time, but of course we are a government
that is not, sort of, oriented to operate in that way. We are
oriented to operate by stacks of paper. As Mr. Connolly was
talking about, right, this is not a common thing. If we can
have people update in real time. You know, I mean, look, you
can get code in real time on GitHub. Why cannot we use a
similar capability to update our SBOMs? It seems obvious. But
the government is not good at buying new capable technology at
a moment's notice, taking risks--we do not incentivize risk
taking, even when it comes to buying American technology, that
is crazy.
Mr. Langworthy. So, do you believe AI will impact the SBOM
landscape?
Mr. Jaffer. No doubt it will. It could make it better. It
could make it more challenging. At the same time, we just have
to encourage our government and our government procurers to do
things that are unusual and not just buying programs of record,
buying capabilities, having money to do that. And when they do
it, and they do not get it quite right, Congress will hold them
accountable, but not punish them. Ultimately, you cannot
incentivize risk if you are going to punish somebody for taking
risks.
Mr. Langworthy. Would the existence of SBOMs have helped
Federal agencies defend or mitigate against the recent high-
profile attacks such as SolarWinds.
Mr. Jaffer. It would have let us know what is in there, but
stop them, no.
Mr. Langworthy. OK. Well, every passing day brings a surge
in both the quality, the quantity, and severity of
cybersecurity threats facing our country. In the traditional
notion of invulnerability, it no longer holds true, as threats
now transcend physical borders originated from adversaries
working remotely. We are committed to collaborating with the
Oversight Committee and our colleagues to continuously advocate
for robust policies that fortify our Federal cybersecurity
defenses in response to this evolving threat landscape.
I really appreciate all of you coming in here to testify
today. It is very helpful. Thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. Mace. Thank you. In closing, I want to thank our
panelists, all of you for being here this afternoon and
spending time with us, for your testimony today. And I will
yield to the Ranking Member for a statement.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much, Madam Chairwoman. I will
enter my full statement into the record. And just this last
Thanksgiving week and this last weekend, Microsoft reported
that a North Korean nation state actor linked to a notorious
cyber-crime group, Lazarus, stole a software sign-in key and
inserted malware into a legitimate application developed by the
Taiwanese multimedia software and AI developer, CyberLink. The
malware, known as landload, infiltrates systems by dropping a
fake PNG file to deploy malicious code. That code enables
unauthorized users to steal sensitive data, establish
persistent access to traditionally protected systems, and
corrupt other connected systems. Hackers used landload to
successfully compromise a hundred devices in multiple
countries, including Japan, Taiwan, Canada, and the United
States. The fullest extent of that attack and its damage we do
not know yet. It is a week old.
And that, on top of SolarWinds, on top of all kinds of
other examples we do not even know about, I think, underscores
the point that we have got to protect the Nation's assets--
supply chain, proprietary information, intellectual property,
data bases, privacy.
And I guess I would come back, Mr. Jaffer, I think you made
a lot of good points, but I also would gently suggest, you are
a little facile about checking the box when it comes to
statutory requirements. Because--and that is why I asked you if
you had worked for the Federal Government. Because, working for
the Federal Government, you know, normal assumptions on how we
work in the private sector do not apply.
Ms. Bisceglie pointed out, if you look at weapons systems,
we are all in our compartments, and we do not share. We do not
work across the board. It is not our culture. If I have learned
in my agency how to protect against cyber-attacks, that does
not mean I am going to let you in on the secret.
So, trying to change the culture by having metrics where
you are going to be judged and metrics that will materially
improve operations and save tax dollars and allow us to be
cyber secure is kind of our goal. But you have got to create
the architecture. And I have learned the hard way that in
bureaucracies, you have got to create metrics people have to
meet. And they have got to be meaningful metrics, right, as we
discussed.
And, you know, when we began FITARA, there were 250 people
in 24 agencies with the title CIO. But who was in charge?
Nobody. Everyone could assume responsibility under that system.
So, trying to empower a CIO, a primary, Latin primus inter
pares, the first among equals, so that there is somebody, and
that somebody, according to our scorecard, has to report to the
boss.
Because, again, we know org charts matter. Likewise, data
centers, not checking a box. We retired 4,000 Federal data
centers. We did not even know how many there were when we
began. We thought there were only 900. You remember? Vivek
Chudgar thought there were 900. We cut it in half. Well, it
turned out there were thousands. And we only knew that when we
made them have to measure it. We eliminated 4,000 of them
saving billions of dollars.
So, I just, you know, we got to be respectful, I think, of
the statutory architecture required if we are going to make
progress. And next steps, we got to go after those legacy
systems. We got to make sure that we are using software and
supply chains that can be protected from a cyber point of view,
so that we are avoiding what Microsoft reported just last
weekend.
So, on that note, thank you. I think this is a thoughtful
subject, Madam Chairwoman, thank you for doing it, but I think
we have a lot more progress to go. And we cannot assume the
basics are in place. I wish we could, but we cannot. Thank you
for being here.
Ms. Mace. And I will add to that if our Federal agencies
are unwilling to make those changes because they are kings
around their own kingdoms, not willing to move forward, it will
never happen.
So, with that and without objection, all Members will have
five legislative days within which to submit materials, and to
submit additional written questions for the witnesses which
will be forwarded to the witnesses for their response.
So, if there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:19 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
