- HEALTH CARE ISSUES INVOLVING THE CENTER FOR CONSUMER INFORMATION AND INSURANCE OVERSIGHT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HEALTH CARE ISSUES INVOLVING THE CENTER FOR CONSUMER INFORMATION AND
INSURANCE OVERSIGHT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

----------

FEBRUARY 16, 2011

----------

Serial No. 112-7

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

HEALTH CARE ISSUES INVOLVING THE CENTER FOR CONSUMER INFORMATION AND
INSURANCE OVERSIGHT

HEALTH CARE ISSUES INVOLVING THE CENTER FOR CONSUMER INFORMATION AND
INSURANCE OVERSIGHT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 16, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-7

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-977                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE MYRICK, North Carolina           GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chair                         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANE HARMAN, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN BILBRAY, California            JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLIE BASS, New Hampshire          TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
BOB LATTA, Ohio                      JIM MATHESON, Utah
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

(ii)
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

CLIFF STEARNS, Florida
Chairman
SUE MYRICK, North Carolina           DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee            Ranking Member
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
BRIAN BILBRAY, California            GENE GREEN, Texas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia                officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Cliff Stearns, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Florida, opening statement..................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Cory Gardner, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Colorado, prepared statement...................................    10
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado, opening statement.................................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    77
Hon. John D. Dingell, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Michigan, prepared statement................................    78

Witnesses

Steve Larsen, Deputy Administrator and Director, Center for
Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight, Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services, Department of Health and Human
Services.......................................................    14
Prepared statement...........................................    17
Jay Angoff, Senior Advisor, Office of the Secretary, Department
of Health and Human Services...................................    26
Prepared statement \1\.......................................

Submitted Material

Letter of February 15, 2011 from the American Heart Association,
submitted by Mr. Waxman........................................    80
Letter of February 15, 2011 from the the American Cancer Society,
submitted by Ms. DeGette.......................................    81
Subcommittee exhibit binder......................................    83
Letter of support from the Hemophilia Federation of America,
submitted by Mr. Stearns.......................................   332

----------
\1\ Mr. Angoff did not submit a prepared statement.

HEALTH CARE ISSUES INVOLVING THE CENTER FOR CONSUMER INFORMATION AND
INSURANCE OVERSIGHT

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 16, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:30 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Cliff
Stearns (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Stearns, Sullivan, Murphy,
Burgess, Blackburn, Myrick, Gingrey, Scalise, Gardner,
Griffith, Barton, DeGette, Schakowsky, Weiner, Green, Dingell,
and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Caroline Basile, Staff Assistant; Mike
Bloomquist, Deputy General Counsel; Allison Busbee, Legislative
Clerk; Karen Christian, Counsel, Oversight; Stacy Cline,
Counsel, Oversight; Howard Cohen, Chief Health Counsel; Julie
Goon, Health Policy Advisor; Todd Harrison, Chief Counsel,
Oversight/Investigations; Sean Hayes, Counsel, Oversight/
Investigation; Ruth Saunders, Detailee, ICE; Alan Slobodin,
Deputy Chief Counsel, Oversight; Sam Spector, Counsel,
Oversight; John Stone, Associate Counsel; Tim Torres, Deputy IT
Director; Lyn Walker, Coordinator, Administration/Health
Resources.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CLIFF STEARNS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mr. Stearns. We convene this hearing of the subcommittee on
Oversight and Investigation today to gather information on the
entity responsible for overseeing the Administration's changes
to the private insurance market, the Center for Consumer
Information and Insurance Oversight.
It has been nearly a year since the health care law was
enacted, and this is the first hearing this subcommittee has
had since passage of the law devoted exclusively to its
effects. This Center is responsible for the massive changes
being made by the Administration to the private insurance
market. It is responsible for new insurance market rules, the
temporary high-risk pools, new medical loss ratio rules, and
will assist States in implementing the massive new regulatory
burdens imposed by the Administration.
Our witnesses today are a former Director of the Center and
the current one, Mr. Jay Angoff, who ran the office from its
inception after the passage of the bill until earlier this
year. We know very little about the creation of this office,
and I hope this hearing this morning will finally shine some
light on how this office was, in fact, created, how it is
simply organized, and why it is recently moved from HHS to CMS
on literally, literally the day the Republicans took the
majority in the 112th Congress. Just a coincidence I am sure.
We also know little about how this office is funded. Is it
paid for out of the Health Care Law that was signed last year?
Is HHS taking money from another program? So we know very
little, and what we do know has not made a favorable impression
on us, perhaps because we don't understand.
Last year the New York Times reported, ``In Bethesda,
Maryland, more than 200 health regulators working on
complicated insurance rules have taken over three floors of a
suburban office building, paying almost double the market rate
for the space in their rush to get started.'' So I hope the
Administration and its regulators are better at writing
regulations than perhaps writing leases.
Our other witness is Mr. Steve Larsen. Mr. Larsen was
recently promoted to Director of the Center and had previously
served in the Center's Office of Oversight, the office that was
responsible for granting waivers from the Obama
Administration's Health Care. I think it is an understatement
to say that these waivers have been controversial.
The Administration's Health Care Plan was sold as all
benefit and no downside, so when the public began hearing that
while they would have to comply with all the new regulations
and costs while other individuals would get waivers from the
Administration and thus not have to comply and bear the same
burdens, obviously they weren't happy. After all, they were
promised that if they like their coverage, they could keep it.
We heard this mantra over and over again. If you like your
coverage, you can keep it.
They were promised lower premiums. They were promised lower
costs, so simply what did they get? Lost coverage, higher
premiums, and higher costs in our opinion, and when the
damaging effects of the Administration's Health Care Plan got
so bad that people were starting to notice, then it was time
for waivers. The promises made by supporters of the law just
simply have not come true.
The Chief Actuary for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services recently testified that the law will likely not hold
down costs. He went on to say that not everyone will be able to
keep their coverage, even if they like it. Meanwhile, the
adverse effects of the law on the private sector have been
undeniable. Companies are considering dropping coverage,
insurers are opting to exit from the market, and consumers are
left with fewer options, in fact. And of those options
available the premiums continue to rise thanks to the costly
mandates and regulations in Obamacare.
It certainly doesn't get any better when you look at how
the government is handling this Health Care Bill. Last month
this subcommittee's hearing on the need for regulatory reform
highlighted how numerous regulations in the Health Care Bill
have been issued without even public comment. If an idea is
controversial and lacks popular support, like end-of-life
counseling, for example, then it simply sneaks into the
regulations in the hope that nobody will notice. No comment
period. Just happens to appear.
So today, my colleagues, we will hear testimony about why
so many companies and insurers need to be excluded, given
waivers from this great Health Care Bill that the
Administration has touted. Ironically, considering that if you
listened to the Administration for the last 2 years, you would
wonder why anyone would ever need to be protected from this
law, yet today we have learned that over two and a half million
people have been exempted from the Administration's Health Care
Plan through these waivers. Two and a half million people need
to literally, literally be protected from the devastating
effects of the Health Care Bill the Administration has passed.
Yes, protected.
Under the very standards determining whether a waiver will
be granted, a company or insurer needs to show that unless a
waiver was granted, beneficiaries were either going to face
significant premium increases or a significant reduction in
access to benefits. So we will hear today that these waivers
are necessary because the plans they affect offer little
coverage. We will likely hear at length today that the reason
it is OK to give out these waivers is because in 2014, the
exchanges will finally provide low-cost, quality health care,
yet nearly every promise made about Obamacare has been broken.
During the debate on health care our party offered many
solutions to expand access to health care services without
raising costs or bankrupting the country. They were not passed.
They were ignored. So I am hopeful today that we begin to
examine the effects of the Administration's Health Care Bill.
Americans from both parties will begin to see the value in our
ideas, ideas that rely on commonsense and free-market solutions
and perhaps not on decisions that are made by the federal
bureaucracy.
I am very interested in the testimony we will hear today,
because this Center is responsible for many of the changes in
the Administration's Health Care Bill that it makes to the
private insurance market, and I hope our witnesses will shine
some light on the reasons for these changes. I know this is a
busy season for them, so I appreciate them coming up here
especially with the budget process and the budget being
released this week. So I thank them sincerely for their time.
Today marks the beginning of what the public voted for in
2010, real and sustained oversight of the federal takeover of
the health care industry, and with that I recognize
distinguished colleague, Ms. DeGette.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stearns follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Cliff Stearns

We convene this hearing of the Subcommittee on Oversight
and Investigations today to gather information on the entity
responsible for overseeing the Administration's changes to the
private insurance market--The Center for Consumer Information
and Insurance Oversight. It has been nearly a year since the
health care law was enacted, and this is the first hearing this
subcommittee has had since passage of the law devoted
exclusively to its effects.
This Center is responsible for the massive changes being
made by Obamacare to the private insurance market. It is
responsible for new insurance market rules, the temporary high
risk pools, new medical loss ratio rules, and will assist
states in implementing the massive new regulatory burdens
imposed by Obamacare. Our witnesses today are the former
Director of the Center and the current one--Mr. Jay Angoff ran
the office from its inception after the passage of Obamacare
until earlier this year. We know very little about the creation
of this office, and I hope this hearing will finally shine some
light on how this office was created, how it is organized, and
why it was moved from HHS to CMS on literally the day
Republicans took the majority in the 112th Congress.
We also know little about how this office is funded--is it
paid for out of the health care law signed last year? Is HHS
taking money from another program? We know very little, and
what we do know has not made a good impression. Last year the
New York Times reported: ``In Bethesda, Maryland, more than 200
health regulators working on complicated insurance rules have
taken over three floors of a suburban office building, paying
almost double the market rate for the space in their rush to
get started.'' I hope Obamacare's regulators are better at
writing regulations than writing leases.
Our other witness is Mr. Steve Larsen, Mr. Larsen was
recently promoted to Director of the Center, and had previously
served in the Center's Office of Oversight--the office that was
responsible for granting waivers from Obamacare.
I think it is an understatement to say that these waivers
have been controversial. Obamacare was sold as all benefit--no
downside. So when the public began hearing that while they
would have to comply with all of the new regulations and costs,
while other individuals would get waivers from the
Administration and thus not have to comply and bear the same
burdens, they weren't happy.
After all, they were promised that if they like their
coverage, they could keep it. They were promised lower
premiums. They were promised lower costs. What did they get?
Lost coverage. Higher premiums. Higher costs. And when the
damaging effects of Obamacare got so bad that people were
starting to notice? Then it was time for waivers.
The promises made by supporters of the law have not come
true. The Chief Actuary for the Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Services recently testified that the law will likely
not hold down costs. He went on to say that not everyone will
be able to keep their coverage, even if they like it.
Meanwhile, the adverse effects of the law on the private sector
have been undeniable: companies are considering dropping
coverage, insurers are opting to exit from the market, and
consumers are left with fewer options--and of those options
available, the premiums continue to rise, thanks to the costly
mandates and regulations in Obamacare.
It certainly doesn't get any better when you look at how
the government is handling Obamacare. Last month this
subcommittee's hearing on the need for regulatory reform
highlighted how numerous regulations in Obamacare have been
issued without public comment. If an idea is controversial and
lacks popular support, like end of life counseling, then it is
simply snuck into a regulation in the hope that nobody will
notice.
Today we will hear testimony about why so many companies
and insurers need to be excluded from the effects of
Obamacare--ironic, considering that if you listened to the
Administration for the last 2 years you'd wonder why anyone
would ever need to be protected from this law--yet today we
learn that 2.5 million people have been exempted from Obamacare
through these waivers. 2.5 million people need to literally be
protected from the devastating effects of Obamacare.
Yes, protected. Under the very standards determining
whether a waiver will be granted, a company or insurer needed
to show that unless a waiver was granted, beneficiaries were
either going to face a ``significant'' premium increase or a
``significant'' reduction in access to benefits.
We will hear today that these waivers are necessary because
the plans they affect offer little coverage. We will likely
hear at length today that the reason it is ok to give out these
waivers is because in 2014, the exchanges will finally provide
low cost, quality health care. Yet, nearly every promise made
about Obamacare has been broken.
During the debate on health care, our party offered many
solutions to expand access to health care services without
raising costs or bankrupting the country. We were ignored then.
I am hopeful that as we begin to examine the terrible effects
of Obamacare, Americans from all parties will begin to see the
value in our ideas--ideas that rely on commonsense and free
market solutions, not on decisions made by the federal
bureaucracy.
I am very interested in the testimony we will hear today
because this Center is responsible for many of the changes
Obamacare makes to the private insurance market, and I hope our
witnesses will shine some light on the reason for those
changes.
I know that this is a busy season for them, especially with
the budget being released this week, and I thank them for their
time.
Today marks the beginning of what the public voted for in
2010: real and sustained oversight of the federal takeover of
the healthcare industry.
I recognize, with pleasure, the Ranking Member, Ms.
DeGette.

Ms. DeGette. Mr. Chairman, out of deference to the two
hearings this morning, I am going to defer to the ranking
member to make his opening statement first.
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Waxman is recognized.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much. I am a strong believer in
effective oversight. It is essential to assure that the laws
passed by Congress are implemented in the most effective and
efficient way possible, and that is why I support oversight of
the Affordable Care Act.
The Health Reform Law passed by Congress, signed into law
by President Obama last year, provides tremendous benefits.
Insurers are banned from discriminating against children with
pre-existing conditions. Seniors are already benefiting from
lower drug prices. Small businesses are getting tax cuts to pay
for health insurance. The law has benefits for all Americans,
and we ought to be doing what we can to make sure the
Administration is implementing the law appropriately.
But I am concerned, Mr. Chairman, that this committee is
using oversight as another means of blocking the implementation
of the law. Over the last few weeks the committee issued a
broad document request to the Department of Health and Human
Services that require massive document searches for no apparent
purpose. Already HHS has provided over 50,000 pages of
documents in response to these requests. And already we are
seeing Republican leaders make unsubstantiated allegations that
wrongly accuse the Department of misconduct and mismanagement.
Before they have even had the hearing and gotten the facts
Republicans are telling us that the law has failed, and I
believe that it is not true.
The subject of today's hearing is the formation of the HHS
Center for Consumer Information and Insurance. This group
within CMS has provided insurers from a provision of the Health
Care Bill banning annual limits on health care coverage. The
insurers are saying unless they get some of these waivers, the
price of the insurance will go up before we get to the period
of 2014, or the availability of the insurance will not be as
much as it has been in the past. So we wrote into the law that
we wanted the Department to give these waivers, at least until
2014, when the law will be fully in effect.
Our subcommittee chairman has asserted that the granting of
these waivers show that health care reform is flawed. ``If the
law is so good, why are so many waivers to the law being
granted.'' Senator Orrin Hatch decried the lack of
transparency. Oversight Chairman Darrell Issa has asserted that
unions have received special treatment because, ``Bureaucrats
are picking winners and losers in a politicized environment
where the winners are favored constituencies of the
Administration.''
But let us look at the facts. The waiver process has been
transparent and efficient. HHS put out an interim final rule,
three sets of guidance, and worked individually with each
applicant to resolve any problem with waiver requests. Over 90
percent of all entities that applied for waivers were approved.
The average wait time for approval of a completed waiver
request was only 13 days. The process has been fair.
Contrary to Chairman Issa, there has been no favoritism to
unions. The information HHS has provided to the committee shows
that plans that serve union employees were almost five times as
likely to have their waivers denied as non-union plans. Nine of
the last ten largest applicants to be denied waivers were plans
that provided care for union members.
The law and waiver process are designed to accommodate
plans with low annual limits known as limited benefit plans or
mini-med plans. These plans either have a set limit of dollars
that they will spend on benefits or a limited amount of
benefits that may be received or a cap on specific benefits.
These are plans that by 2014 will no longer be able to do what
they are doing because in 2014, all plans are going to have to
cover the minimum health insurance package. They will not be
able to discriminate on the basis of pre-existing conditions,
and consumers and small businesses will have improved access to
affordable care through no health insurance exchanges.
The waivers are intended to provide a smooth transition
between now and 2014. They affect a small population, less than
2 percent of all Americans with employer-based coverage, but
for this group they provided valuable interim relief.
The Democratic staff has prepared an analysis of the waiver
process that documents its success, and I ask this analysis be
made part of today's hearing record.
I was the ranking member of the Oversight Committee when
Dan Burton was Chairman, and during that time President Clinton
was in office. No allegation was too wild for him not to
pursue. The committee would demand thousands of documents, take
up hundreds of hours of taxpayer's time in investigations that
cost taxpayers millions of dollars, all with no regard for the
basic facts of the case.
An allegation would come out before they got the
information, and then when the information came out disproving
the allegation, they were already ready for another allegation.
They moved 1 day to the next with attacks, attacks, attacks.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I hope we are not going to see that go
on in this committee and in this Congress. Let us be fair, let
us get the facts, and let us see what the reality is before we
make any of these accusations that I have been hearing.
I yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Waxman follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Henry A. Waxman

Mr. Chairman, I am a strong believer in effective
oversight. It is essential to ensuring that the laws passed by
Congress are implemented in the most effective and efficient
way possible. That is why I support oversight of the Affordable
Care Act.
The health reform law passed by Congress and signed into
law by President Obama last year provides tremendous benefits.
Insurers are banned from discriminating against children with
pre-existing conditions. Seniors are already benefitting from
lower drug prices. Small businesses are already getting tax
cuts to pay for health insurance. The law has benefits for all
Americans--and we ought to be doing what we can to make sure
the Administration is implementing the law appropriately.
But I am concerned that this Committee is using oversight
as another means of blocking implementation of the law. Over
the last few weeks, the Committee issued broad document
requests to the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)
that require massive document searches for no apparent purpose.
Already HHS has produced over 50,000 pages of documents in
response to these requests.
And already we are seeing Republican leaders make
unsubstantiated allegations that wrongly accuse the Department
of misconduct and mismanagement.
The subject of today's hearing is the formation of HHS's
Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight and the
waivers that CCIIO has provided insurers from a provision of
the health care bill banning annual limits on health care
coverage.
The Subcommittee Chairman has asserted that the granting of
these waivers shows that the health care reform effort is
flawed: ``If the law is so good, why are so many waivers to the
law being granted?'' Senator Orrin Hatch has decried ``the lack
of transparency which has surrounded the waiver process.''
Oversight Chairman Darryl Issa has asserted that unions have
received special treatment because ``bureaucrats are picking
winners and losers in a politicized environment where the
winners are favored constituencies of the administration.''
But let's look at the facts.
The waiver process has been transparent and efficient. HHS
put out an interim final rule, three sets of guidance, and
worked individually with each applicant to resolve any problem
with waiver requests. Over 90% of all entities that applied for
waivers were approved. The average wait time for approval of a
completed waiver request was only 13 days.
The process has also been fair. Contrary to Chairman Issa,
there has been no favoritism to unions. The information HHS has
produced to the Committee shows that plans that serve union
employees were almost five times as likely to have their
waivers denied as non-union plans. Nine of the ten largest
applicants to be denied waivers were plans that provided care
for union members.
The law and the waiver process are designed to accommodate
plans with low annual limits known as ``limited benefit plans''
or ``mini-med'' plans. These plans either have a set limit on
dollar amounts of benefits that may be received or cap specific
benefits.
In 2014 these plans will be unnecessary: all Americans will
have improved health care coverage because insurers will no
longer be able to discriminate on the basis of pre-existing
conditions, and consumers and small businesses will have
improved access to affordable care through new health insurance
exchanges.
The waivers are intended to provide a smooth transition
between now and 2014. They affect a small population--less than
2% of all Americans with employer-based coverage--but for this
group they provided valuable interim relief.
Rather than indicating a flaw in the law, the waiver
process shows HHS is implementing health reform in a way that
helps consumers keep their plans without imposing undue burdens
on insurers or risking loss of coverage.
The Democratic staff has prepared an analysis of the waiver
process that documents its success. I ask that this analysis be
made part of today's hearing record.
I was ranking member of the Oversight Committee when then
Chairman Dan Burton ran amok investigating our last Democratic
President. No allegation was too wild to pursue. The Committee
would demand thousands of documents, and take up hundreds of
hours of taxpayer time in investigations that cost taxpayers
millions of dollars--all with no regard for the basic facts of
the case.
I hope this is not happening here. When we hold oversight
hearings, we should do so because we want to make sure that
federal agencies are doing their jobs. We should not hold
hearings to stop the vital work of government. And we should
not hold hearings because the new Republican majority wants to
disrupt the health care reform law.
As we conduct oversight on the law, I hope we will put
partisanship aside and do the kind of thorough and fair
investigations that have been the hallmark of this Committee.
And if we do that, the American people will see there is
good news about the health care reform law and the ways it is
helping all Americans.

Mr. Stearns. Yields back the balance of his time and I
recognize the gentlelady from Tennessee for 2 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I welcome our
witnesses today. We have been waiting a long time to ask these
questions that we have for you, and reading your prepared
remarks I think we would all be led to believe that this has
been an unqualified success in its rollout. You talk a lot
about benefits, but you don't talk a lot about expected costs,
and we will want to talk with you about that.
I want to go to the waivers because there have been some
900 health plans that have been given waivers, and we will
discuss those waivers as we move forward. I think we are going
to want to know what happens in 2013, and 2014, when those
companies are not able to get waivers. These waivers gave
relief to some plans but will happen to--we want to know what
is going to happen when the other mandates of Obamacare are
phased in, and it seems to me that these are 900 new stories
that the Administration probably is wanting to avoid because
private sector plans that are working for people, they don't
want to come under Obamacare. And so they are coming to you to
get a waiver.
In Tennessee we have been down this costly road before, and
Mr. Chairman, I have some charts on what happened in Tennessee
that I would like to submit for the record.
As I have repeatedly stated in this committee, TennCare
gave unlimited access to care, it incentivized use rather than
controlled costs, it reached the point of consuming 35.3
percent of the State budget. That was in 2005. Nearly
bankrupted the State, so I am going to want to know if you are
using history as a guide, what is your plan for dealing with
cost acceleration which comes on you very quickly if you look
at the TennCare model which is the closest thing in this
country to what you have.
Even our former governor, a Democrat, Phil Bredesen, did a
lot to rein in exploding costs, implementing a program, but,
there again, we saw what happened in our State.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. And I thank the gentlelady. Recognize Dr.
Burgess for 1 minute.
Dr. Burgess. For 1 minute?
Mr. Stearns. We are going to go 1 minute to Mr. Burgess, 1
minute to Mr. Gardner, and 1 minute to Mr. Barton.
Dr. Burgess. All right. Very well. Then let me just welcome
our witnesses. It is good to see you again, Mr. Angoff. We had
a nice visit last November. This is an issue that has been of
great interest to me for quite some time. In fact, you were
known by a different acronym when I met with you and, now I
followed with interest that there have been some changes within
the agency, and whether those are good or bad remains to be
determined.
Mr. Waxman spoke eloquently of the problems that he saw in
a previous Congress, but let me just allude to the problems
that I saw in the last Congress when we decided to be
indifferent to oversight and not even ask a simple question. We
passed this law in my opinion in a way that was poorly done,
and then your agency, within the agency was set up with very
little notice to the Congress. No one knew you were here, no
one knew how much money you were spending, where it was coming
from, and then we find out that in order for the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act to work you had to give two
and a half million people waivers. Well, it doesn't sound to me
like the definition of a good solid foundation.
So I am grateful that we are doing the oversight now,
grateful to the subcommittee chairman for calling this hearing.
I wish we could have done this several months ago. I think it
would have helped all of us, but thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
will yield back.
Mr. Stearns. Thank the gentleman, and Mr. Gardner, you are
recognized for 1 minute.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and the witnesses for
attending today for convening our first hearing, oversight
hearing, on the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
A lot of promises have been made about health care reform.
Costs would be lower, people would have better access to health
care. If people liked their coverage, they could keep it. Those
promises are not being kept.
The waivers issued by HHS exempting health plans from the
prohibition on annual or lifetime benefits or lifetime limits
on benefits is a good case study. Over 900 health plans would
have been forced to reduce benefits, raise costs to their
enrollees, or drop the plans altogether because complying with
the requirements of the Health Care Bill was just too
expensive.
Even worse, these waivers are simply postponing reality.
What will happen as other requirements of the law are phased in
and health care plans, health plans are not able to comply with
those further financial burdens? This is why this committee's
investigation of the bill is so timely in the Center for
Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight. We cannot wait
until the exchanges are up and running to discover that they
are not working. Congress can't stick its head in the sand and
deny the law of economics. Companies that need waivers today
will not suddenly be able to provide even more required
benefits in 2012, when the Health Care Bill fully kicks in.
Many of the assumptions that are underpinning the Health
Care Bill have proven to be false. For instance, it was
estimated that 375,000 people would enroll in the high-risk
pools. Instead, only 12,000 people enrolled. Recent articles
and the news have discussed the increasingly unbearable burden
that Medicaid places on State budgets. Medicaid is 21 percent
of total State spending and annual spending growth on the
program doubled between 2008, and 2009.
I am excited to get to work on this. I believe we have a
lot of work to do and look forward to hearing from you before
we end up bankrupting this country.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gardner follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Cory Gardner

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for convening our first oversight
hearing on the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
A lot of promises have been made about health care reform.
Costs would be lower. People would have better access to health
care. If people liked their coverage, they could keep it. Those
promises are not being kept.
The waivers issued by HHS exempting health plans from the
prohibition on annual or lifetime limits on benefits is a good
case study. Over 900 health plans would have been forced to
reduce benefits, raise costs to their enrollees, or drop the
plans altogether because complying with the requirements of
Obamacare was just too expensive. Even worse, these waivers are
simply postponing reality. What will happen as other
requirements of the law are phased in, and health plans are not
able to comply with those further financial burdens?
This is why this Committee's investigation of Obamacare,
and the manner in which it is being implemented by the Center
for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight is long
overdue. We cannot wait until the exchanges are up and running
in 2014 to realize that this system is not working. You cannot
stick your head in the sand and deny the laws of economics
forever. Companies that need waivers from Obamacare's
requirements today will not suddenly be able to provide even
more required benefits in 2012, when Obamacare fully kicks in.
Many of the assumptions underpinning Obamacare have been proven
to be false.
For instance, it was estimated that 375,000 people would
enroll in the high-risk pools. Instead, only 12,000 enrolled.
Recent articles in the news have discussed the increasingly
unbearable burden that Medicaid places on state budgets.
Medicaid is 21 percent of total state spending, and annual
spending growth on the program doubled between 2008 and 2009.
And yet this health care reform law would essentially add 20
million more people to the Medicaid rolls in 2014. These are
simply unsustainable burdens, and if they are not fixed, they
will break the world's greatest health care system and bankrupt
this country. We need to fix this problem.
I am ready to get to work on this issue. I thank the
witnesses for being here, and I yield back the balance of my
time.

Mr. Stearns. I thank my colleague and the distinguished
chairman emeritus, Mr. Barton.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will put my formal
statement in the record.
Today's hearing is the first of many, but I think it is
telling, Mr. Chairman, that we are here today with an oversight
hearing over an organization that is not explicitly authorized
in the Act, whose job is to give waivers to a law that
supposedly is going to lower costs, but the very reason they
are giving waivers is because the cost of complying with the
law is so large that over 900 companies or 900 insurance plans
have been given waivers because they could not comply if they
had to honor what the law said.
So this is going to be a good hearing. I appreciate each of
you two gentlemen being here, and I will try to participate
some, Mr. Chairman, but as you know, we have the FCC Commission
downstairs simultaneously. So some of us have to try to be two
places at one time, which is----
Mr. Stearns. I appreciate your----
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. Staying here.
Mr. Barton. Thank our witnesses.
Mr. Stearns. Thank you. The gentlelady, Ms. DeGette, is
recognized.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DEGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Last year President Obama signed into law landmark health
reform legislation to improve health care access for millions
of American families and small business owners, prohibit
abusive insurance practices, and to reduce our Nation's
deficit. Today's hearing is focused on implementation of the
law's prohibition on annual and lifetime limits on health care
coverage, an important consumer protection that prevents people
with chronic or catastrophic illnesses from losing their
coverage after they reach an arbitrary cap on expenses
established by their insurer.
This is a provision that is already protecting consumers
and will protect millions more individuals with chronic and
expensive diseases like diabetes, and it is widely supported.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to insert into the record
letters from the American Cancer Society and the American Heart
Association about the importance of this provision.
Mr. Stearns. By unanimous consent, so ordered.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. DeGette. We are transitioning to this new policy, and
millions of Americans with insurance are benefiting
immediately, but a small percentage of insured Americans are in
plans that will need waivers from these provisions until the
Health Care Bill takes effect in its entirety in 2014. The law
allows for those waivers which are the subject of today's
hearing.
And, Mr. Chairman, you noted that two-and-a-half million
people are subject to these waivers, but I would point out that
is two-and-a-half million out of 164 million, which is less
than 2 percent of the market.
The Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight
is responsible for implementing the consumer protections
against insurers' annual limits. CCL announced that that
process in a public role last summer and issued further
guidance based on input from affected entities. CCO is granting
waivers to this provision in cases where insurance providers
show that compliance, ``would result in a significant decrease
in access to benefits,'' or, ``would significantly increase
premiums.''
Republicans on this committee and elsewhere have made a
number of allegations about this agency and its process for
implementing the ban on annual limits. Senator Kyl and others
have made statements suggesting that CCO may be providing
waivers to political allies such as unions, and in fact, Mr.
Chairman, you, yourself, have suggested that the volume of
waivers granted indicates flaws in the Health Reform Law.
But the information and documents that the committee has
received tell a different story. They show that the
Administration is implementing the law in a fair, transparent,
flexible, and efficient way. The Administration data shows over
90 percent of applicants who sought waivers--I am working on a
cold. I will try not to sit too close. Ninety percent of the
applicants who sought waivers for their plans received HHS
approval. The average completed application was approved by HHS
within 13 days with over one-third approved in under 1 week.
Now, this is exactly the kind of governmental efficiency
that everybody across the aisle should be standing up and
applauding. We reviewed e-mails that the companies requesting
waivers exchanged with CMS. Here is--formerly HCFA, by the way.
Here is what a few of the companies had to say.
``I want to sincerely thank HHS for working so hard to
process and approve our waiver application.'' ``Thanks to you
and all the staff at CCIIO for your consideration and effort.''
``We just want to thank you for the prompt and courteous
service you gave these applications.''
Mr. Chairman, these don't sound like businesses that are
overburdened and fearful of government regulation. They sound
like satisfied clients.
As for the claim of bias towards unions, the data received
by the committee shows that the plans that serve union
employees were almost five times more likely than average to be
denied waivers. If the Administration is somehow biased in
favor of unions, that frankly is a pretty strange way of
showing it.
In the subcommittee's first hearing we learned from the
Administration how the President's executive order on
regulations has instructed agencies to implement laws in a
manner that protects consumers while imposing the least burden
possible on business. The implementation of the Annual Limits
Provision provides a case in point in how the Administration is
acting on those principles.
The plans that are receiving waivers need improvement. They
are often so-called mini-med plans that offer limited benefits.
In 2014, thanks to the new Health Care Bill almost all
Americans will get better coverage than this, but for now these
limited plans are the best coverage available for many of these
workers, and the waiver process accommodates business and
insurers so that consumers can retain access to these plans in
bridge years.
Based on clear regulation and guidance CCO evaluates waiver
requests on clearly-explained criteria such as premium changes
in percentage terms and dollar terms, the number and type of
benefits affected by the annual limits, and the number of
enrollees under the plan seeking the waivers. Approvals once
granted are rapidly posted on the HHS Web site. The overall
process for implementing this important health reform provision
and the waiver provisions within it embodies the principles
that all of us on this committee seek in the regulatory
process.
I look forward to hearing from our two witnesses today. I
hope we can talk about facts and why this is necessary and why
it is working, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. DeGette follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Diana DeGette

Last year, President Obama signed into law landmark health
reform legislation to improve health care access for millions
of American families and small business owners, prohibit
abusive insurance practices, and reduce our nation's deficit.
Today's hearing is focused on implementation of the law's
prohibition on annual and lifetime limits on health care
coverage, an important consumer protection that prevents people
with chronic or catastrophic illnesses from losing their
coverage after they reach an arbitrary cap on expenses
established by their insurer.
This is a provision that is already protecting consumers,
and will protect millions more--individuals with chronic and
expensive diseases like diabetes.
We are transitioning to this new policy, and millions of
Americans with insurance are benefitting immediately. But a
small percentage of insured Americans are in plans that will
need waivers from these provisions until the health care bill
takes effect in its entirety in 2014. The law allows for these
waivers, which are the subject of today's hearing.
The Center for Consumer Information and Insurance
Oversight, or CCIIO, is responsible for implementing the
consumer protections against insurer's annual limits. CCIIO
announced that process in a public rule last summer and issued
further guidance based on input from affected entities.
CCIIO is granting waivers to this provision in cases where
insurance providers show that compliance ``would result in a
significant decrease in access to benefits'' or ``would
significantly increase premiums.''
Republicans on this committee and elsewhere have made a
number of allegations about CCIIO and its process for
implementing the ban on annual limits. Senator Kyl and others
have made statements suggesting CCIIO may be providing waivers
to ``political allies'' such as unions. The subcommittee
chairman has suggested that the volume of waivers granted
indicates flaws in the health reform law.
But the information and documents the Committee has
received tell a different story. They show that the
Administration is implementing the law in a fair, transparent,
flexible, and efficient way.
The Administration data show that over 90% of applicants
who sought waivers for their plans received HHS approval. The
average completed application was approved by HHS within 13
days--with over one third approved in under one week. This is
exactly the kind of government efficiency that my friends
across the aisle ought to be standing up and applauding.
We reviewed emails that the companies requesting waivers
exchanged with CMS. Here's what a few of the companies had to
say: ``I want to sincerely thank HHS.for working so hard to
process and approve our waiver application.'' ``Thanks you and
all the staff at OCIIO for your consideration and effort.''
``We just want to thank you for the prompt and courteous
service you gave these applications.'' Mr. Chairman, these
don't sound like businesses that are overburdened and fearful
of government regulation - they sound like satisfied clients.
As for the claim of bias toward unions, the data received
by the Committee shows that plans that serve union employees
were almost five times more likely than average to be denied
waivers. If the Administration is somehow biased in favor of
unions, this is a pretty strange way of showing it.
In the Subcommittee's first hearing, we learned from the
Administration how the President's Executive Order on
regulations has instructed agencies to implement laws in a
manner that protects consumers while imposing the least burden
possible on business. The implementation of the annual limits
provision provides a case in point of how the Administration is
acting on these principles.
The plans that are receiving waivers need improvement. They
are often so-called mini-med plans that offer limited benefits.
In 2014, thanks to the health care bill, almost all Americans
will get better coverage. But for now, these limited plans are
the best coverage available for many workers--and the waiver
process accommodates business and insurers so that consumers
can retain access to these plans in the bridge years.
Based on clear regulation and guidance, CCIIO evaluates
waiver requests on clearly explained criteria, such as premium
changes in percentage terms and dollar terms, the number and
type of benefits affected by the annual limits, and the number
of enrollees under the plan seeking the waivers. Approvals,
once granted, are rapidly posted on the HHS Web site.
The overall process for implementing this important health
reform provision, and the waiver provisions within it, embodies
the principles that Republicans and Democrats alike seek in the
regulatory process. It is fair. It is efficient. It is
transparent. And it is allowing over two million Americans to
keep their existing health insurance coverage.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses. I hope we can
discuss the facts about CCIIO and its waiver process today
rather than propagating myths about healthcare reform's
implementation.

Mr. Stearns. I thank the ranking member, and let me open up
by saying I ask unanimous consent that the contents of the
document binder be introduced into the record subject to any
necessary redactions by the staff.
Without objection, the documents will be entered into the
record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Stearns. And let me address the two of you before we
start your opening statement. You are aware that the committee
is holding an investigative hearing and when doing so has had
the practice of taking testimony under oath. Do you have any
objection to testifying under oath?
OK. The Chair also advises both of you that under the rules
of the House and the rules of the Committee you are entitled to
be advised by counsel. Do you desire to be advised by counsel
during your testimony today?
OK.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Stearns. You are now under oath and subject to the
penalties set forth in Title XVIII, Section 1001, of the United
States Code. If you would be so kind now as to give us, each of
you, your 5-minute summary of your opening statement.
Thank you. Mr. Larsen.

TESTIMONY OF STEVE LARSEN, DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR AND DIRECTOR,
CENTER FOR CONSUMER INFORMATION AND INSURANCE OVERSIGHT,
CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES, DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES; AND JAY ANGOFF, SENIOR ADVISOR,
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES

TESTIMONY OF STEVE LARSEN

Mr. Larsen. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Stearns. I think you need to bring the mike a little
closer.
Mr. Larsen. Can you hear me now?
Mr. Stearns. We can hear you good. Thank you.
Mr. Larsen. OK.
Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. My full testimony has been submitted for the
record. I serve as Director of the Center for Consumer
Information and Insurance Oversight within CMS. Since taking on
this role I have been involved in implementing many of the
provisions of the Affordable Care Act, ACA, including
overseeing private health insurance reforms, establishing the
health insurance exchanges, and ensuring that consumers have
access to information about their rights and coverage options.
Prior to becoming the Director of CCIIO I served as the
Director of the Office of Oversight within CCIIO, which works
with the States to implement the new insurance market rules,
including the new restrictions on annual dollar limits on
health insurance benefits.
As Director of CCIIO I am committed to improving the health
insurance system so that it works for consumers now and in
2014, when consumers will have more quality health care
options. I am working to make sure that Americans who have
insurance today can keep that coverage as we transition to the
improved system in 2014.
As part of improving the current health insurance system,
the Affordable Care Act ensures that consumers are provided
meaningful and reliable coverage for their premium dollars by
phasing in restrictions on annual limits and insurance policies
between now and 2014. This is one of the subjects that you have
asked me to discuss today.
Right now over 160 million Americans get their health
insurance through an employer; however, not all coverage
offered by employers is the same. A very small percentage of
employees are offered policies with low annual limits, caps on
the amounts of benefits that are provided under the policy in a
year. Often, these policies are offered by employers who hire
lower-wage, part-time, or seasonal workers.
While having such limited coverage may be better than no
coverage at all, this coverage, unfortunately, can fail those
that need it most. These policies can have high deductibles and
annual dollar caps as low as $2,500. Some are better, with
$5,000 or even $25,000 in coverage, but in the case of a
serious illness or accident, the coverage can be inadequate.
In 2014, consumers will be able to purchase fuller health
insurance coverage in State-based exchanges, competitive
marketplaces, where consumers and small businesses can shop for
private coverage and will have the market power similar to
large employers. Small businesses with fewer than 25 employees
will be eligible for tax credits to help pay for their
employees' coverage, and small businesses with up to 100
employees in a State will be able to join the shop exchanges.
But in the time between now and 2014, we need to maintain
the coverage that employees have until better options are
available for them. For policies with low annual limits,
immediate compliance with the new Affordable Care Act
protections that restrict annual limits could cause disruption
of this coverage.
The Affordable Care Act directs the Secretary to implement
the restrictions on annual limits in a manner that ensures
continued access to coverage. This is accomplished by phasing
in the annual restrictions for most policies and for this year
we established a waiver process for the small percentage of
policies that are substantially below the restricted annual
limits set in the regulation.
These waivers only apply to this single provision of the
ACA. Insurance companies and employers that receive waivers
must comply with all other parts of the Affordable Care Act.
Our goal has been to implement the law but to do so in a manner
consistent with the statute and in a way that preserves
employees' coverage options until 2014.
All employers and insurers that offer limited benefit plans
may apply for a waiver if they demonstrate that there will be a
significant increase in premiums or a significant decrease in
access to coverage without the waiver. Applying for a waiver is
simple, a basic process that CCIIO clearly published on our Web
site. We administer the process fairly without regard to the
type of the applicant or size of business. We published our
standards for reviewing applications in the regulations
implementing the law and again in the bulletins implementing
the regulations.
The vast majority of waivers were granted to health plans
that are employer based, more than 95 percent. Of the waivers
approved, 47 percent were to self-insured employer plans, 26 to
HRAs, and 21 percent to Taft-Hartley plans, which are multi-
employer plans governed by collective bargaining agreements,
and 3 percent to issuers, insurance companies who provide these
policies.
The limited benefit plans for which waivers are allowed
cover an extremely small portion of people who have employer-
sponsored health plans. Since setting up the waiver program
CCIIO has granted waivers to plans covering approximately 2.4
million people out of the 150 million or so who have employer-
sponsored health coverage. This is less than 2 percent of all
covered people in the private insurance market.
The vast majority of employers who applied for a waiver
reacted to the application process positively. We have been
open to feedback from applicants, and based on their input we
improved the application process so that it is timely and
responsive to their needs. We view our work as a partnership
between the Federal Government, States, employers, and
consumers who are constantly striving to meet--and we are
constantly striving to meet--our stakeholders' needs.
As we work toward 2014, we are implementing the ACA
carefully and responsibly so that coverage is maintained and
the market is not disrupted.
Thank you for the privilege of appearing before you, and I
would be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Larsen follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.253

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.254

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.255

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.256

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.257

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.258

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.259

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.260

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.261

Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Mr. Larsen. Mr. Angoff.

TESTIMONY OF JAY ANGOFF

Mr. Angoff. Mr. Chairman, Madam Ranking Member----
Mr. Stearns. I think you have to pull it a little closer,
and you got the mike on. Right?
Mr. Angoff. Yes, sir.
Mr. Stearns. OK.
Mr. Angoff. Yes, sir.
Mr. Stearns. OK. There you go.
Mr. Angoff. Mr. Chairman, Madam Ranking Member, members of
the committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify here
today to discuss the Department of Health and Human Services
work to implement the Affordable Care Act.
I currently serve as Senior Advisor to HHS Secretary
Kathleen Sebelius. I also served as the Director of the Office
of Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight, known as
OCIIO, during its 9 months as an independent division of HHS
until its recent merger into the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services, or CMS.
OCIIO's accomplishments during that period include the
following: during its first 3 months, the establishment of two
major programs, the Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Plan and
the Early Retiree Reinsurance Program, and the development and
implementation of our new Web site, healthcare.gov. During its
first 6 months, the promulgation of regulations implementing
the insurance market reforms of the Affordable Care Act. Among
other things, those rules now enable young adults to stay on
their parents' policies until age 26; they prohibit insurers
from discriminating against those under 19 with pre-existing
conditions or from canceling coverage; and, they eliminate
lifetime limits on coverage.
During its first 7 months, we implemented three major grant
programs to States: rate review grants, which are enabling
States to establish or strengthen their capacity to review and,
where appropriate, to disapprove proposed health insurance rate
increases; exchange planning grants, which are enabling States
to begin the work necessary for establishing their exchanges;
and, consumer assistance grants, which are enabling States to
develop or strengthen existing programs enabling consumers to
obtain insurance and to more effectively deal with their
insurance companies.
By the end of 2010, the promulgation of the medical loss
ratio rule and the rate review rule. Under our medical loss
ratio rule, insurers in the individual and small group markets
must spend at least 80 cents of the premium dollar on health
care costs and quality improvement activities and no more than
20 cents of the premium dollar on administrative expenses.
Insurers that don't meet this standard must either reduce their
premiums or issue rebates to their policyholders.
Under the rate review rule, insurers must publicly justify
proposed increases exceeding 10 percent, which are then
reviewed for reasonableness by the State, or if the State does
not review rates, by HHS.
These reforms, Mr. Chairman, are already having a positive
effect in the marketplace. For example, the Trade Press is now
reporting that, as a result of the medical loss ratio rule,
insurance companies are streamlining their expense structures,
moderating their increases, and improving their benefit
packages. And more than 1.2 million adults can now remain on
their parents' health insurance plans because of our dependent
coverage until 26 rule, part of what we call the Patients' Bill
of Rights.
Most importantly, individuals are being helped. People like
Kayla Holmstrom, who was in a motorcycle accident when she was
9 and has a chronic bone infection but who is studying to
become a nurse at South Dakota State University and can now
stay on her parents' policy until she is 26. And people like
James Howard from Katy, Texas, who has brain cancer and was
canceled by his insurance company but was able to get coverage
through the PCIP Program that may well have saved his life.
While the American health system has always set examples of
shining successes and good care if you can get it, the system
has failed other citizens for too long. People with pre-
existing conditions have been locked out of coverage by
insurance companies. After long careers we have told Americans
to keep working until they reach the age of 65 because without
a job as a practical matter they can't get health insurance
because insurance companies surcharge them both based on their
age and based on health status. We have allowed insurance
companies to select out risks and to segment the market, to
cherrypick the healthy and to exclude the less healthy.
The Affordable Care Act, Mr. Chairman, is changing this. It
is building a more equitable health care system which empowers
consumers, establishes new consumer protections under the law,
and gives consumers new information so they can make the best
choices for themselves and their families. It is putting
consumers back in control of their health care coverage by
giving them an unprecedented amount of clear information on the
health care market, protections that bolster the rights of
consumers in dealing with insurance companies, and an
innovative new marketplace.
Most importantly, beginning in 2014, the Affordable Care
Act will allow individuals, families, and small business owners
to pool their purchasing power through new State-based
exchanges in which insurers will compete based on price and
quality, and people will be able to make apples-to-apples
comparisons.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I have every confidence that
the new Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight
within CMS will continue the vital work of the Office of
Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight, and I look
forward to the results it will produce. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today, and I would be happy to
answer any questions you or the members of the committee may
have.
Mr. Stearns. I thank you, and I thank both of you for your
opening statements. I will open with my series of questions.
The ranking member indicated the efficiency of the
Obamacare and how the people who got the waivers sent thank you
letters back. I would submit that is like saying to a person
who won the lottery, are you happy with the efficiency of the
lottery that you won? They would explicitly say, yes, and be
glad to send a lot of thank you letters back.
But having said that, Mr. Larsen, I just looked through
your resume, and I noticed that Governor O'Malley appointed you
as a member of the Maryland Health Service Cost Review
Commission that actually sets the rates in the State. Is that
true?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Mr. Stearns. Are you still on that board?
Mr. Larsen. No, I am not.
Mr. Stearns. When did you leave that board?
Mr. Larsen. When I started with the Federal Government.
Mr. Stearns. OK. So I was a little concerned. I wasn't
sure----
Mr. Larsen. No, I am not.
Mr. Stearns. OK. Let me move to this, Mr. Larsen, to this
area of waivers. When we ask questions, we each have 5 minutes,
so if you could just answer yes and no, and if we reach an
impasse here, I will certainly give you a little time, but I am
hopeful that you can answer most of the questions yes or no.
I have been informed that you folks are considering or have
given a waiver to the entire State of Florida. Is this true?
Mr. Larsen. We established a process that permits States--
--
Mr. Stearns. No, not----
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. To apply.
Mr. Stearns. Has the State of Florida received a waiver?
Yes or no?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Stearns. OK.
Mr. Larsen. Well, may I clarify?
Mr. Stearns. Oh, sure.
Mr. Larsen. The process that we set up for the States
essentially allows the States to apply on behalf of----
Mr. Stearns. I understand.
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. The issuer.
Mr. Stearns. Just in curiosity, did New York State get a
waiver, the entire State?
Mr. Larsen. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Stearns. So only Florida. Can you list to me all the
States that got a complete waiver?
Mr. Larsen. Yes. I can confirm, I think it is Ohio,
Tennessee, Florida, and there may be one more.
Mr. Stearns. And New York City being considered? New York?
Mr. Larsen. I don't believe New York applied, but I can
double check.
Mr. Stearns. Can I ask you this question? Has New York
applied?
Mr. Larsen. The State of New York?
Mr. Stearns. State of New York. Our understanding they have
applied.
Mr. Larsen. Oh, they have applied.
Mr. Stearns. OK. New York----
Mr. Larsen. But we haven't made a decision.
Mr. Stearns. Oh. I understand, but New York has applied.
OK. So the question is, obviously, why would Florida need a
waiver, why would New York need a waiver, and all these other
States you are giving complete current blocks for these States?
You know, I think for many of us under the 10th Amendment we
believe the States should be able to come up with their own
health care and perhaps handle their health insurance market
better than the government.
Simply tell me why would the State of Florida, perhaps New
York, and why are these people, why do you think Florida needs
a waiver, the entire State?
Mr. Larsen. Sure. Sure. So the waiver program is set up to
ensure that that small percentage of employees under these
small benefit policies can continue coverage. So in a small
number of States there are State programs that authorize or
require these limited-benefit policies. And so we made the
determination to allow the States to apply on behalf of the
issuers in their State.
Mr. Stearns. Now, the big question is, OK, all these
States, you are 1 year into this, and you are recognizing large
States and small States, you are giving waivers, what happens
in 2014? In fact, these waivers are only for 1 year, aren't
they?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Mr. Stearns. OK. So then all these States will have to come
back in the year 2013?
Mr. Larsen. We made the decision for a 1-year waiver in
order to gather better information about these types of
policies----
Mr. Stearns. If they needed a waiver----
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. And we will determine----
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. In 2011, won't they need a waiver
in 2012, and '13, so you will go back and give a waiver----
Mr. Larsen. Well----
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. Presumably again?
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. I was trying to answer. We haven't
made a determination about----
Mr. Stearns. OK.
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. What happens. These policies and
these waivers represent a glide path, if you will, a transition
to 2014, so we set them up to do the first year, to gather
data, and then determine what the next steps would be between
now and 2014.
Mr. Stearns. Would it be fair to say then the year 2014,
none of these people will get waivers, or will you consider
giving waivers ever after the exchange is in place?
Mr. Larsen. In 2014, consumers will have access to full
coverage, not the types of limited-benefit policies that they
have today, so in 2014, there won't be limited-benefit policies
to be waived from. Consumers will have access to the full range
of benefits.
Mr. Stearns. I guess the basic question was McDonald's is a
large corporation that got a waiver. Is that true?
Mr. Larsen. The carrier that provides coverage to
McDonald's, yes.
Mr. Stearns. Got a waiver. And didn't Waffle House get a
waiver? I don't know. I think the staff is saying yes.
Mr. Larsen. OK.
Mr. Stearns. So I assume--I would think you should know
these.
Mr. Larsen. Well, I haven't memorized the list of----
Mr. Stearns. Well, some of the big ones like McDonald's and
so forth I would think you would know.
Mr. Larsen. Well, I do know about McDonald's.
Mr. Stearns. Well, let me ask you. Did Denny's get one?
Mr. Larsen. I would have to look at the list.
Mr. Stearns. OK. How many private corporations, do you
know, just off hand? A dozen or 100 or----
Mr. Larsen. Well----
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. Because you got 915 that got
waivers, and you said you denied 61, so out of that 915 you
gave me a percent. How--so I guess some of the large
corporations got these waivers.
Mr. Larsen. When we think about the waivers, we think about
the type of employers and issuers that have applied. So self-
insured employers, for example----
Mr. Stearns. OK.
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. Represent 49 percent of the
applicants, we have----
Mr. Stearns. I can't miss this question. Where in the
Health Care Bill does the word waiver--can you give me the
specific line where it says waivers will be granted to health
care providers in the Health Care Bill? Where do you get your--
--
Mr. Larsen. Sure. The annual limits provision of the
Affordable Care Act specifically directs the Secretary to
implement this provision in a way that ensures----
Mr. Stearns. But the word waiver is not in there.
Mr. Larsen. I don't know whether the word----
Mr. Stearns. We couldn't find it anywhere. So you are
saying your interpretation is implying that your definition of
waiver is through that interpretation of the language?
Mr. Larsen. To comply with the requirements of the ACA.
Mr. Stearns. OK. My time is expired.
The ranking member, Ms. DeGette.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much. Mr. Larsen, when you say
that a waiver was given to Florida, that doesn't mean every
insured person in Florida was given a waiver. Correct?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. I mean, basically, what it is is waivers were
given to some States that had State laws that would violate the
new federal law, and they were given specifically for these
individual market plans within those States. Correct?
Mr. Larsen. Sure. States that have--yes.
Ms. DeGette. So how many States did that involve?
Mr. Larsen. I think we have approved four States to date.
Ms. DeGette. Four States. And those States were approved
based on their State laws that might have affected those
individual plan markets. Correct?
Mr. Larsen. Even the applicants in the States had to still
satisfy the regulatory standard for getting a waiver.
Ms. DeGette. So there was no political--someone from the
White House didn't call you folks up and say, approve these
States because it is going to be important in the election next
year.
Mr. Larsen. No, and we applied the standards consistently
across all applicants----
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. Whether it was State applicant
or----
Ms. DeGette. Now, Mr. Larsen, some have alleged that the
process through which waivers to annual limits are granted
lacks transparency, so I want you to walk us through the
process by which your agency makes waiver decisions. Can you
briefly describe the factors that you take into account when
evaluating waiver requests?
Mr. Larsen. Yes, and the standards were set out in the
regulation that we issued subsequent to the passage of the ACA.
The standard----
Ms. DeGette. Can you briefly describe those standards?
Mr. Larsen. Sure. So the regulatory standard requires that
an applicant show that there either be a significant increase
in premiums or significant decrease in access to care. So that
is the regulatory standard. We then issued subsequent guidance,
I believe in November, that articulated factors that we use in
evaluating those two standards, which include whether the
compliance with the restrictions on the annual limits would
result in a decrease in access to benefits, looking at the
policies' current annual limits. If the annual limits are
particularly low, there will be more of an impact, looking at
the change in percent of--the change in premiums in terms of
percentage, and then the change in premiums in terms of
absolute dollar values, and then the number and types of
benefits that would be impacted by application of the law.
Ms. DeGette. And is my understanding accurate that CCIIO
has reached out and continues to reach out to stakeholders to
make sure that you are addressing any concerns that they may
have regarding the waiver process?
Mr. Larsen. We do.
Ms. DeGette. And in which way?
Mr. Larsen. Well, we have constant interaction with the
applicants as they file, and if they have issues, hopefully
they are brought to my attention, and we seek to resolve them,
and I think as was mentioned earlier we have what I believe is
very positive feedback that we have received from applicants.
Ms. DeGette. Now, as you describe, you put out an interim
final rule and guidance on the waiver process, and about 90
percent of the applicants for waivers have been approved, so
that would seem to me that the process is working because
people understand what the criteria are, and they understand
how to go through the process.
But there has been one concern that has been raised, and
not by this committee but by Chairman Issa's committee, the
Oversight Committee, they said that you had not adequately
defined some of the criteria you use in making decisions. For
example, he said you hadn't published a clear bright line
numerical definition of a large premium increase.
So I guess my question is is it accurate that you have not
published a strict numerical definition of what constitutes a
large or significant premium price increase?
Mr. Larsen. That is right. We do not have----
Ms. DeGette. And can you tell me why not?
Mr. Larsen. Sure. We took the view that applying an
absolute number would not adequately allow us to fairly process
the applications as they came in because the applications in
terms of the number of employees affected, in terms of their
baseline premiums, they all--they vary significantly. So, for
example, you could have a policy that had a very high premium
but a low percent impact but actually still has a significant
impact on people that pay the premiums.
So picking an absolute number we didn't think would be the
best approach.
Ms. DeGette. But just because you don't have an absolute
number doesn't mean you don't have criteria. Correct?
Mr. Larsen. No. We do have criteria.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. The gentlelady yields back. Our next--Dr.
Burgess.
Dr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Angoff, it
has already been pointed out we have 5-minute increments in
which our lives are lived, so I am going to ask you a series of
questions, and I am going to ask us to go fairly quickly, so if
we can, yes or no answers.
When you came and visited me in my office, I believe it was
November 30, I had some questions then you were kind enough to
answer. We had the luxury of additional time, but today we need
to go fairly quickly, so I am going to list a number of
functions that it is my understanding were under your--when you
were the head of OCIIO, the previous agency, that they were
under your purview. So please let me know as I read through
this list, please acknowledge that they were under your
jurisdiction, or if they were not, let me know that as well.
So children with pre-existing conditions?
Mr. Angoff. Yes.
Dr. Burgess. Healthcare.gov?
Mr. Angoff. Yes.
Dr. Burgess. Rescissions.
Mr. Angoff. Yes.
Dr. Burgess. No rescissions.
Mr. Angoff. Right. The rule prohibiting rescissions.
Dr. Burgess. The co-op program?
Mr. Angoff. Yes.
Dr. Burgess. Federal high risk pool?
Mr. Angoff. Yes, which is the same as the pre-existing
condition insurance plan.
Dr. Burgess. Waivers for insurance plans?
Mr. Angoff. Yes.
Dr. Burgess. Grandfathered regulations?
Mr. Angoff. Yes.
Dr. Burgess. Early retiree programs?
Mr. Angoff. Yes.
Dr. Burgess. Annual limits?
Mr. Angoff . Yes.
Dr. Burgess. Waivers for businesses?
Mr. Angoff. Yes.
Dr. Burgess. State exchanges?
Mr. Angoff. Yes.
Dr. Burgess. Coverage for children under parents' plans?
Mr. Angoff. Yes.
Dr. Burgess. Age 26.
Mr. Angoff. Right.
Dr. Burgess. And the medical loss ratio?
Mr. Angoff. Yes, sir.
Dr. Burgess. So all these things are functions for which
you were responsible for overseeing and implementing?
Mr. Angoff. Correct.
Dr. Burgess. Can you help us--I have got a copy of the
Patient Protection Affordable Care Act here. Can you direct us
to the section of PPACA that authorizes OCIIO to speak in
acronyms for just a moment?
Mr. Angoff. The Secretary has discretion to manage and
operate her office, but to answer your question, Congressman,
there is no particular specific authorization in the bill that
says there shall be created an Office of Consumer Information
and Insurance Oversight. That is part of the Secretary's
discretion.
Dr. Burgess. So there is no authorization statute in the
law that was signed by the President on March 23 of last year?
Mr. Angoff. Well, the functions are authorized. The
specific office, there is no section of the bill which----
Dr. Burgess. So what about CCIIO, the follow-on
organization? Is there a section in here that I have missed
that authorizes the follow-on organization? CCIIO, whatever
exists today?
Mr. Angoff. There is no section specifying the name OCIIO
or CCIIO.
Dr. Burgess. Neither branch of the federal agency was
specifically authorized under the legislation.
Mr. Angoff. But the functions that those agencies carry out
are authorized in the bill.
Dr. Burgess. So when in the timeline were you hired by the
Administration for the purposes of creating and running OCIIO?
Mr. Angoff. I was hired, I believe my first day on the job
was February 16, and----
Dr. Burgess. February 16 of 2010?
Mr. Angoff. February 16 of 2010. The----
Dr. Burgess. Happy anniversary then.
Mr. Angoff. Oh, thank you very much.
Dr. Burgess. And I have the Federal Register from April 19,
2010----
Mr. Angoff. Right.
Dr. Burgess [continuing]. Which talks about the Secretary
organizing your agency.
Mr. Angoff. Yes. Before you wished me happy anniversary I
was about to say that the office was authorized on April 19.
Dr. Burgess. So March 23, signed into law, April 19,
Federal Register, within a month of passage the Administration
realized that they needed and the legislation lacked and they
were able to divert funds to hire you, create OCIIO, and do
this whole creation basically out of thin air, out of whole
cloth because it wasn't authorized in statute.
Mr. Angoff. Well, obviously I wouldn't agree with that
characterization.
Dr. Burgess. Well, OK. Well, what about--this is pretty
simple then. Where did the money come from? Where was the
funding for OCIIO?
Mr. Angoff. The money came from the $1 billion that was
appropriated as part of the ACA and then in addition, there are
certain statutes, certain provisions of the Affordable Care Act
which carried with them funding to carry out those particular
provisions.
Dr. Burgess. So would a correct characterization be you
were able to skim money off say some areas like the money for
the high risk pools to fund your organization?
Mr. Angoff. No. That is not a characterization, and that is
not an accurate characterization because--for this reason.
Dr. Burgess. Perhaps you would be able to provide to the
Committee a detailed budget of where the money came from, the
million dollar initial authorization, but there were other
agencies making draws on that as well. Presumably you had at
the end of the day your agency merged into another one, how
many employees were working for you?
Mr. Angoff. Two hundred and fifty-two.
Dr. Burgess. All right. That is not inexpensive to hire 252
people in Washington or Maryland.
Mr. Angoff. No. If I could just go back, though,
Congressman, just to one point because I think it is very
important to realize that the Act has certain sections which
carry with it specific appropriations for those sections.
Dr. Burgess. Let me just ask you very briefly. Do you have
and can you produce for the Committee a delegation of authority
from the Secretary of HHS that we can use to better understand
what your services were at OCIIO?
Mr. Angoff. Yes. There was such a delegation, and I am
happy to produce it.
Dr. Burgess. I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stearns. Thank the gentleman, and the gentleman from
Michigan, Mr. Dingell, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dingell. Please respond yes or no to this--these
questions if you can, and if the answer is no, would you also
please submit a detailed explanation for the record?
One, the underlying goal of the Affordable Care Act was to
provide affordable quality health care for all. Do you believe
the limited benefits plans provide that quality and that they
provide comprehensive care to consumers? Yes or no?
Mr. Angoff. No.
Mr. Dingell. OK. Next, we know that millions of Americans
do rely on limited-benefit plans. Do you believe consumers have
been adequately informed about the benefit limits under these
plans? Yes or no?
Mr. Angoff. No.
Mr. Dingell. The waivers are for how long? Only for 1 year.
Right?
Mr. Angoff. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. And they will be reviewed at the end of that
year?
Mr. Angoff. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. So you will have the chance to reissue the
waiver or to deny the waiver at that particular time.
Mr. Angoff. That is correct.
Mr. Dingell. This is a transitional step, is it not?
Mr. Angoff. Yes, it is.
Mr. Dingell. And the purpose is to see to it that you don't
take away from the recipients of the benefits under these
plans, the benefits that they are receiving while you set up
the larger plan as required by the statute. Is that right?
Mr. Angoff. That is exactly right.
Mr. Dingell. Now, under ACA the Secretary has authority to
determine what is restricted annual limits, and the
responsibility to also protect consumer access to essential
health benefits. We know that we allow an appropriate
transition time. Some States, employers, and insurers would be
unable to comply with the no annual limits provision and
without an adverse impact on coverage or premiums. Is that
correct?
Mr. Angoff. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Do you believe that waivers are necessary to
provide an uninterrupted, affordable transition coverage to
individuals?
Mr. Angoff. I do.
Mr. Dingell. And you will be reviewing these matters as we
move towards 2014, and the full statute goes into effect.
Mr. Angoff. That is correct.
Mr. Dingell. Is that right? Do you believe that the
necessary guidance and assistance from the CCIIO has been
readily available and accessible to assist potential applicants
in completing the waiver application process? Yes or no?
Mr. Angoff. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Do you believe that CCIIO has dedicated an
adequate amount of staff time to be responsive to potential
applicants regarding the waiver application process? Yes or no?
Mr. Angoff. I do.
Mr. Dingell. And you have put considerable effort into
seeing to it that those resources are available for that
purpose.
Mr. Angoff. Yes, we have.
Mr. Dingell. Do you believe that the waiver process has
provided an ample and an adequate transition time for employers
and employees to comply with the Affordable Care Act?
Mr. Angoff. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. And that, of course, is, again, one of the
purposes of the waiver provisions.
Mr. Angoff. Yes, it is.
Mr. Dingell. Waivers are being granted. Is that right?
Mr. Angoff. Yes, it is.
Mr. Dingell. Now, do you believe that the enrollees will
receive greater information about the limited benefits in their
health plan under the waiver process?
Mr. Angoff. I do.
Mr. Dingell. Now, let us try and summarize. The--we are
moving towards the establishment of the national plan which
takes place in about 2014. This is going to be a very
complicated exercise and a complicated plan. You will be
reviewing these waivers periodically to see to it that they
further your purposes of and the purposes of the statute in
getting us where we can have a good workable national plan
which provides to an orderly transition to that. Is that
correct?
Mr. Angoff. That is correct.
Mr. Dingell. Now, if you did not grant these waivers, what
would be the practical result? As I read it, you would be
kicking all these people off their plans, they would receive no
benefits, and so we would have a very large problem of a lot of
people not receiving any coverage at all. Is that correct?
Mr. Angoff. Yes, it is.
Mr. Dingell. The plans are--a lot of these plans are
subject to criticism on the adequacy of the benefits provided,
but nonetheless, that is better than having no plans to cover
these people, which could happen if you did not give the
waiver. Is that correct?
Mr. Angoff. That is true.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I note that I have 18 seconds to
yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentleman, and next we will go to
Mr. Murphy.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Institute of
Medicine has been asked by HHS to make recommendations on the
criteria and methods for determining and updating the essential
health benefits package called for by the Affordable Care Act,
and you know, Congress did not call for definition of medical
necessity in the bill. While the House bill included a
definition, it was not included in the final bill as amended.
But as I understand it Health and Human Services has asked
the Institute of Medicine to review definitions and
applications of medical necessity, which we didn't call for in
the Affordable Care Act, and is outside the scope of defining
essential benefits.
Can you tell me what authority does HHS believe it has to
include this in the definition of essential health benefits?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I can try and answer that. I apologize. I
know that the Institute of Medicine has been tasked with
helping HHS define what essential benefits are, and that will
also be supplemented with a study by the Department of Labor. I
have to confess I am not familiar with the medical necessity
component of the task that has been asked, so I can follow up.
Mr. Murphy. Can you do that? I would really appreciate if
you would follow up. That would be great. Thank you.
Mr. Larsen. I will do that.
Mr. Murphy. Now, I want to ask a little bit more about
these waivers. One of the waivers from the State of Ohio, my
neighbor in Pennsylvania, and it is interesting a statement
from Mary Jo Hudson, who is the Director of the Ohio Department
of Insurance, was this. She said, ``Not allowing a blanket
waiver for all companies for basic and standard open enrollment
in group conversion options would lead to an unlevel playing
field. Some companies will seek waivers while others won't.''
I think that is a good point, but how are you sure you
haven't created some sort of an unlevel playing field, make
sure everyone affected by the bill, the annual limits, know
that they can apply for waiver?
Mr. Larsen. Yes, thank you, and I don't think we have
created an unlevel playing field. There are a small number of
States that, through State policy, have encouraged or required
insurance companies to offer these as we call them, mini-med
policies, in order to make sure that there is a policy
available for some people who otherwise couldn't afford
coverage.
And in establishing the waiver process and particularly the
State process, we did want to make sure that people who have
that coverage can, today, continue that coverage. So we set up
a process that allows for the States, when there is a State
policy or law or program that requires carriers or establishes
a program that offers these types of mini-med policies to apply
for a waiver.
Mr. Murphy. It still is a situation in question, is
everybody well-informed? Are you comfortable with how people
are informed that they can apply for waivers, and they
understand the terms and conditions of--once they can obtain a
waiver?
Mr. Larsen. We are. Again, I think we have been very
transparent in publicizing this. The States are aware of it. We
have worked through a number of different outside entities and
trade groups and the NEIC to make sure that the word got out
that there was an option to apply for these types of waivers.
Mr. Murphy. How about a medical loss ratio? A number of
States have applied for things, Georgia, Iowa, Maine, South
Carolina, Texas, et cetera, all requesting waivers for medical
loss ratio. Have any of the States contacted you about waivers
for the MLR?
Mr. Larsen. I would answer that in two ways. Before the
medical loss ratio regulation was issued in December, we
received a number of letters from States because the statute
contemplates a State-based waiver process, but we hadn't set up
the process yet. So we did receive letters from States before
the regulations were issued.
Since the regulations were issued in December that laid out
the process for applying, I believe we have received three
States----
Mr. Murphy. Would you let us know all the States that have
that under--and what standards would a State obtain an
exemption?
Mr. Larsen. Sure. Well, the standards are set out in the
regulation.
Mr. Murphy. Just make sure we know that.
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Murphy. The other thing I want to know is with the
waivers that are being granted on multiple levels, has anyone
done an economic or financial analysis of what this means in
terms of the overall financial stability or instability,
whatever, of the entire health care package?
Would either of you know what that is?
Mr. Larsen. I am not familiar with a study that looks at
the impact of waivers.
Mr. Murphy. The issue being that if someone is required to
participate, then they are waived from that, I don't know what
this actually means in terms of revenues spent, revenues locked
in. We are trying to get a handle on what all this means and
the whole financial analysis of this bill and not clear if
anybody is doing that analysis.
Mr. Larsen. Well, in the transition between now and 2014, I
think these limited waivers are beneficial to all the
stakeholders, to both--either the companies or the issuers or
the States or the beneficiaries so that they can continue the
coverage between now and 2014.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you very much.
Mr. Stearns. The gentleman yields back the balance of his
time. Mr. Green is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Annual limits or
coverages we understand can be a pretty rotten deal if you are
really ill for consumers. You pay premiums for many years and
then all of a sudden you find out that your wife has cancer or
maybe your child that was just born has some terrible illness
that you have to have a lot of health care for, and your
insurance company ends up paying a lot and then they end up
hitting up against that annual limit and sometimes even a
lifetime limit.
Unfortunately until health care law was implemented, will
be implemented in 2014, there are some people who have a choice
between a plan with low annual limits on coverage or no
coverage at all, and Congress intended to make sure that people
enrolled in these plans wouldn't see their premiums rise
dramatically or see their options for coverage disappear while
employers adjust to new consumer protection rules and the full
range of health care reforms.
Mr. Larsen, am I correct that the waiver process that we
are talking about today was envisioned by Congress and put into
place to help consumers in these low-cost and low-benefit
plans?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Mr. Green. It is my understanding that these waivers are
temporary and that they only last for a year, and they won't be
available in 2014, or after. Is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Mr. Green. Mr. Larsen, what are some of the benefits that
will be available to low-wage workers once the annual limit ban
becomes firm in 2014?
Mr. Larsen. Well, the entire landscape changes to the
benefit of the consumer. They will have access to an insurance
marketplace; there will be increased competition, benefits will
be fuller; there will be premium subsidies available for
individuals who can't afford to purchase insurance; but, the
insurance that they purchase will now have full coverage and
not the restricted limits that, unfortunately, some people have
today.
Mr. Green. OK, and the waiver process I know benefits
businesses, too. Health and Human Services implementing the ban
on annual limits incrementally, starting with the floor of
$750,000 in coverage for central care annually and raising that
floor gradually until annual limits are eventually prohibited.
Business and health plans would see substantially higher
exposure to claims under even this incremental approach can
apply for short-term waivers.
What percentage of the businesses that have applied for
these short-term waivers received them?
Mr. Larsen. Well, we approved the vast majority of the
applicants that came in. Some are Taft-Hartley Plan, some are
self-insured businesses, some are issuers, but overall I think
the approval rate is about 95 percent or so.
Mr. Green. That is what our staff has come up with, about
90 percent and these are requests from businesses who are
asking for that short-term waiver so they can grow into the
health care.
Mr. Larsen. That is right.
Mr. Green. It seems to me the waiver process implemented is
just the sort of thoughtful approach that we want in a health
insurance reform plan. The President advocated the ban on
annual limits is a critical consumer protection, and the waiver
process allows the Administration to implement that protection
with due regard to individual circumstances and individual
particular consumers and businesses.
The prohibiting annual limits is important reform that
responds to one of the worst features of our insurance market
today, and, again, I served 20 years in the legislature, and I
understand what happens in legislatures where you have very
low-limit policies because you hope sometimes somebody has one,
just has a policy.
Annual limits can leave consumers, particularly those with
expensive and chronic conditions and those experiencing
catastrophic medical limits, with enormous medical debt and
without an ability to access the health care. Congress included
a ban on annual limits in the Reform Bill, but it also gave HHS
the authority to waive it.
It is my understanding this waiver process was necessary to
ensure the small number of people in certain low-cost, low-
benefit plans, often called mini-meds, which still have access
to at least some coverage before health care reform is fully
implemented. Is that your understanding, Mr. Larsen?
Mr. Larsen. That is right.
Mr. Green. Since this waiver process does not represent a
flaw in the health care law but rather a recognition that
flexibility and accommodation of unique circumstances--you
don't turn around a battleship or an aircraft carrier
immediately just like you don't turn around our health care
plan.
Under circumstances would be required we build towards full
range of consumer protections, and benefits will be available
to all Americans in 2014. Is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Mr. Green. In fact, the waiver process responds to an
uncommon, relatively uncommon set of circumstances. What
percentage of the people in private insurance plans, Mr.
Larsen, are covered by plans that have received a waiver?
Mr. Larsen. Well, again, the number is about 2\1/2\, so
less than 2 percent of people that have employer-based coverage
are in plans that have received a waiver.
Mr. Green. So we are addressing this problem, but less than
2 percent----
Mr. Larsen. That is right.
Mr. Green [continuing]. Have requested or received a
waiver. Compared to the number of people receiving protection
against annual limits under the Affordable Care Act, I would
call that number a very small amount. I wish we didn't have to
issue any waivers from this important protection, but just over
1 or 2 percent seems fairly minor.
In addition, the annual limit restrictions are but one
important part of the series of protections that have been
implemented since enactment. Young adults can now stay on their
parents' policies until 26, lifetime limits have been
eliminated, plans must cover preventative care for free.
Mr. Larsen, are any of these protections or any of those
protections being waived?
Mr. Larsen. No. No, sir.
Mr. Green. OK. So the core protections of the law continue
to be implemented smoothly with benefits for families,
employers in this area. Is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Mr. Green. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back
my time.
Mr. Stearns. All right. Thank the gentleman. The
gentlelady, Mrs. Myrick, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Myrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you both for
being here.
The center contains the Office of Insurance Programs, which
will administer the temporary high-risk pool program called the
Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Plan. The health care law
created this program with $5 billion in funding. Correct? I
guess these probably go to Mr. Larsen since you are the head of
that right now. Correct?
Mr. Larsen. I can speak somewhat, and Jay can as well.
Mrs. Myrick. OK. Well, whoever wants to answer. Go ahead.
OK. Is--the $5 billion is correct. Right?
Mr. Angoff. Yes.
Mrs. Myrick. And HHS recently announced the enrollment in
the program. What was the number?
Mr. Angoff. Approximately 12,000.
Mrs. Myrick. Twelve thousand, which seems awfully low
considering the fact that pre-existing conditions were used
routinely as one of the reasons that we needed to have the law.
So don't you think the health care law, an unprecedented
intrusion into the health care sector, was probably oversold by
continually referencing those who had pre-existing conditions?
Mr. Angoff. No, I don't think so, Congresswoman. And I
don't think it is law. The program has only been up for a
couple of months. It is a transitional mechanism. It is only
necessary because, under current law, insurance companies are
permitted to exclude people based on health status and to
charge more based on that.
Mrs. Myrick. Well, when the report was issued last April
CMS's Chief Actuary said the creation of a national high-risk
insurance pool will result in roughly 375,000 people getting
coverage in 2010, and if only 12,000 have enrolled, it seems to
me that that is an overestimate of about 360,000 people for
last year.
Mr. Angoff. No question that prediction has proved to be
inaccurate. There were fears that the program would be overrun,
and that has not occurred.
Mrs. Myrick. Well, the Washington Post did a story also at
the end of 2010, in December, the open question was--this is
what they said. It is an open question whether the $5 billion
allotted by Congress to start up the plans will be sufficient.
Do you think these high-risk pools will need additional
funding?
Mr. Angoff. No, I don't.
Mrs. Myrick. The same news article states New Hampshire's
plan has only about 80 members, but they already have spent
nearly double the $650,000 the State was allotted. Is this
true?
Mr. Angoff. No, it is not. They spent more than the amount
that was allotted for 1 year, but they are well under the
amount that was allotted for the entire lifetime of the
program.
Mrs. Myrick. And how many people are they scheduled to
enroll then in the program?
Mr. Angoff. I am sorry?
Mrs. Myrick. How many people are they scheduled to enroll
in the program based on what you are saying?
Mr. Angoff. I can't give you a projected number of people,
but I do know that the projections are that they will not
exceed the amount that they have been allotted for the entire
lifetime of the program.
Mrs. Myrick. Will States like New Hampshire be provided any
more money then in case they do?
Mr. Angoff. There is a process pursuant to which money
could be reallocated but----
Mrs. Myrick. Does that mean reallocated from other States
that aren't spending it or----
Mr. Angoff. Yes, but that is very unlikely because there is
no State which has spent more than its allocation for the
period of----
Mrs. Myrick. At this point.
Mr. Angoff [continuing]. That the program would be in
place, and as you pointed out, there is a lot of money left to
insure a lot of people, and we are looking forward to doing
that.
Mrs. Myrick. The article also states that although they
collect enrollment data monthly, they have decided--you have
decided to report it on a quarterly basis. Can you commit to
reporting it on a monthly basis instead of quarterly since the
data is available?
Mr. Larsen. I would have to go back and check with our
systems folks.
Mrs. Myrick. Would you do that?
Mr. Larsen. Sure.
Mrs. Myrick. Because it seems like, if it is overestimated
enrollment that is still spending more than it was originally
promised, if you wait on the quarterly data instead of doing it
monthly, it just doesn't----
Mr. Larsen. Sure.
Mrs. Myrick [continuing]. Serve the purpose, and it
technically kind of eliminates political damage.
Mr. Larsen. Well, we can do that, and to Mr. Angoff's
point, the initial period, the start-up, getting this set up
was where the resources were devoted to, to make sure that the
program was up and running.
Mrs. Myrick. OK.
Mr. Larsen. So we understand that there are estimates out
there that are higher than the 12. We know, for example, that
after we got the program up and running and we started the
outreach, I think, in the last period, enrollment has increased
50 percent. So we are already seeing a very rapid rise in the
enrollment of this, and we fully expect that to grow as we now,
having stood the program, have had the opportunity to get the
work----
Mrs. Myrick. Got one more question because I am running out
of time. HHS recently announced that new resources will be
available to increase awareness of the program. Correct?
Mr. Larsen. Correct.
Mrs. Myrick. And so some of those include working with the
U.S. Social Security Administration on a comprehensive outreach
campaign. Any idea on the cost of that?
Mr. Larsen. I don't, sitting here today, but I will get
that----
Mrs. Myrick. If you will get it back to me.
Mr. Larsen. Absolutely.
Mrs. Myrick. I mean, there has already been so much
discussion about this Health Care Bill, and there has been so
much awareness, et cetera, during the long period we debated it
that my concern is do we really need to spend more dollars
right now on additional outreach? So----
Mr. Larsen. Well, I think we----
Mrs. Myrick [continuing]. Mr. Chairman--go ahead.
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. Have learned that it really takes
a lot of effort. Many of these people have had a tough time;
they have medical conditions; they don't have coverage; so, we
are going to work with hospitals and providers and other
sources to make sure that they get what they need, and they are
aware of this program.
Mrs. Myrick. Thanks. I am out of time.
Mr. Stearns. Thank the gentlelady. Ms. Schakowsky,
recognized for 5 minutes.
Oh, Mr. Waxman. I didn't see you.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Some of the
Republicans on this committee and elsewhere have been
relentless in their attacks on the Health Care Bill generally
and on your Office's implementation of the bill in particular.
One of the main allegations is that CCIIO has acted with bias
in granting waivers to annual limits on essential benefits
coverage.
Representative Gingrey alleged that the waiver process has
been ``highly political and selective,'' and that politics and
insider status rather than objective criteria have been guiding
this process. Others have suggested that an increase in waiver
grants following the November, 2010, election reflects
potential reward of political allies. Subcommittee Chairman
Stearns said, ``From December, 2010, to January, 2011, the
number of waivers grew from 222 to over 700, and yes, a lot of
those waivers are going to unions.''
Mr. Larsen, before this hearing HHS turned over to the
Committee detailed information on all approvals and denials of
requests for waivers from the New Annual Limits Provisions of
the Affordable Care Act. I would like to get your thoughts on
what this information shows about the allegations of bias.
The information HHS has provided the committee shows that
of applications by union plans or plans that serve union
members 14 percent were denied waivers compared to denial rate
of about 3 percent for all other applicants, so plans to serve
union members are almost five times as likely to be denied
waivers as other applicants.
Do you think this information supports allegations that
CCIIO is showing favoritism toward unions?
Mr. Larsen. No. It doesn't, and to be clear, we didn't
solicit applications from any particular sector. We didn't
favor applicants from any particular sector or type of
applicant. I know it has been described in some cases as a high
percentage of union approvals, but as I think the data show,
and hopefully we have clarified for you all, those are
generally the Taft-Hartley Plans, which, in fact, are employer-
sponsored coverage. They are not union plans, and so as you
point out, there is a very--a small percentage, in fact, of
unions that have gotten waivers, a much higher percentage of
employer-based coverage.
Mr. Waxman. I guess to say that unions are getting special
treatment, which they are not, is a way to get people angry
because they want to stir up hostility to unions, although the
unions, unfortunately, are shrinking to less and less an
important part of our economy.
Mr. Larsen, the information received from our committee
indicates that there was a spike in waiver grants in January of
this year. Can you explain why there was such an increase?
Mr. Larsen. Yes. So we require applicants to submit their
requests 30 days in advance of the plan year, the policy year
for which the coverage takes effect, and because many plan and
policy years begin on January 1, as you might expect, right
around December 1 and the end of November we received an
increase in the number of waiver applications to coincide with
the large number of plans.
So there is kind of a bubble, and things have receded back
down closer to the levels that we saw right before December.
Mr. Waxman. Well, let me be very specific. I want to ask
you this question. Is political support for the Obama
Administration a factor in any way for the CCIIO considering
and evaluating applications for the waivers to annual limit?
Mr. Larsen. No, not in any way.
Mr. Waxman. And can you assure this committee that your
office has handled the waiver process in an unbiased fashion?
Mr. Larsen. We handle the applications in an unbiased
fashion.
Mr. Waxman. So when people make these charges, there is no
basis for these charges. They are all political. It is all
propaganda. It is just another attack on this Administration,
another attack on the Health Care Bill.
I am a strong believer in effective oversight, but this
redoric and tone surrounding the attacks on HHS implementation
of the health care law has me very concerned. Opponents have
hurled one accusation after another at HHS and at the Health
Care Bill, and then when the facts emerge, the allegation turns
out to be unfounded.
I hope that we are not going to do this in oversight on all
the issues that we have before us. I just hear these statements
that I know are untrue. The Republicans say that they had a
bill that would have accomplished all the same things that the
Democratic bill would have accomplished. It would have stopped
the discrimination for pre-existing conditions, it would have
stopped these discriminations by insurance companies. That
isn't what they proposed at all, and they didn't propose
anything that covered Americans. Maybe $3 million, not the $30
million that the bill covered. I just get frustrated that we
have to run after the falsehoods with truth.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Stearns. Gentlelady from Tennessee is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and we are talking
so much about the waivers that States are getting, including
Tennessee, which came to you and asked for a waiver, and I have
got their waiver letter with me. This came to you September 17,
2010. This was during the administration of Governor Bredesen,
who has since left office, and we have Governor Haslam.
But talking about these waivers and our concern, our
program in Tennessee, CoverTN, which is an innovative program
that was put in place, and we are concerned about what is going
to happen with these programs in the future, and I want to read
for you page 6 of this letter that went to you. It says that
absent a waiver, absent getting a waiver from you, from
Obamacare, that the State would have to dis-enroll 20,000
Tennesseans, who were not served by the commercial market in
Tennessee prior to their enrollment in CoverTN. It seems likely
that the majority of these individuals would become uninsured,
and finally, it goes on and states that insurance premiums
would go up, get this, 86 percent. Eighty-six percent.
So would you agree with me that this would be a significant
cost increase to individuals and the State?
Mr. Angoff. I would. I would just like to make one thing
clear, though, that I don't think has been made clear, which is
this. The waivers are not granted to States. They are granted
for coverage that is mandated by States. I am not as familiar
with Tennessee as I am with New Jersey where I was Deputy
Commissioner, and in New Jersey, for example, New Jersey
mandates that all carriers shall have certain coverage.
Mrs. Blackburn. That is right. You all had guaranteed issue
in New Jersey, but we have a TennCare program that was put up
as an executive order of the governor and then has been run
under the purview of CMS. OK, but you all granted Tennessee a
waiver for this program. Right?
Mr. Angoff. For that specific program.
Mrs. Blackburn. For the CoverTN Program. That is exactly
right. The program that is working and providing coverage and
is successful.
Mr. Angoff. Correct.
Mrs. Blackburn. Now, what is Tennessee and what are these
Tennesseans going to do in 2014? Where are they going to go?
What is going to happen? Because that program is not going to
be there unless you give it another waiver.
Mr. Angoff. Well, I'll just say this. We have been very
conscious of this--when a State mandates certain coverage, and
I will refer to New Jersey again because I am most familiar
with that, New Jersey mandates that carriers sell relatively
limited coverage, and so when a State mandates certain
coverage----
Mrs. Blackburn. Sir, I am going to interrupt you with that
because I am not talking about guaranteed issue. I am talking
about an innovative program in Tennessee that is working and
what is going to happen with that program. And, see, I think my
State is a great example of what is wrong with your approach to
this with Obamacare, because you are going to take away a
program that is working and then people are going to be left to
go through and try to find something through an exchange, and
they are going to face higher rates, and they are going to face
a cramped access to health care services. Their insurance cost
goes up, and the delivery costs goes up. It goes up on two
fronts, two separate fronts.
And I think that the letter--I was looking at page 3 of
this where it defines the benefits. This is a State solution.
CoverTN is a State solution to provide affordable basic health
insurance for small businesses, the self-employed, and the
recently unemployed that covers the most frequently-used
services. This letter also explains to you that because of the
way this program was set up, and the letter came to you from
the Department of Finance and Administration from the State of
Tennessee on behalf of the CoverTN Program, but it states this
plan has seen enrollment climb because, number one, the plan is
affordable, and the medical loss ratio for 2010 was 87 percent.
Now, under the current rules this plan would disappear in
2014. Is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. Congresswoman, if I could respond, I actually
think we are in agreement on many issues. The State of
Tennessee, like other States, in response to the very broken
marketplace that we are all trying to solve.
Mrs. Blackburn. Our marketplace was broken because of the
implementation of TennCare that ate up 35.3 percent of the
budget----
Mr. Larsen. I can't speak to TennCare.
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. And saw hundreds of thousands
of Tennesseans dis-enrolled from the program.
Mr. Larsen. So Tennessee----
Mrs. Blackburn. You are correct. We were under the 1115
Waiver Program, and it did nearly bankrupt the State, and I
would hope, I would like to move onto my last question.
Mr. Larsen. If I could, ma'am.
Mrs. Blackburn. No, sir. I have got one last question that
I am going to ask and because you all avoid it. If history is a
guide, what in heaven's name are you going to do with
escalating costs? TennCare's cost quadrupled. They quadrupled
within about a 5-year period of time.
So if history is a guide and that happens with Obamacare, I
would love to hear what is your plan for dealing with
accelerated costs?
Mr. Larsen. The Affordable Care Act, in fact, is full of
provisions and its purpose is to lower the cost curve, and
there is a series----
Mrs. Blackburn. Sir, history tells you that when you go
into this premise of near-term expenses banking on long-term
savings, it doesn't work. What is your plan B?
Mr. Larsen. The plan is the Affordable Care Act. That is
the plan, and it is going to work.
Mrs. Blackburn. Sir, there is no case in history in this
country where this has worked.
Mr. Larsen. This will work.
Mrs. Blackburn. None. It is----
Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentlelady. The time has expired
and will recognize----
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous
consent to let Mr. Larsen answer the very important question
that Ms. Blackburn asked.
Mr. Stearns. Well, I think Mr. Larsen answered it. He said
that the answer is Obamacare.
Ms. DeGette. No. The previous question that she asked.
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Larsen, did you answer her previous
question?
Mr. Larsen. Well, the point, the only point I was trying to
make about the State programs and the point that I think we
were in agreement on, which was the market is broken. People
can't get coverage, haven't been able to get affordable
coverage. One response at the State level, these are the States
that applied for waivers, was to set up programs that have
limited benefits, and we understand that. We agree that those
programs between now and 2014 should continue so that those
people do have access to care. Then in 2014, they will have
access to much better--
Mr. Stearns. I would advise all members we are going to
have a second round here, so if anybody wants to stay, they can
go into it.
So Ms. Schakowsky.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, let me explore that a little further.
The waiver that is granted to States like Tennessee and Florida
is to allow the mini-med plans. Talk about those plans for a
minute that Ms. Blackburn has lauded as some really great
coverage. What are we really talking about in terms of mini-med
plans? Are they not limited coverage?
Mr. Larsen. They are limited coverage. They are not all the
same. Some have very low annual limits. Some have restrictions
on other types of benefits, and that is the dilemma because
they are not good coverage. They don't provide comprehensive
coverage, but, nonetheless, today until the full reforms of the
Affordable Care Act kick in, that is an option for people.
Ms. Schakowsky. Right.
Mr. Larsen. And we want people to have that option, even
though it is not necessarily full coverage.
Ms. Schakowsky. So we see that as a bridge----
Mr. Larsen. As a bridge.
Ms. Schakowsky [continuing]. As you said to better
coverage. Would you describe what happens to people who are in
the mini-med programs now once the full implementation of the
Affordable Care Act in 2014?
Mr. Larsen. Well, they are going to get a much richer,
fuller benefit package, and they are not going to have to worry
about whether they spend 4 days in the hospital and run out of
their inpatient coverage because there is an annual limit on
their policy.
So consumers are going to be better off. The system is
going to be better off because we are not going to have the
levels of uncompensated care that we have today. So that is the
world in 2014.
Ms. Schakowsky. I want to go back to the issue of the
States for just a second, the overall policy, because, again,
it was--it seemed to be promoted by our Chairman as, again,
something political about Florida or New York. What States,
what is the feature in the States that would uniquely make them
eligible for a waiver?
Mr. Larsen. The feature is if they have a law or program
that establishes a package of benefits that insurers have to
issue, or insurers issue pursuant to a State program. So there
is a small number of States that have these types of programs,
one of which is----
Ms. Schakowsky. These are the limited-benefit programs.
Mr. Larsen. That is right.
Ms. Schakowsky. Yes. So----
Mr. Larsen. And, otherwise, we apply the same regulatory
criteria that we apply to all applicants to the States that
apply. So there has to be a significant increase in premiums or
decrease in access to benefits if they had to comply with the
law.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK. The other issue I wanted to deal with,
there was a charge made somehow that there is skimming in order
to create your office, and I wanted to talk a little bit about
it.
Mr. Angoff, I wanted to ask you about the Secretary's
authority to create the office. Implementing landmark health
insurance reform, of course, is a huge job, and following the
enactment of the Affordable Care Act, Secretary Sebelius
established the Office for Consumer Information and Insurance
Oversight.
So I think you talked a little bit about the
responsibilities of the office, but I am more interested in
getting to the question really of the authority because
Representative Burgess questioned that authority. The committee
looked into, the staff did some research and found that
according to the Department's reorganization plan from 1953,
the Secretary, ``may from time to time make some provisions as
the Secretary deems appropriate, authorizing the performance of
any of the functions of the Secretary by any other officer or
by any agency or employee of the Department.''
So it looks, Mr. Angoff, like the Secretary has had that
power for nearly 60 years.
Mr. Angoff. That is correct. There is no question about the
Secretary's authority to create the Office. She has such
authority.
Ms. Schakowsky. Now, I also want to clarify what you said.
You were saying that there is money in the bill to implement
the provisions and that a decision was made about a structure
to do that, taking money already in the bill. Is that what you
were saying? To create an appropriate structure.
Mr. Angoff. That is correct. There is $1 billion
appropriated for the ACA as part of the Act, and then in
addition there are specific provisions such as the provision
authorizing the high-risk pools and the provision authorizing
the Early Retiree Reinsurance Program, which carry independent
funding with those provisions.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. So I just want to end by saying
words like skim, I think, are very loaded, they create a very
negative feeling that, in fact, all of the money to create this
Office to help implement the bill was appropriated and in the
legislation. Thank you.
Mr. Stearns. Thank the gentlelady. Does the word fungible
work better?
Mr. Griffith, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am curious
following up on that line, you were hired on February 16, but
the legislation wasn't passed until March 23. Why not put a
line in there that specifically stated that you all were going
to have this office?
Mr. Angoff. That is not for me to answer.
Mr. Griffith. It would have made things a lot clearer,
would it not?
Mr. Angoff. No, I don't think so. I mean, I think the
provisions which Congresswoman Schakowsky cited make it clear
that there has never been any question about the Secretary's
authority to delegate authority and manage her jurisdiction in
the way she sees fit. So I just don't see any issue there.
Mr. Griffith. Do you know how much money you all spent in
this endeavor, 252 employees, and I understand you had offices
in Maryland at one time?
Mr. Angoff. Yes. For fiscal year 2010, $33.4 million is the
amount that comes out of the billion that was authorized, that
was appropriated.
Mr. Griffith. All right, and how much do you anticipate
going forward?
Mr. Griffith. That would be Mr. Larsen's area.
Mr. Larsen. We are still working through the 2011 number,
so I can't give you that number at this point. In the
President's budget in 2012, we have got, I think $94 million
for oversight and consumer assistance and functions like that
in the President's budget.
Mr. Griffith. And you indicated that--speaking to Mr.
Larsen now, you indicated that you had an outreach program for
folks to get into the programs regarding high risk or areas
where people were----
Mr. Larsen. We are starting that up now. We have not to
date had a very vigorous outreach program, and I think that
accounts for the lower-than-anticipated enrollment. So we are
going to----
Mr. Griffith. My question then would be do you also have an
outreach program for micro-employers, people that have five or
less employees? Do you have an outreach program to let them
know about they can easily access the ability to get a waiver
if they need one?
Mr. Larsen. We don't have a specific program targeted to
types of employers, but I would be happy to talk to you about
ideas for doing that.
Mr. Griffith. And as we go forward you don't anticipate
there being any waivers after 2014?
Mr. Larsen. We don't, because the law wouldn't allow for
limited waivers or policies because the restrictions on the
annual limits are complete at that point, and that is the point
at which consumers have access to a full array of benefits.
Mr. Griffith. And in regard to the minimum essential
coverage penalty, you answered earlier your plan B was this is
actually going to work and so forth, but how do you anticipate
dealing with States like Virginia where it has been ruled
unconstitutional because of that penalty and the 26 States that
are in the Florida legislation----
Mr. Larsen. Right.
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. That, of course, got its own
opinion? How do you all plan to deal with that? Are you going
to continue to charge forward, notwithstanding the legal
question which obviously is very serious with, I think, now 27
States having a ruling that says that that provision at least
is unconstitutional. Now, the difference, of course, Virginia
not only had a separate piece of legislation but had a separate
suit from the others and focused entirely on that one part of
it.
But how do you plan to go forward?
Mr. Larsen. Yes. I guess I would answer in two ways. First,
today, right now, we are proceeding with implementation of the
law, but our lawyers at HHS are, as you can imagine, looking at
the implications of the ruling and how we will be responding to
that. So----
Mr. Griffith. And I guess my question is what is the plan B
if ultimately the 27 States that have already gotten a ruling
that is unconstitutional prevail?
Mr. Larsen. Yes. Well, that I can't speak to.
Mr. Griffith. Does the plan work without mandatory
purchase?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I think as been discussed publicly, the
individual responsibility provisions are an important part of
the architecture of the ACA, but in terms of what happens, I
can't get into----
Mr. Griffith. Including the penalty provision?
Mr. Larsen. I can't get into what happens in light of the
pending litigation that we have.
Mr. Griffith. So there is no plan B?
Mr. Larsen. I am not saying there is or there isn't a plan
B; but, in matters relating to the litigation that we have with
the States, we are proceeding with implementation today as I
sit here, and I will leave it to the lawyers to figure out----
Mr. Griffith. Can you let me know when you develop a plan
B?
Mr. Larsen. We absolutely will.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you.
Mr. Stearns. Thank the gentleman. Mr. Scalise, the
gentleman from Louisiana, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
calling this hearing. Obviously we are trying to get as much
information as we can about the impacts, unfortunately in many
cases, the devastating impacts of President Obama's health care
law that are now being felt.
I want to talk to you first about the child only policies.
We have been being a number of companies that used to offer
child only policies that are now getting out of the market
because of this law.
Are you aware, first of all, of that problem of the
companies that are just dropping this line of business
altogether?
Mr. Larsen. Well, the Affordable Care Act set up a system
where, for the first time, insurance companies aren't going to
be able to deny care for sick kids, and that was the goal of
the Affordable Care Act, and it is unfortunate, frankly, that
there are insurance companies that have decided that if they
can--unless they can only insure healthy kids, they are not
going to offer----
Mr. Scalise. So what you are saying you are aware that
there are companies now that just aren't offering these health
care options to any parents who want to provide this for their
children. Are you aware of this?
Mr. Larsen. In the small segment of the market there are
companies----
Mr. Scalise. Can you tell me how many companies have gotten
out of this line of business since----
Mr. Larsen. I can't answer that exact question. I don't
know.
Mr. Scalise. You can't? I mean, I would understand it is
your job, your Office's job to follow these effects on
insurance injury and the ability for people to get access to
health care. I would think it is your job, so I would think you
would know how many.
Mr. Larsen. Well, here is what we have done. We have
provided guidance to States, Louisiana and other States, with a
range of options to encourage them to take, in order to
maintain a market for these carriers that otherwise don't want
to insure sick kids. So, they are leaving the market because,
unless they can just insure healthy people----
Mr. Scalise. Right, and one of our concerns all along, and
frankly it was discussed by those of us on this side of the
aisle when this bill was being debated over the course of the
last year and a half, that these kinds of mandates and laws
that were included in Obamacare were going to deny access to
people who had health care that they liked. And, of course, the
President multiple times would say if you like what you have,
you can keep it, and we pointed out in many cases that because
of these changes, they were going to actually force a lot of
people just out of the market altogether, which would deny
coverage to many people who had health care that they liked.
And so, you don't know the number of companies now. You are
saying that. I would encourage you to go and find out how many
there are and find out what things need to be done to unravel
it unless, I guess, you all are more concerned about invoking a
policy than actually improving access to people who want to get
health care, because your policies that took effect.
I see in September of 2010 are what ran a lot of these
people out of the market altogether, and there are articles
that started coincidentally right after the law took effect
that talk about all of these companies that were offering
health care options to children that no longer are doing it. So
now you have denied access to families, parents who had good
health care for their kids that don't have that option today.
Mr. Larsen. We have not. The insurance companies----
Mr. Scalise. Well, the law did. You personally didn't do
it, but Obamacare did, and since it is your job to track these
things, I would encourage you to go back and take a look.
Mr. Larsen. Well, we have worked with the States. We have
sent guidance out and worked with the States to provide them
with----
Mr. Scalise. Well, with the States, you are on your own now
because families don't have the same options. They have limited
options, and I appreciate maybe you have a difference on the
overall law. I will say, and I am glad that the Chairman is
having this. I am a little surprised that some of our
counterparts on the other side are criticizing us for having
this hearing. There is a letter, and I would like to get the
letter in the record, there is a letter that a number of
members of this committee wrote last year asking then Chairman
Waxman to hold a hearing on these kind of problems, and for
whatever reason Chairman then Waxman chose not to have any
hearings, and maybe it is because they didn't want the American
people to find out just how devastating this law, Obamacare, is
on denying access to people today.
Now, one other area I want to get----
Mr. Stearns. Do you want to put that in the record?
Mr. Scalise. And I would like, yes, to ask unanimous
consent to put that letter in the record, because I think----
Mr. Stearns. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears in the exhibit binder at the
conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Scalise [continuing]. It is important to show we have
been interested in this for a long time. Unfortunately, the
folks on the other side when they were in charge didn't want to
have these kind of oversight hearings where the American people
could find out that people today are being denied health care
that they liked because of this law.
Now let us get to these waivers. I think probably one of
the biggest heights of hypocrisy is the fact that the President
ran around touting how great this law was going to be, it is
going to be wonderful for American people, it is going to
reform health care problems. Of course, we pointed out back
then all the problems it would created. I am surprised at how
many people have asked and now, I am not surprised how many
people have asked. Frankly I think everybody would like and
should get a waiver from the entire law and hopefully the
courts will take care of that, but I am surprised how many
waivers have been granted.
Can you tell me how many waivers have been granted to
companies that said we just, you know, we don't want to comply
with some of these sections.
Mr. Larsen. Sure. Through----
Mr. Scalise. I am talking about the number. Do you know the
number?
Mr. Larsen. I believe the number that we gave you was 915.
Mr. Scalise. OK. The 915. From what I am understanding
about 60 companies have been denied that ability to get the
waiver. Can you get us the list of those companies that have
been denied, and even more specifically, I would ask you to
submit to the committee matrix on the number of companies, the
number of employees, if you don't want to include their name
for other reasons, I can appreciate that, but at least get us
the matrix on the number of companies, the number of employees,
broken done by region, and also broken down by union versus
non-union, because I think a lot of small businesses out there
that would like to be exempted from this haven't been given
that opportunity, you know, and maybe there is a line formed at
the White House where you have to go and get it, but frankly, I
think it is the public's right to know what that, what those
matrix are and to get that data and who has been exempted from
this----
Mr. Larsen. We provided that to the committee.
Mr. Scalise [continuing]. Was touted as a panacea and is,
in fact, destroying access to health care for millions of
Americans. Thanks. I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. Thank the gentleman. We are going to go
another round of questions. If you would engage us, I would
appreciate your forbearance here.
The President kept saying during his campaign, if you like
your health care, you can keep it. He kept saying that as a
mantra, but wouldn't both of you agree that without a waiver
these people that you gave a waiver, they couldn't keep their
health care? Isn't that true, Mr. Angoff?
Mr. Angoff. We don't know whether those people liked their
health care----
Mr. Stearns. No, but, I mean, the fact is the President
says you can keep it, you can keep your health care. If you
like your health care, you can keep it, but without a waiver,
they couldn't keep it. Isn't that true?
Mr. Angoff. They are keeping it. Keep in mind that in
2014----
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Larsen, isn't that true, though, basically
that without these waivers, McDonald's and these people, they
couldn't provide?
Mr. Larsen. I agree with Mr. Angoff. The fact is that they
are keeping it, and the ACA contemplated setting up a system to
ensure that people in these low annual limit policies could, in
fact, keep----
Mr. Stearns. Well, you know, the Democrats are continually
trying to defend these waivers, but, you know, what the problem
is the Administration health care, Obamacare, has created this
problem, and now the Democrats are recommending a solution. If
they didn't have this problem from the first place, we wouldn't
need this solution, which is these waivers.
So, you know, our response on this side is the only reason
you have the waiver is because of the new requirements, all
these new requirements of Obamacare making insurance, providing
insurance too expense.
For example, you indicated that you had 915 waivers. 2011,
as I understand it, the ceiling per year is $750,000 a year.
Isn't that true?
Mr. Larsen. That is right.
Mr. Stearns. OK, and does it go up to $1.25 million roughly
in the year 2012?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Mr. Stearns. And it goes up in 2013, to over $2 million. Is
that roughly true?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Stearns. So if a person could not make it in 2011, like
a McDonald's, aren't there going to be a lot more corporations
that are going to come for waivers once they realize that the
benefit is going to go up from $750,000 to $1.25 million? Don't
you think more people will--just logically?
Mr. Larsen. That is exactly why we set up a program where
we are going to have a 1-year----
Mr. Stearns. I understand, but all those people for 1 year
are going to come back, and then more people are going to come.
Then the year 2013, it goes to $2 million, and 2014, is
unlimited. Right?
Mr. Larsen. So what we are doing this year, to answer your
question, is looking at the very question that you are asking,
which is what is the best glide path for these types of
policies between now and 2014, in light of the increasing
annual limits that----
Mr. Stearns. It goes to the heart of the whole question is
the President said if you like your health care, you can keep
it, but basically you can't keep it unless the government gives
you waivers. Have you done an economic analysis, 2014, comes,
right, all these companies you have given waivers now must
comply. Have you done an economic analysis to see what it is
going to cost these companies when they have to provide
unlimited benefits every year for their employees?
Mr. Larsen. Well----
Mr. Stearns. I mean----
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. Remember that this----
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. We are seeing these waivers from
2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 unlimited. I mean, have you done any
kind of economic analysis?
Mr. Larsen. But the vast majority of employer-based
coverage will, or already does, meet those annual limits. So we
are only talking about a very small percentage of the
marketplace that has to be on a glide path to 2014.
Mr. Stearns. Well, I think that I would disagree with you
because when you say to a corporation, a small corporation that
you have got to provide unlimited benefits, I think it is going
to make it more expensive, and this whole process is just going
to be very dependent upon high costs at which the government is
going to have to supplement and pay to cover these. And I think
you have got the indication of the problem with these waivers
from States, and if New York gets a waiver, has, I mean, at
what point after you have given these waivers to large States
do we actually see the realization that we can't afford this?
And so, I mean, we are just talking about escalating the
number of waivers.
Mr. Larsen. Well, I think that is the connection between
today and 2014. We have a solution in 2014, and we need to make
sure that this small part of the marketplace gets to 2014, and
that those individuals as you suggest as the President wants,
can continue their current coverage.
Mr. Stearns. Well, I think for the benefit of acting on
what the President says, if you like your health care, you can
keep it, you should have some economic analysis, what is going
to happen in 2014, based upon all these waivers you are
anticipating that are going to increase.
Just a last question. How does a corporation know that he,
his corporation, his benefit, his union can get a waiver? Do
you tell people? I mean, how does a normal small business find
out? How did Waffle House find out that they could even do a
waiver? Because I think there are many people out there that
don't know they can get a waiver, they don't have the steps to
do it. I don't--are you advertising that you can get waivers?
Mr. Larsen. When we put the waiver process in place, we put
out a press release, and we posted the information on the Web
site.
Mr. Stearns. On your webpage.
Mr. Larsen. A number of--that is right. Trade groups, law
firms----
Mr. Stearns. When did you do that?
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. Consultants.
Mr. Stearns. How long ago? Did you do it 2 months ago or--
--
Mr. Larsen. Well, we set the program up in September, and
then we have had subsequent----
Mr. Stearns. OK.
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. Guidance since then and----
Mr. Stearns. So I could advise any corporation in the State
that wants a waiver to go to your Web page, and they would
understand how to fill out the forms and do it?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Stearns. OK. My time has expired. The gentlelady, Ms.
DeGette.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to
clarify a couple of things.
The first thing I want to clarify, Mr. Larsen, is Mr.
Scalise asked you if the information on all of the waivers, the
applications, the approvals, et cetera, was available, and it
is available online. Correct?
Mr. Larsen. It is on our Web site. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. So you guys aren't trying to hide any of that
information. Right?
Mr. Larsen. No, we are not in any way.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Mr. Larsen. We are very----
Ms. DeGette. The second question I have is, Mr. Scalise was
talking quite a little bit about the insurance companies after
the requirement that they couldn't drop children with pre-
existing conditions were leaving the market, in fact, most
children are the cheapest group of folks to insure if they are
healthy. Correct?
Mr. Larsen. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. And so really what these insurance companies
are saying is we don't want to have to give insurance policies
to children with pre-existing conditions or who are sick. Would
that be a fair interpretation?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. And the Affordable Care Act as it is phasing
in now says, you know what, if you are going to offer parents
an insurance policy, you have to offer people like Diana
DeGette, who has a child with Type I Diabetes, an insurance
policy just like you have to offer everybody else an insurance
policy. Isn't that right?
Mr. Larsen. Right.
Ms. DeGette. Don't you think--well, never mind. I will say
what I think. I think the parents of America would like to see
sick children as well as well children insured.
Let me ask you another question which is I guess I am a
little bit perplexed by some of these lines of questioning on
the other side, because the reason you folks set up these
waivers is so that States or--well, strike that. So that
employers that were offering these limited-benefit plans would
be able to continue to offer those in the transition period
before--between now and 2014. Right?
Mr. Larsen. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. And if we didn't have these waivers, then
those folks would be bumping up against the caps. Correct?
Mr. Larsen. For the small percent of the market. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. For the 2 percent of the market that is
getting the waivers. Right?
Mr. Larsen. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. And so it seems to me that what you are doing
is you are allowing this gap to be filled between now and 2014,
for people who need those policies. Right?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. Now, I want to ask you this follows up on this
last question, and the reason you are not going to need these
waivers in 2014, is because there are many new tools that are
coming on deck in 2014, that these employers will be able to
have. Is that right?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. I am wondering if you can explain some of
those tools that we will have and why we will no longer need
those waivers for these limited number of employers in 2014,
briefly.
Mr. Larsen. Well, consumers are going to have a range of
new options. First of all, there is going to be a ban on all
pre-existing conditions for all issuers. Everyone can get
coverage. Everyone can get full coverage. There will be an
essential package of benefits. There will be options within the
exchanges with richer benefits, and not as rich benefits,
covering still the same set of essential benefits. There will
be a competitive marketplace where people can shop. Competition
will increase, and for those who are low-income individuals,
there will be opportunities for premium subsidies to get better
coverage that will be affordable for them.
Ms. DeGette. So, in fact, I don't know if you are aware but
the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office made a projection,
and what they said was Americans buying comparable health care
plans to what they have today in the individual market would
see their premiums fall after 2014, by 14 to 20 percent, which
would save $732 on an individual policy and $1,975 for a family
policy. Most Americans buying coverage on their own would
qualify for these tax credits that would reduce their premiums
by an average of 60 percent, even as they get better coverage
as they have today.
And the CBO also estimated that small businesses would see
premium reductions of 8 to 11 percent and would receive tax
credits worth nearly $40 billion over the next decade to help
pay for coverage.
Are you aware of the CBO analysis?
Mr. Larsen. Generally, yes.
Ms. DeGette. And one last question. According to what you
know are the benefits that people, that employers are going to
have to offer after 2014, unlimited benefits?
Mr. Larsen. They are not going to be able to have lifetime
and annual limits on the policies that they issue.
Ms. DeGette. But the limits--are not unlimited. They are
going to be----
Mr. Larsen. Oh, that is right. That is right.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Mr. Stearns. Thank the gentlelady. Dr. Burgess is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the interest of
brevity I am interested in the private sector experience that
both of you have, and perhaps you could provide that to the
committee at some point so we would be able to review that.
I want to just close the loop on a line of questioning that
I was undertaking before, Mr. Angoff. So now we have the
situation where OCIIO has become CCIIO, and it is located at
CMS. Right?
Mr. Angoff. Yes, sir.
Dr. Burgess. Just recapitulate and all the functions that I
mentioned before are now under the direction of Administrator
Dr. Don Berwick. Is that correct?
Mr. Angoff. Yes, sir.
Dr. Burgess. So CMS, Center for Medicare and Medicaid
Services oversees Medicare, Medicaid, SCHIP, and a very
significant portion of the private insurance market over which
it never had authority in the past. Is that a valid
observation?
Mr. Angoff. Not entirely, in that much of Medicaid and
Medicare now is actually run through the private insurance
system.
Dr. Burgess. But it is all directly--Dr. Berwick is
directly responsible for all of those federal programs.
Mr. Angoff. yes.
Dr. Burgess. So we have the public and private side by side
as PPACA phases in. So, again, just to complete the story, we
have an Administrator at CMS, who parenthetically has never
been confirmed by the Senate because he was a recess
appointment, so as much affection and respect that I have for
Dr. Don Berwick, he has never come before the United States
Senate to undergo the confirmation process. Maybe they will
have an opportunity to do that before, but he is in charge of
almost all insurance coverage in the United States of America
as PPACA phases in, and it is all going to be led by this sub-
organization of HHS, CCIIO, that is a follow on from OCIIO that
was a non-directly appropriated, non-authorized center without
clear authority who cannot provide his budget to the committee
at this time. Is that a fair assessment of the landscape as
we--as it exists today?
Mr. Angoff. I don't think it is fair because I think----
Dr. Burgess. Of course it is. I went to great detail to,
painstaking detail to outline it for you.
Mr. Angoff. And Congresswoman Schakowsky went into specific
detail about the specific provisions which authorize the
Secretary to delegate her authority, and as I said before,
there is a delegation, and we will provide that to the
committee.
Dr. Burgess. And again, I have been working for several
months. I would very much like to have that delegation of
authority and the budgetary plan under which you have been
working, Mr. Larsen, under which you intend to work going
forward because I just think for an entirely new federal agency
that is going to have this broad of power, and I went through
those powers with you, this broad a scope and reach over--into
the lives of every single man, woman, and child in this
country, not just now but for the next 3 decades, it is
appropriate that this committee from time to time have some
curiosity about just what is going on and kicking the tires on
OCIIO or CCIIO or whatever it then becomes going forward.
The Governor of Utah was in town this week and spoke at
several places. I know we have been talking about the waiver
authority under the mini-med plans, but you are also
responsible for setting up the State exchanges. Is that
correct?
Mr. Angoff. That is correct.
Dr. Burgess. And Governor Herbert had mentioned some
difficulty that he was having getting an answer out of CMS or
HHS on some flexibility that he wanted. Just the administrative
flexibility of being able to do things electronically rather
than on paper, that he estimated would save his State some $600
million a year, but he had been waiting from July until this
week to get an answer.
Does that seem a little long?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I apologize. I don't know the details of
what he is looking for. I know that we have on ongoing dialogue
with the States and the State Governors. I know Utah has an
exchange as do one or two other States, and we look forward to
working with the States. We view the States as our partners on
the exchange process and----
Dr. Burgess. Well, again, it just looks like July to the
day after Valentine's Day seems like a long timeframe to get an
answer on a relatively straightforward administrative
simplification request that his State had with the expectation
that it is going to save significant dollars for the State.
And after all, I mean, the gentlelady from Tennessee
pointed out a big problem for all of us, you guys at the
witness table but for us guys up here at the dais, in that what
do you do going forward? All this stuff--you are granting the
waivers, you are kind of doubling down on the population as it
is coming in. 2014, hits, you flip the switch, and no light
comes on. What do we do then?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I think in 2014----
Dr. Burgess. You are betting on all this stuff working.
Mr. Larsen. I think we are going to flip the switch and the
lights are going to go on, and it is going to be----
Dr. Burgess. But, again, as the gentlelady from Tennessee
pointed out, where is the plan B? What rational person looks at
the demographics of the United States of America today with
people my age who within a very short period of time will be
entering Medicare, the advancing complexity of what we are able
to do to alleviate suffering and treat disease, what rational
person looks at that and says, you know what? In 2014, it is
going to cost $500 billion less than it did the year before. I
mean, that is crazy talk. That is not going to happen.
It is going to cost more to take care of the Medicare
patients going forward, and other than waiting lists and
rationing, I don't see that you have done anything that is
going to be able to control costs going forward.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the indulgence on the time. I
would be happy to hear the answer from either of our panelists
if they would care to do so.
Mr. Angoff. Yes. I would just like to point out just one
rule which really already is having an affect, and that is the
medical loss ratio regulation. The trade press really is
reporting that that is already having an effect of having
companies reduce their rates and provide more generous benefit
packages to their policyholders.
So there are already things that are being done, even
though it has only been in effect for a short while, that are
actually driving down costs.
Dr. Burgess. Yes. With all due respect you were late
getting that done and let us revisit that in a year's time and
see what the story looks like.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
Colorado, Mr. Gardner, is recognize for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Foster, in
your opening statement that I was able to listen to you
mentioned that you--it is your goal to allow people to keep the
insurance that they currently have. That was something that you
had said this Health Care Bill was attempting to do. Is that
correct?
Mr. Larsen. Yes. This bill and--yes.
Mr. Gardner. And I believe that Mr. Foster, with the
Medicare, in Medicare has testified before the House Budget
Committee that that would not be the case, that people would
not be able to keep the insurance they had. Is he wrong?
Mr. Larsen. I have to confess that I am not familiar with
the testimony that Mr. Foster gave I guess recently in front of
the committee. I know that our view is absolutely people can
keep the care that they have. They are doing it now. I think
they will have in 2014.
Mr. Gardner. So your Office is in charge of implementation
in many of these things that we went through, and Mr. Burgess
went through a long list with you, Mr. Angoff, of what
responsibility your Office had. You don't communicate with the
Chief Actuary of Medicare?
Mr. Larsen. I am not saying that I do or don't. I am just
not familiar with the testimony that he gave, and I apologize
for this particular----
Mr. Gardner. Has the Chief--had Medicare, has he expressed
concern that--he actually made two statements. He said that it
probably won't lower costs and that it will not allow people to
keep their insurance. Have they expressed that to you?
Mr. Larsen. I haven't heard that from Mr. Foster, but,
again, we are 2 weeks into this transition so----
Mr. Gardner. How long has your Office been open?
Mr. Larsen. We have been in----
Mr. Angoff. Since April 19. Rick Foster is the Actuary for
Medicare, not for the Office of Consumer Information and
Insurance Oversight.
Mr. Gardner. Right, but do you not communicate with
Medicare in terms of what is happening with the Health Care
Bill? That is the Chief Actuary who said that these two primary
tenants of the Health Care Bill aren't going to come true. That
is pretty significant, is it not? Yes or no?
Mr. Larsen. Like I said, I apologize. I would be happy to
go back and review his statements with regard to the area. As
Jay said, he is the Medicare Actuary. We are the private health
insurance market coming into CMS, so we will go back and read
his testimony.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Angoff, that is a pretty significant
difference of opinion, isn't it?
Mr. Angoff. Opinion is probably the right word. These
actuaries make predictions. Sometimes they pan out, sometimes
they don't.
Mr. Gardner. And so you are just betting that he is wrong
and you are right?
Mr. Angoff. Again, I haven't seen--I am unfamiliar with the
specific testimony that you are referring to.
Mr. Gardner. So do you think he is wrong, that people will
get to keep the insurance that they currently have?
Mr. Angoff. Well, people are getting to keep the insurance
they currently have. We have got to keep in mind there are 50
million people today without any insurance at all.
Mr. Gardner. That is not what he said. He said that it is
doubtful that they won't be able to keep the insurance that
they have. That is his testimony before the House Budget
Committee. Was he wrong?
Mr. Larsen. I don't know. I have got to take a look at it.
Mr. Gardner. Before you if you look into your document
file, you will notice that there is a letter from the Aspen
Skiing Company. It is in the document tab that you should have.
The document states at the bottom that compliance with the
PPACA would cause the cost to increase substantially, which
would render the plans unaffordable. Is that correct?
Ms. Voice. Document 20 I believe.
Mr. Gardner. I am sorry. Yes. Document 20.
Mr. Angoff. I am sure it says what you say it says.
Mr. Gardner. And this company did receive a waiver. Is that
correct?
Mr. Angoff. I would have to look at the list. I can do that
if you want.
Mr. Gardner. Well, they did, and so there are seasonal
employees at the Aspen Skiing Company. The letter states that
800 full and part-time employees during the summer go to 2,600
employees in the winter season----
Mr. Angoff. Yes.
Mr. Gardner [continuing]. And that is what it talks about.
So in 2014, what happens to the Aspen Skiing Company? They will
go into the exchanges. Is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. There will be a number of options for the
employees of the company, and they will have an opportunity to
get fuller health care coverage than they probably have today.
Mr. Gardner. And do you believe that the ski resort knows
what is best for their employees?
Mr. Larsen. I don't understand your question.
Mr. Gardner. I mean, do you think that the operator of a
ski resort is better equipped to determine the health care
needs of their employees than the Federal Government?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I don't know who is best equipped to make
that decision. I know that----
Mr. Gardner. So the answer is, no, you think the government
may be better equipped than the Aspen Skiing Company?
Mr. Larsen. No. I don't think that is what I am saying. I
think, what we want is, we want people to have full coverage,
and my guess is that the employees of Aspen would like to have
full coverage as compared to limited coverage.
Mr. Gardner. So the letter says the plans are specifically
designed to meet the needs of seasonal and part-time employees.
Mr. Larsen. Right. That is typical of the applicants that
we get for annual limits waivers. This is probably a very
typical application. It is part-time coverage, seasonal
coverage.
Mr. Gardner. So they might be wrong, though? I mean, we
think the Federal Government might know better how to provide
coverage for those employees?
Mr. Larsen. No. I don't think that is what we are saying.
Mr. Stearns. The gentleman's time has expired.
Dr. Gingrey, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and to the witnesses
let me apologize for not being here earlier. We have got
concurrent subcommittee hearings, both extremely important, and
this obviously is an extremely important hearing for me as a
position member of the subcommittee and obviously the issue of
the area which you have jurisdiction over regarding the Patient
Protection Affordable Care Act is extremely important to all
committee members.
I think I will focus my attention on the Class Act. I don't
know whether that has come up in--from previous questions, but
I am very concerned about the Class Act, particularly in
reference to information that has come out recently in regard
to the unsustainability, the non-viability of the program as it
is designed in regard to the monthly premiums and the benefit
package.
In testimony before the Finance Committee yesterday, in
fact, Secretary Sebelius admitted that long-term care insurance
program created by Obamacare called the Class Act, is totally
unsustainable I think she put it. This statement mirrors
similar remarks made by the Chief Actuary of CMS, Rick Foster,
when he testified before the House Ways and Means Committee a
couple of weeks ago. In fact, the President's Deficit Reduction
Commission even cited the need to dramatically change or even
repeal the Class Act because they also found the program
completely unsustainable as currently proposed.
Mr. Larsen, the President's budget proposal asks for $13.4
million for an IT system and another $93.5 million for
information, education in order to sign American workers up for
the Class Act.
So yes or no, if you will. In light of the Secretary's
statement and those posted on your Web site, do you believe the
Administration should provide proof to the American people
before your agency begins signing them up for the Class
Program?
Mr. Larsen. Well, if I could answer this way, and I hope
you will accept my apology, the Class Act is not actually part
of CCIIO or OCIIO, so we don't oversee the Class Act. In fact,
I am aware of the issues that you raised, and I know the
Secretary spoke about this yesterday, but it is not in the
purview of the----
Mr. Gingrey. Do you have an opinion on that? Can you answer
that question yes or no?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I am not familiar with the issues
surrounding----
Mr. Gingrey. All right. Mr. Angoff, do you have an opinion?
Mr. Angoff. No, I don't. The Class Act is part now of the
Administration on Aging, and so it is under their jurisdiction.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, given the Secretary's dire warning and
should the Secretary not listen to reason, will the Center for
Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight, that is you.
Right? Include a disclaimer in its education material to
workers stating clearly that the Class Act is not sustainable?
It is unsustainable?
Mr. Larsen. I would be happy to look at whatever proposal
there is on that.
Mr. Gingrey. Again, you are punting on this.
Mr. Larsen. I am punting.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Angoff, would you like to take the ball
and run with it?
Mr. Angoff. No, I wouldn't.
Mr. Gingrey. You are also a punter. Well, look, let me just
comment then, Mr. Chairman, in the remaining time that I have
left since these gentlemen have stated that this is not under
their purview and they don't want to express an opinion, and I
certainly will express an opinion.
Back in, I guess it was in the late '80s when we had the
bill that was enacted, catastrophic coverage under Medicare
forced on the American people, and the seniors just went nuts
when they found out what it was going to cost them in regard to
their part B premiums, and then Ross Stankowsky I think almost
had his automobile destroyed in downtown Chicago with umbrellas
over that bad piece of legislation.
This is the kind of thing that--why we feel so important to
have the oversight on every aspect of this bill, all 2,400
pages of it, PPACA, Obamacare, however you want to call it,
Patient Protection Affordable Care Act, but this is one I think
that is very important, even though it is not under your
authority specifically, that the committee, the subcommittee
understands that something like the Class Act, it was just part
of so much of this bill that was thrown together just to get it
passed so that hopefully after people read the bill they would
come to like it.
They are not going to come to like the Class Act, and
hopefully we are not going to spend $100 million putting it
into effect.
Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Stearns. Thank the gentleman. The gentlelady from
Tennessee is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to go back
to Mr. Larsen's answer to Mr. DeGette.
You continue to talk about, well, come 2014, you are going
to have all of these wonderful benefits, it is going to be
better, it is going to be fuller coverage, and, sir, I just
have to tell you this is our concern. We have lived through
this in Tennessee, and it does not work. You cannot incentivize
use, and there is no way to pay for it. Doing this investment
on the front end and expecting to get savings on the back end,
it doesn't work. And I have got plenty of charts here that show
you what happened in our State.
Now, what you have not been able to define for me is how do
you plan to pay for it? What is going to happen to these
innovative plans like CoverTN when you get to 2014? How, you
know, you talk about this exchange market, but I have to tell
you, sir, unless you can point to a pilot project that has
worked, the examples that are out there now do not work. You
are speaking on theory. Is that not correct? Your statement to
me was Obamacare would work. This plan would work, but you have
no data to back it up. You have no analysis that says, we ran
this program, and we looked at it, and this worked.
So, we are looking at this, and we are shaking our heads.
In 2014, the CoverTN Program would cease to exist. Is that not
correct?
Mr. Larsen. If I can respond this way, we know the system
prior to the passage of this bill was broken. Fifty million
people without insurance. I think there were----
Mrs. Blackburn. Sir, I am not even going to--I am going to
jump in, and it is not out of disrespect. It is just that you
are talking apples and oranges. There are reforms that need to
be placed. People want them to be in place as free market,
patient-centered reforms. When you have tried a public option
health care system, see, you are avoiding my question. You
cannot give me an example of where public option health care
has worked successfully, and that is because you don't got one.
Mr. Larsen. Well----
Mrs. Blackburn. As they say in Tennessee. You just don't.
Let me go onto something else.
When we are looking at the Center moving from HHS to CMS,
when was that--why was the decision made? When was that
decision made?
Mr. Angoff. I am sorry. When was it made?
Mrs. Blackburn. Why and then when?
Mr. Angoff. Oh. The reason it was made is that it made
sense to have a separate organization reporting directly to the
Secretary that had to do a lot of things quickly as an
independent organization. Once all----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Who was involved in the decision
making?
Mr. Angoff. Sorry?
Mrs. Blackburn. Who? Who was involved in the decision-
making process, sir?
Mr. Angoff. Several people at HHS. I don't know.
Mrs. Blackburn. Several people at HHS. Would you please
supply me with a list of those that were involved in that
decision making?
Mr. Angoff. Yes, I will.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you very much. And why did you not
start the Office in CMS?
Mr. Angoff. Because it was--we had a lot to get done in a
very short time, we needed a mechanism to do it, we thought----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. Angoff [continuing]. The best way to do it would be to
have an independent organization.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. Angoff. Now that it has matured and all the major
regs----
Mrs. Blackburn. All right, and then when did you decide to
move it?
Mr. Angoff. In December, late December.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit
for the record the letter from Secretary Sebelius on January 5,
2011, writing to inform that they were moving it to CMS. I find
that date to be a little bit curious.
Mr. Stearns. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears in the document binder at the
conclusion of the hearing.]
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, sir. Was any discussion had
about the fact that by moving the Center into CMS where funding
is directed for Medicare and Medicaid that it would either
better protect or give less subject to oversight or be harder
to de-fund that, and would it allow you to run that office more
along the vein of the 1115 Waiver Program that Tennessee
operated TennCare under which put the feds in control of how a
State would deliver their program and basically took those
State lawmakers out of the process, basically handed State
lawmakers the bill, and said, here you go. The feds say you
have to fund it.
You know, I find it so curious you did this, and then I
look back at what has transpired in our State and when I was in
the State Senate there, and we were trying to figure out how to
pay for this program and then I went back and read the
statement from our former Governor who said this would be the
mother of all unfunded mandates, and you know what, I am
beginning to think they are about right on that.
What was your decision for moving that?
Mr. Angoff. I am sorry. What was the question?
Mrs. Blackburn. What was your decision matrix for moving
it? Why did you move it?
Mr. Angoff. There are efficiencies to be gained by merging
the two organizations, functions such as----
Mrs. Blackburn. I thought you just told me you wanted it
over there because it would be an independent organization and
not tied to HHS.
Mr. Angoff. At the beginning.
Mrs. Blackburn. Did it have anything to do with funding?
Mr. Angoff. No.
Mrs. Blackburn. Could it easier to protect? Would it
eliminate oversight? Would it tie the hands of State
Legislators?
I yield back.
Mr. Angoff. No. It was a question of efficiencies. There
are overlapping functions, budget, grants, personnel, external
affairs, IT. Now that the regs have been adopted and the
programs established, there are efficiencies to be gained by
merging the two organizations.
Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentlelady. The gentleman from
Virginia is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Chairman, before the gentleman----
Mr. Stearns. Sure. Point of----
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. I would just like to note--move
to strike the last----
Mr. Stearns. Right. Or a question of personal privilege.
Ms. DeGette. I just want to note that we have now had two
rounds of questions----
Mr. Stearns. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. And the Chairman is proceeding to
the third round of questioning.
Mr. Stearns. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. I object to that because I believe these
witnesses have thoroughly and adequately answered all of the
questions put to them regarding their agency and the waivers
that have been granted, and I think now what we are moving into
is the majority is using this hearing as a way to attack the
Affordable Care Act, and frankly, I think it is abusive to the
witnesses.
Having registered that objection, you are the Chairman. You
are going to do what you want, and I will reserve any time I
have in this third round of questioning until the conclusion.
Mr. Stearns. And I thank the gentlelady. You know, this is
our first hearing really. We have only been here 2\1/2\ hours
for this huge new government program, so I think Members having
a chance for the first time to do this is very reasonable, and
I think the witnesses are doing an adequate job as best they
can to explain it, and I think it is worthwhile to Members who
perhaps had not been able to ask questions, come back, and so
we are going to continue.
So, Mr. Griffith.
Dr. Burgess. Mr. Chairman, if I might----
Mr. Stearns. Sure.
Dr. Burgess. [continuing]. Just make a point of personal
privilege----
Mr. Stearns. Yes.
Dr. Burgess. [continuing]. As well, it is far less abusive
to not make the witnesses listen to opening statements from
every member of the committee as we did during the last
Congress.
I will yield.
Ms. DeGette. I will agree with that.
Mr. Stearns. I think Ms. DeGette will agree with that.
The gentleman from Virginia.
Mr. Griffith. Just to note, this is only my second time,
but anyway--no, no. I was here. I just didn't get my first and
second--I was here. This is just my second, though, and I am
the last one, but it is only my second time.
We talked earlier, Mr. Angoff, about the $33.4 million in
expenses and that that came out of the $1 billion appropriated
or that was mentioned in the Act.
Mr. Angoff. Yes, sir.
Mr. Griffith. And at one point in the questioning with
someone else you indicated that there were three sources of
money from which you could get your funds, the $1 billion in
the Act, the high-risk area, and the early retirees. And when I
asked the question, and I am not trying to make any accusation,
I am just saying that you said there was $33.4. Did that
include all the pots of money or just the billion?
Mr. Angoff. No. That $33.4 million is only out of the
billion.
Mr. Griffith. What monies came out of the other two
sources?
Mr. Angoff. There is additional money coming out of those
two sources, and I don't have that with me.
Mr. Griffith. Can you get that for us?
Mr. Angoff. Absolutely.
Mr. Griffith. OK, and I do appreciate that there were
additional monies.
Now onto the $1 billion it is interesting because the
waiver program, can you tell me how much just the waiver
program costs?
Mr. Angoff. No, I can't.
Mr. Larsen. I don't have that broken out by the staff that
work on the waiver program compared to the entire $33 million.
We can, you know, try and get that to you.
Mr. Griffith. If you can do that for me, I would appreciate
it, and here is the point, and I touched on this in my previous
questioning. We have got this giant Act. Now, while it does
have the catchall that the Secretary has the authority to, you
know, implement, and it has the $1 billion in the back of it,
it doesn't actually have waiver in here.
And I guess my problem is is that one of the things that I
fear is is that part of the distrust that people have in
general is that when you have a gigantic Act it is hard to
figure it out, and then you can't find things, and it looks
like to me what we have done is we have built a program based
on the Secretary's authority to try to implement the law and
then we have bootstrapped back in that she can use the $1
billion to implement the law, but we have got layer upon layer
of interpretation, and that might be OK if this was a 5-page
bill and you could say, well, we couldn't get it all in here,
but I mean, we have got this, you know, it is a textbook in
length. It is 1,000 pages this way. It was more than 2,000
pages when it was in bill form.
And so I just have great concerns that we are building
assumptions on top of assumptions, and it may very well be the
fault of Congress for not having been specific in past years
going back not just during this bill but many other bills, but
it seems to me that we are the ones that ought to be making the
laws and that if there is something that is unclear, it ought
to come back to the Legislative Branch. In this case that would
be United States Congress.
And I just wonder if you had any comments on that.
Mr. Angoff. Just this. On the waiver issue there is
language there that makes it clear that statutory language, not
regulatory language, in the statute that says that the
restricted annual limits should be interpreted in a way so that
people can keep their coverage. Everything that we have done is
done pursuant to specific language in the statute.
Mr. Griffith. Well, and I guess the concern that I have is
we are spending money to notify folks of part of the program,
but we are not spending money yet to let folks know about the
waivers, as I mentioned earlier, and while we have given
McDonald's a waiver, I don't know how they work their system,
but I have a letter from a constituent of mine who owns several
Burger King establishments. He is panicked about how this is
going to impact him, and I, of course, as soon as I get back to
the office I will notify him of the waiver program. I am not
sure he knows about that.
And so, that is what happens when you make things so
complex, and you can't find it in the written word. You have to
go to an assumption made on an assumption made by an attempt to
try to implement something that apparently the legislation
wasn't crafted as well as maybe it should have been. I wasn't
here, so I didn't take part in that, but it just seems to me
that there is an awful lot of confusion out there, and we are
spending money on some things based on assumption what we are
supposed to do, and we are not spending it on others. And it
would seem to me that we would want consumers to be aware of
the waivers as well as to be aware of knowing how they get into
any of the other programs.
I yield back the remainder of my time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentleman. I dare say that if you
took an ad and put it in the Final Four basketball, announcing
to the American public that they can receive waivers from the
Obamacare, I think you would be offering waivers well in
adjustment of 915, because I think as the gentleman from
Virginia had indicated, a lot of people don't know that you can
get these waivers, and they are not going to your Web site.
But lo and behold if you told all 50 States in a very clear
manner and you told all the corporations in America that they
could get a waiver, I think everybody would do that, and they
would want to waiver every year, and they would want to waiver
in 2014.
The ranking member mentioned about the new tools coming on
in 2014, and Mr. Larsen consumed a little bit of time talking
about the ranges of these new benefits, but I guess, Mr.
Larsen, who is going to pay for those benefits? Because the
benefits are all inclusive, and lo and behold, the taxpayers or
the corporations are going to have to charge more money.
And she also indicated that she was concerned about
recently that a lot of sick children were not being insured,
but--before Obamacare, but the reason a lot of people now are
pulling back is because, frankly because they are concerned
about these benefits going from $750,000 up to $1.2 and $2.2. I
mean, that is a little bit of a chilling factor for a lot of
companies, so they are deciding that they don't want to insure,
and I don't think they know about the waivers.
I guess I want to ask you a little bit of question, Mr.
Larsen, about some of the spending here. How much money in
total has HHS spent so far in setting up and operating your
Office? Can you just give me an estimate? Just approximate.
Mr. Larsen. Yes, and I think Jay touched on this earlier,
of the $1 billion that was appropriated at the outset of the
implementation of the ACA----
Mr. Stearns. So it is about a billion dollars?
Mr. Larsen. Well, that--no, no, no.
Mr. Stearns. OK.
Mr. Larsen. Thirty-three million is the answer----
Mr. Stearns. OK.
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. Spending to date for OCIIO, now
CCIIO.
Mr. Stearns. So $33 billion----
Mr. Larsen. Million.
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. From all sources.
Mr. Larsen. I am sorry. Did I say billion?
Mr. Stearns. Billion?
Mr. Larsen. No, $33 million----
Mr. Stearns. Thirty-three million.
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. Out of the $1 billion.
Mr. Stearns. All right. I respect that. OK. Now, I think
our staff is a little non-plussed here because $33 million
seems like a pretty small amount. Does this include all the
sources of funding?
Mr. Larsen. Well, that is essentially to operate the 252
and the programs. I think this was earlier----
Mr. Stearns. Two hundred and fifty-two employees out of
Bethesda?
Mr. Larsen. Right.
Mr. Stearns. Are they still out in Bethesda?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Stearns. OK. You seem a little puzzled. Have they moved
since you left? You were a little puzzled.
Mr. Larsen. I didn't know whether you knew something I
didn't. No. They are still out there.
Mr. Stearns. OK. How did HHS come up with $465 million for
implementation of the President's budget for HHS? Do you know
that?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I know----
Mr. Stearns. Either one of you know that?
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. Generally, the breakdown, because
I know which part is attributable to the CCIIO-related
activities. There is about $94 million for oversight and
consumer information, which includes the Healthcare.gov Web
site, which is a fantastic consumer tool. People can go in
today and find out what policies are available to them, what
coverages, what options are available. So it includes that
money. There is consumer assistance, setting up the appeals
unit again, so consumers that have been denied, they are going
to have an appeal process.
So there is $94 million associated with all of those
activities and then, of the $400 million figure you mentioned,
there are exchanges. We are now standing up the exchanges. We
have got IT programs that we have got to get up and running.
Mr. Stearns. Yes.
Mr. Larsen. So I think that is the composition of the
request in the President's budget.
Mr. Stearns. You asserted that these waivers are necessary
between now and 2014, to help people retain their coverage
until they have access to comprehensive coverage through the
exchange, but isn't it true that these plans and employers have
access to comprehensive coverage now, but it is just too
expensive and so that the employees themselves choose a lower-
cost plan?
Mr. Larsen. Well, it is a good question. It is not always
clear why employers offer different levels of coverage and,
certainly, in some cases, they are aware that their employees
can only afford--because they may be part-time workers or
seasonal workers, can only afford benefit packages that have
limited benefits.
So, that is what we know today. There is a range of
options----
Mr. Stearns. Yes.
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. But sometimes many of them aren't
affordable. In 2014, I think we are going to have a better set
of options available for employees and employers.
Mr. Stearns. I guess the question is do you and perhaps Mr.
Angoff think that the comprehensive coverage that we mandated
in 2014, through the exchanges or offered by employers, do you
think they will be less expensive and more affordable than it
is today? Based upon what we are saying and all these waivers
and----
Mr. Larsen. Yes. You know, there are----
Mr. Stearns. Don't you think----
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. Offsetting factors at play
because, when you bring, when you expand the insurance pool,
you are going to bring down costs because now you have a full
pool, and the exchanges also reduce administrative expenses
because all the time and money that insurance companies spend
today underwriting people and trying to figure out how not to
provide coverage with the--without having the pre-existing
condition, having a pre-existing condition exclusion ban, so
there are a number of factors that help to bring the cost down
in 2014. I think that was referenced even in the----
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Larsen, in all deference to you, you say
these based upon your opinion, that you think that it will
bring the cost down and so forth, but if you look at countries
that have a government universal health care plan, the costs
have not come down, and in fact, the costs have gone up, and
many countries now are trying to get from out--from underneath
the universal government health care. And there is a long line.
So is there any study or any analysis that you have done to
corroborate what you have just indicated that you think----
Mr. Larsen. Well, I know----
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. Through this universal magic wand
that everybody is going to get cheaper and more coverage.
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. Even--back to your earlier
question----
Mr. Stearns. Because, see, basically, in my opinion you are
putting price controls by--people are asking for waivers
because you are putting in price controllers. You are saying
basically these people got to comply with this or else, and
those people are saying we need waivers.
So it is a form of price control. You might not agree, but
when you do that, then what happens is you don't have the
opportunity for the market to bring it down because the
government is putting all these mandates down.
So I am just philosophizing----
Mr. Larsen. Well, I think----
Mr. Stearns. So the question is, do you have an analysis to
show, to back up, corroborate what your analysis is?
Mr. Larsen. Well, here is what we do know.
Mr. Stearns. Do you have an analysis?
Mr. Larsen. Consulting firms like Hewitt and Mercer looked
at the impact of the ACA on employer-based coverage and found
the impact might be in the 1 to 2 percent range, because most
coverage is meeting the requirements of the ACA, but we want to
raise the bar for everyone----
Mr. Stearns. OK.
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. So the financial impact on
premiums has been in the 1 to 2 percent range, and that is
offset by the benefits that consumers get. They don't have cost
sharing now for preventative services. So their out-of-pocket
expenses are much less now than they were before the passage of
the----
Mr. Stearns. All right. My time has expired.
Dr. Burgess. Thank you. Just a couple loose ends to tie up,
and it may not even take the full time.
There was some discussion, Mr. Stearns, and you with
Ranking Member DeGette about new tools versus new benefits. New
tools, one thing, new benefits certainly are a cost driver, so
when you flip the switch in 2014, and all the lights do come on
on all the new benefits, it is--there is going to be increased
cost.
So have you done an economic analysis on what is going to
be the effect on companies that are having difficulty meeting
the financial obligation today and require a waiver, they have
got new tools or new benefits, which means new costs? Have you
done an economic analysis, or can you point us toward a single
study that shows how that is going to work?
Mr. Larsen. I know it is subject to disagreement, but the
CBO estimated that the bill is going to lower overall health
care costs for many of the reasons that we have talked about.
Dr. Burgess. Well, OK. So they did, and that is the point
of some disagreement.
Actually, I had a resolution of inquiry the last Congress
and had the Democratic Chairman accepted it, we could have had
Mr. Foster in to talk about just that, because I was concerned
that Congress voted on a bill without knowing the actual cost.
Mr. Foster--Mr. Elmendorf had dramatically different cost
estimates, about a $450 billion spread over 10 years as I
recall, and that was pretty significant.
But we never got an opportunity to do that. Perhaps, Mr.
Chairman, we will get to do that make up.
Now, Mr. Angoff, you actually said that I was
mischaracterizing things when I said that the Office of
Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight skimmed from the
appropriations, the $1 billion for appropriations when you were
setting up the Act. So let me rephrase my question so it won't
be a mischaracterization.
Would it be inaccurate for anyone to say that, for example,
$5 billion was set aside for subsidizing the high-risk pools?
Mr. Angoff. No. That is accurate.
Dr. Burgess. But because you used some of that figure for
your Office for start-up costs, then the entire $5 billion was
not available, was it?
Mr. Angoff. And that is the intent because the language
says $5 billion is authorized to carry out the provision.
Dr. Burgess. Oftentimes we have a limiting amount that only
5 percent can be used for administrative function, but there
was no such limitation in this case, was there?
Mr. Angoff. That is right.
Dr. Burgess. So, again, I point to the fact that it would
be great to have that budgetary information, that detailed
budgetary information.
Now, you were hired a year ago as we have already
established, and you were involved in the outline of the
development of the creation of OCIIO, the predecessor of CCIIO
or whatever it is. I get confused. Who appointed you?
Mr. Angoff. The Secretary.
Dr. Burgess. And who advised the Secretary on the creation
of the Office of Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight?
Mr. Angoff. I did not.
Dr. Burgess. Do we know who?
Mr. Angoff. I don't know.
Dr. Burgess. You had a Deputy at the time. Was the Deputy
involved in providing that advise to the Secretary?
Mr. Angoff. My Deputy?
Dr. Burgess. Yes.
Mr. Angoff. Not to my knowledge.
Dr. Burgess. Well, who decided that it was a good idea to
put it in the Secretary's office?
Mr. Angoff. I don't know.
Dr. Burgess. Well, we have already established that there
was a reason then to move it to CMS. Mr. Larsen, can you help
us with that just a little bit more why it was so important to
have it freely mobile within HHS at one point and then suddenly
bring it under the control of CMS?
I got to tell you with all due respect it does look like we
were trying to move things around, and it was because this
committee indirectly started asking questions about what was
happening and beginning to shine a little light on the
activities, because I got to tell you, most members of Congress
were blissfully unaware, Mr. Angoff, of your activities last
fall.
Mr. Larsen. I would characterize it this way. I hope this
is helpful. It is kind of the difference between a startup and
then running the operation. They had to start this thing up
from scratch.
Dr. Burgess. And I don't dispute that, but it is just
interesting that after the questions started to get asked when
the discussion was made----
Mr. Larsen. They weren't connected. We concluded that----
Dr. Burgess. Let me ask you this, Mr. Angoff. We had a nice
discussion in November, and I was concerned, if I got a
constituent back home that says, well, I want one of these
waivers, how do I get one? And it actually wasn't available on
the Web site that, at that time. It was shortly after our visit
that that information did become available on the Web site, so
I am greatly appreciative that you did that, but as you were
developing this, why was there not more thought given to how do
we get this out to just the regular guy on the street who may
run a small business or a restaurant or may need this waiver?
Mr. Angoff. Well, we did give it some thought. As you said,
it is on the Web site now. It is a transparent process, and we
think it has worked well.
Dr. Burgess. But, again, this was all in the works for some
time, and it just strikes me as odd that you wouldn't have had
that one simple feature out there early on to make this more
accessible to more people. Obviously it is a very popular
waiver program, very popular, and many people want to
participate in it, and again, I dare say they will still want
to after 2014.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. All right. Mr. Griffith from Virginia is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me ask you this
in regard to the shift. I think I heard earlier that part of
the reason for that was that there were would be efficiencies
gained. I have also heard there were 252 employees. I am
wondering how many employees have been let go or been
transferred subsequent to the shifts in the attempt to make
efficiencies.
Mr. Larsen. Sure. Well, I guess a couple of answers. One,
we are in a 60- to 90-day transition period. We have a
transition team from CMS and a transition team from our shop
working together to nail down these efficiencies. We don't
anticipate laying people off, but as Jay mentioned there are
certainly areas where we don't--we are not going to staff up in
the future, for example, and we have got to figure out what
exactly that staffing level is going forward.
So we are right in the middle of that process from a
staffing perspective.
Mr. Griffith. So you made the move for the efficiencies,
but we don't know what--how much you are going to----
Mr. Larsen. Well----
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. How many employees you are going
to be able to save, how many spots you are going to be able to
reduce?
Mr. Larsen. Well, let me rephrase that. We are not talking
about necessarily reducing--meaning laying people off. I mean,
we have told our people we are not laying people off, but as
attrition comes in and as we get efficiencies with the budget
people and with the legislative office and with the programs
office, there is----
Mr. Griffith. So you are planning to do it through
attrition, but do you have any idea what your target--how
many----
Mr. Larsen. That is--no.
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. Spots you wish to get of?
Mr. Larsen. That is what we are working--we are, literally
as we speak, working through the exact components.
Mr. Griffith. And I am new to the Federal Government but
wouldn't it make sense to have some idea of what--how many
folks or how many spots you were going to eliminate if the
reason for shifting was efficiencies----
Mr. Larsen. Well, we didn't----
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. Before you made the shift?
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. Go in with a hard and fast number
about what we want to save. We clearly understood as we were
continuing to stand up OCIIO,and that we need to have functions
here, and that CMS has those functions, and those----
Mr. Griffith. Let me shift gears.
Mr. Larsen. Sure.
Mr. Griffith. Isn't it true that the employers' plans which
have received these waivers are likely to drop coverage for
their employees is no longer affordable in 2014, finding it
cheaper to pay the penalty, if applicable?
Mr. Larsen. I don't think so.
Mr. Griffith. Well, the CBO estimates approximately three
million employees will be dropped by their employers into the
exchanges, and in that circumstance won't the individuals be
forced to buy a more comprehensive plan at a greater cost to
themselves and at a greater cost to the taxpayer if that
premium then has to be subsidized through the exchange?
Mr. Larsen. Well, they will have an option for better
coverage, and if they meet the guidelines for subsidies, then
they will have the opportunity to get that coverage, but that
is paid through the various sources as you know, the funds, the
Affordable Care Act.
Mr. Griffith. But isn't it correct that if there are, in
fact, three million employees that are dropped, that that is
going to put some burden onto the exchanges and the subsidies?
Mr. Larsen. Well, it means there would be more people
there, but I think, as we have talked about, there are a number
of aspects of the ACA that reduce costs overall, so I think
those costs are going to be manageable and affordable for
people in those policies.
Mr. Griffith. But as Mr. Angoff said earlier when he didn't
like somebody's opinion, actuaries just give you opinions and
then you have to see if they are right. This would also be the
case with what you have just said. We have to see whether or
not those actuaries are right, and many times they are not.
Isn't that correct?
Mr. Larsen. Well, if you have two actuaries, there is
always the possibility----
Mr. Griffith. One of them is going to be wrong.
Mr. Larsen. Right.
Mr. Griffith. I yield back my time.
Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentleman. Before I recognize the
gentleman from New York for 5 minutes I ask unanimous consent
to put this into the record, a letter from Kathleen Sebelius.
Without objection, so ordered, and it is dated January 5,
2011.
[The information appears in the exhibit binder at the
conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Stearns. The gentleman from New York is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Weiner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have been watching
with some interest in--my office has been trying to do the
appropriation bill on the floor at the same time.
I just want to try to set this up a little bit. You know,
we have this tendency to believe that this debate is about
health care, and to some degree it is, but what it is really
about is how we pay for the health care we get. I mean, isn't
it true, Mr. Larsen, that if someone is struck by lightening
and they are lying on the street, that an ambulance will come
and pick them up, that a doctor will try to resuscitate them,
if they need surgery, they will probably get it, but the
question becomes how it is we pay for that care and how we
insure certain minimum standard of care.
Is that right, Mr. Larsen?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Mr. Weiner. And are there not really three possibilities?
One is the employer-based model, which is we pay premiums to an
insurance company, they set the rules, they set the standards,
we go to them, we pay them, and they pass the money along to
the hospitals, to the doctors, to the ambulance driver, and
then they take a certain amount of profit.
The second model is the one where basically you don't have
a private company passing along costs. A government agency kind
of does that. For example, Medicare is like that. No government
officer, Mr. Larsen, is paid to be the doctor. It is just a
matter of how we are paid for that care.
And then there is the third traunch of people which have no
coverage whatsoever. They are the people that don't have any
insurance whatsoever, and we hope and hope and hope they have
money in their own pocket to pay for that care, but if they
don't, isn't it true, Mr. Larsen, that what would wind up
happening is we are stuck with some tough choices. We can say
to the hospital doctor, tough. You got to suck it up, and
sometimes hospitals go out of business. We lost 17 hospitals,
Ms. DeGette, in New York just since the year 2000.
Or we can say, you know, let us come up with some kind of
reimbursement program, own reimbursed care. Different States
have different rules, the Federal Government has different
rules. Or we can do this. We can say to the taxpayer, why don't
you pay it, and we will figure out later on how we need to work
that, and that is why States get stuck with such a large cost,
localities get stuck with large costs.
When we had this discussion about how to come up with a
system for dealing with those people that are uninsured, what
did we do? We didn't go for the model that someone like I would
have liked, which is let us say like Medicare, for more
Americans, eventually covering all Americans. We went with
basically a free-market model and said, let us try the
employer-based system. Let us try to offer people both
incentives, subsidies, and then if they don't do it, we are
going to say to them, you know what? You can't pass your bills
along to everyone else. You are going to have to pay a little
extra if you are going to do that.
Wasn't it, in fact, the system that we set up a reliance
upon the market-based model, the free-market model that says
insurance companies, you go do this work? Wasn't that basically
the path we followed here, Mr. Larsen?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Weiner. And further, Mr. Larsen, do not insurance
companies, and they are not venal people. They are in a
business. They are in a free-market business. Do they not make
the most profits if they take in the highest amount of premiums
and pay out the least amount in care? Don't they then make the
most profit?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Weiner. And isn't the model today structured to
incentivize them to do that? The problem is, Mr. Larsen, and
Mr. Angoff, is that that model is not necessarily in the
interest of our constituents or good care.
I will give you an example. What if they decide we don't
want to cover preventative care, or we don't want to cover
people for the entire life of their illness. We just want to
cover the first couple of days. They are going to make more
money. Their stockholders are going to do well. That company is
going to do well, but it is not necessarily in the best
interest of the American people, whether you are in a
Republican congressional district or a Democratic. Sometimes we
want to say to them, you know what? We want to have some
standards we want you to uphold. We don't want you to go out of
business. We have socked it in on this process. We obviously
want insurance companies to do well to make a healthy profit.
We want them to be around for years to come.
But the question is should we say to them, maybe we should
put basic requirements that if that guy is lying on the street,
you can't look at him and say, oh, I don't think this guy is
going to be a good deal and have the insurance company keep
driving by. No, of course not. We got to be able to make
coverage.
And you know what? They are doing remarkably well. Let us
face it. If you bought insurance company stock at the beginning
of the recent downfall, you would still be doing pretty well
because people keep getting sick, people keep getting struck by
lightning, people keep needing that care. They are doing OK. As
a matter of fact, if you want to find the easiest, let us say
$300 billion or so, you can take out, you can transfer in
health care costs to better care and reduce taxes for people.
You might want to look at the percentage of the health care
budget that we put to insurance company profits.
So the idea that somehow government is coming in and
imposing some government solution, there is not a single
government doctor that has been hired, a single government
nurse, a single government operator of an X-ray machine. But
that doesn't mean we should simply say you are unfettered by
any regulatory force.
For all of the talk about let us have transferring of being
able to buy insurance policies over State lines, none of my
Republican friends have said, let us get rid of State insurance
commissioners and State insurance regulations because we
acknowledge we need some basic regulations.
Mr. Larsen, is that basically in a broad form what your
office has been spending part of its time doing?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Weiner. Thank you, and I await a second round, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Stearns. All right. The gentleman has advocated
strongly for Medicare as a solution, so he has made that
argument all during our markups, and I think he--and I
appreciate him coming down.
I think what we are going to do, we are finished the
rounds. I thought the ranking member would have a chance to
close, and then I would say a few----
Ms. DeGette. I would ask unanimous consent that----
Mr. Stearns. Objection. Just let me just clarify. Generally
when we do the rounds, a member has to be here. So--but if the
member shows up in the beginning and then goes to the restroom
and comes back, then that is OK, but if someone comes at the
very end--I think your eloquent goes to the equivalent of
three.
So at this point I think we are going to have--we have been
here 3 hours, and we are going to let the ranking member
conclude, and then I will say a few closing comments, and we
appreciate the witnesses bearing through the rest of us.
Go ahead.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I just have a
couple of questions to clarify. I guess I would ask either one
of you gentlemen, if this agency was moved because of any
action that this Oversight and Investigations Committee or the
Energy and Commerce Committee in general made?
Mr. Angoff. No, it was not.
Ms. DeGette. And why was it moved?
Mr. Angoff. It was moved because there are efficiencies to
be gained, as we mentioned, in such functions as budget,
personnel, external affairs, IT, and other front office
functions. There are efficiencies to be gained.
Ms. DeGette. So it was actually done to make the program
operate in a more efficient manner?
Mr. Angoff. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. Now, there was some question about the
agency's budget, and I just wanted to clarify. As I recall, the
HHS overall budget request was about $79 billion, and from what
I have heard is that your Office's budget, Mr. Larsen, is
roughly about $330 million for 2012. Is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. So of that amount that would--of the CMS
budget, which, of course, is much smaller than the overall HHS
budget, your budget request would be around $7.5 of the CMS
budget request and less than one-half of 1 percent of the
overall HHS discretionary budget request for 2012. Is that
correct?
Mr. Larsen. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. And what your agency is doing by giving these
waivers, it is working with companies, both private companies
and also group plans, to give them appropriate waiver so that
they can give insurance to their employees during the gap
between now and 2014, when those employees will be having more
options. Is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Chairman, I will yield my remaining 2
minutes to Mr. Weiner.
Mr. Weiner. While you are here, can you clear up a couple
of things? I understand in the Health Care Act we hired 16,000
IRS officers. That is not true, is it?
Mr. Larsen. I don't know.
Mr. Weiner. Yes. That was one of those made-up things. I
actually wanted a couple of moments to tick off the made-up
stories about the health care, but I realize 2 minutes and 48
seconds will barely tip the iceberg, but let me just--that is
one of the stories that is made up,
Secondly, there is this notion about the Health Care Act
that has been perpetuated widely that government is going and
taking over health care, government takeover of health care is
said over and over again.
Under the Act today, under the Act today, or under the Act
when it is implemented, will there ever be a situation where
there will be a government employee, a government employee
telling a doctor what process or processes that they can offer
to a patient?
Mr. Larsen. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Weiner. However, there still will be, because we have
private insurance companies, still will be insurance companies
that are going to have broad discretion to be jackasses with
their customers. Right? You can't--there are still going to be
people, they are still going to keep you on hold for hours.
There is nothing in the bill that prevents that. Right?
Mr. Larsen. If your question is does it preserve the
private market for insurance companies, yes.
Mr. Weiner. Yes. You are much more delicate than I am, Mr.
Larsen.
Let me ask you another question. There is this notion that
we are paying a couple of years, we are paying 10 years of
taxes for 6 years of service. Isn't it true that today as we
speak that senior citizens have--that senior citizens are
getting help reducing the cost for prescription drugs, the so-
called donut hole? Isn't that true that that is true today,
this second?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Weiner. Is it also not true that under Medicare
processes that used to be subject to a co-payment are now not
covered--that now do not--or has that not taken affect yet?
Mr. Angoff. No, that is in effect.
Mr. Weiner. That has. That is today?
Mr. Angoff. Yes, sir.
Mr. Weiner. Year--basically year 1, week 1, month 1 of the
new Health Care Act.
Let me finally ask you in the remaining 60 seconds about
the idea of the death panel. What section or line is the death
panel in? And just so you know, it was widely circulated by all
kinds of media outlets and perpetuated by some members of this
Congress that there was an effort going to be made in order to
reduce end-of-life coverage. They were going to tell some
people they could not get that coverage. Is that anywhere in
the Act, anywhere in the regulation, or anywhere in the attempt
of the law?
Mr. Angoff. No. I haven't been able to find it.
Mr. Weiner. Now, can I ask you this question. Is it also
true that the way the private insurance model is supposed to
work is that if you aggregate the cost on a wider population,
meaning more people get private coverage, that in theory
according to free-market principles that aggregation of cost
means lower costs to the whole population?
Mr. Angoff. That is right. That is the fundamental
principle of insurance. You spread the risk as widely as
possible.
Mr. Weiner. Thank you very much, and I yield back what time
is remaining.
Mr. Stearns. All right. The gentlelady yields back, and we
are going to conclude. I have, as Chairman I have the
opportunity to offer a few closing comments.
I would say a question that, you don't have to answer but
there is a competitive effectiveness for it which is part of
this bill which is trying to determine efficiency of delivery,
which is being construed by some as a case of cutting off
certain services for, shall we say, medical practice.
But anytime you have a government mandate on insurance
companies, you have a government mandate on employers and
employees, that is considered a government-run system, and that
is why in both the State of Virginia and the State of Florida
they have ruled this mandate unconstitutional.
But I would just close with this comment. The New York
Times recently reported on December 8, 2010, that you folks
have leased an office in Bethesda and are, ``paying almost
double the market rate for the space.'' This is what the New
York Times reported, and I assume that is true.
Mr. Angoff. No, it is not, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stearns. It is not true. I will give you a chance to
correct that----
Mr. Angoff. No, it is not.
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. Because you think the New York
Times is incorrect.
Mr. Angoff. In that case, yes, it is. The Bethesda office
space was something that we didn't seek. We rented in Bethesda
because the rates in Bethesda were lower, substantially lower
than they were in Washington, DC, and in addition, there was
the extra added bonus that the space there was already built
out. We didn't want to go to Bethesda. We would much rather
have preferred to be----
Mr. Stearns. In Washington.
Mr. Angoff [continuing]. DC, but it was cheaper, and we
could get it, get in there faster.
Mr. Stearns. OK. So if I went to the landlord of that
building you are in, they would lease it to me for the same
amount that you are paying?
Mr. Angoff. I don't know what they would do.
Mr. Stearns. So it is possible that you are paying, even
though you are paying less than you would be in Washington, DC,
you are paying more than the market rate for that Bethesda
facility. I think that is what the New York Times----
Mr. Angoff. No, and I think----
Mr. Larsen. I think that the error was that there is a
difference between rentable space and usable space, and you get
different rates based on whether it is, for example, ready to
move in. So the market rate for rentable space, which is what
my understanding is the GSA negotiated, was, in fact, the
market rate for rental space.
Mr. Stearns. Just giving you an opportunity. I just thought
it ironic when we are trying to bring health care costs and the
main core constituency that is deciding what the Health Care
Bill should be is paying too high a market rate. So that is my
only thought about it.
Let me just close by allowing all members to offer
questions for a period of up to 10 days. If you have additional
questions, you are welcome to offer those. I want to thank the
witnesses for your participation, and without further ado, the
Committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:30 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for convening our first oversight
hearing on the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
(``PPAC'').
This oversight hearing is long overdue. The PPACA was
enacted almost 1 year ago, and this is the first time this
Committee has held an oversight hearing on the law. I know some
may think we are moving too fast, or asking too many questions
of the Department of Health and Human Services about the
implementation of health care reform. But if you ask me, over
the last year, this Committee didn't ask enough questions.
So today we begin our work. We will start by examining the
Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight. The
Center is part of HHS and is responsible for implementing the
PPACA. The current director of the Center, Mr. Steve Larsen,
and its former director, Mr. Jay Angoff, are here to testify on
behalf of HHS.
I think it is fair to say that this subcommittee has enough
questions about the implementation of health care reform that
we could keep Mr. Larsen and Mr. Angoff here testifying for the
rest of the week. Today I am anxious to hear about the waivers
the Center has been busy issuing to various health care plans
offered by states, unions, and other employers. These waivers
exempt those plans from the PPACA's requirements, in
particular, the requirement that prohibits employers from
imposing annual or lifetime limits on benefits. To date, the
Center has issued over 900 waivers to health plans, and that
number is rising every day.
This Committee has requested a number of documents about
the waivers issued by the Center. We have some documents, but
not all. The documents we do have show that complying with the
PPACA would have forced hundreds of businesses to drop the
health insurance plans they provide to their workers because
the plans that Obamacare would have forced them to have would
have been too expensive, and would have bankrupted those
businesses.
What does it say about the feasibility of a law when you
need to exempt over 900 health plans (so far)--or 2.5 million
people--from complying with it? While I think it is a good
thing that HHS recognized the significant problems posed by the
PPACA--and exempted these health plans from a requirement that
would have resulted in thousands of people losing their health
insurance or having reduced benefits--I think it's a tacit
admission that the PPACA is fundamentally flawed.
I also have questions for Mr. Angoff and Mr. Larsen about
the Center's operations and its role, now that it has been
moved from the Office of the Secretary of HHS to the Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (``CMS''). As the entity
responsible for the massive changes being made to the private
health care industry, I want to know what lessons the Center
has learned as we approach the 1-year anniversary of the
PPACA's enactment. I hope the witnesses will have some insights
to share.
As Chairman of this Committee, I am committed to
investigating the implementation of the PPACA. I think it is
important that we uncover the facts about how this law is being
implemented and what it means for the individuals and employers
who have to live with its costly requirements. Only when we
understand what worked and what didn't can this Congress enact
meaningful healthcare reform that lets people keep their
coverage and doesn't pass the bill to future generations.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
----------

Prepared Statement of Hon. John D. Dingell

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Department of Health and Human Services was tasked with
the tremendous responsibility of implementing the Affordable
Care Act, with the Center for Consumer Information and
Insurance Oversight serving as one of the greatest consumer
protections under this new law.
CCIIO has the critical responsibilities of providing
consumers with comprehensive and accessible information about
health plans, monitoring and ensuring compliance within the
private insurance market, and overseeing the creation of state
insurance exchanges. The success of CCIIO in these tasks is
essential to providing consumers with affordable and quality
health coverage now and when the health insurance exchanges are
up and running.
In the time since the Affordable Care Act has been
implemented, I believe that CCIIO used its authority
appropriately to assist States, employers and insurers in
complying with the law, while also ensuring that employers--
both small and large--are not unnecessarily and negatively
impacted by the Affordable Care Act. Their efforts at creating
and providing transparency in implementing key provisions of
the law have resulted in effective and efficient roll-outs of
the Early Retiree Reinsurance Program and the Pre-existing
Condition Insurance Plan.
Further, the development of the waiver process for annual
limits has struck a delicate balance between protecting the
access of millions of consumers in ``mini-med'' plans to
affordable coverage, while also assisting a diverse array of
employers and insurers with the information and tools necessary
to navigate the application process.
The work CCIIO is doing now in the areas of annual limits,
rate review, Early Retiree and PCIP all will lay a solid and
necessary foundation for the creation of the health insurance
exchanges, while ensuring uninterrupted care in the meantime. I
commend CCIIO for their work done thus far, and I hope that
today's hearing will serve as yet another opportunity for the
American people to learn about how ACA is improving the quality
of their health coverage.
----------

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.168

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.169

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.170

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.171

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.172

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.173

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.174

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.175

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.176

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.177

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.178

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.179

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.180

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.181

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.182

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.183

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.185

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.186

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.187

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.188

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.189

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.190

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.191

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.192

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.193

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.194

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.195

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.196

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.197

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.198

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.199

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.200

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.201

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.202

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.203

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.204

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.205

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.206

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.207

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.208

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.209

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.210

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.211

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.212

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.213

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.214

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.215

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.216

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.217

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.218

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.219

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.220

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.221

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.222

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.223

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.224

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.225

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.226

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.227

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.228

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.229

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.230

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.231

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.232

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.233

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.234

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.235

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.236

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.237

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.238

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.239

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.240

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.241

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.242

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.243

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.244

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.245

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.246

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.247

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.248

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.249

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.250

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.251

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.252

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.262

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5977.263


