- H.R.------, THE U.S. AGRICULTURAL SECTOR RELIEF ACT OF 2012, AND H.R.--, THE ASTHMA INHALERS RELIEF ACT OF 2012

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R.------, THE ``U.S. AGRICULTURAL SECTOR RELIEF ACT OF 2012,'' AND
H.R.------, THE ``ASTHMA INHALERS RELIEF ACT OF 2012''

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 18, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-168

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

82-531 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JIM MATHESON, Utah
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JOHN BARROW, Georgia
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             GENE GREEN, Texas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   LOIS CAPPS, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio)
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     4
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     7
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................    11
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................    15
Hon. Lois Capps, a Representative in Congress from the State of
California, opening statement..................................    15

Witnesses

Russ Costanza, Owner, Russell Costanza Farms.....................    19
Prepared statement...........................................    22
Scott M. DiMare, Vice President and Director of Farm Operatons,
DiMare Ruskin, Inc.............................................    28
Prepared statement...........................................    30
David D. Doniger, Policy Director, Climate and Clean Air Program,
Natural Resources Defense Council..............................    38
Prepared statement...........................................    40
Michelle Castellano Keeler, Vice President, Mellano & Company....    59
Prepared statement...........................................    61
Mark Murai, President, California Strawberry Commission..........    70
Prepared statement...........................................    73
Jason Shandell, Vice President and General Counsel, Amphastar
Pharmaceuticals, Inc...........................................   152
Prepared statement...........................................   155
Monica Kraft, Professor of Medicine, Duke University; President,
American Thoracic Society; and Director, Duke Asthma, Allergy
and Airway Center..............................................   162
Prepared statement...........................................   165
Chris Ward, Former Chairman, Board of Directors, Asthma and
Allergy Foundation of America..................................   171
Prepared statement...........................................   173
Edward W. Kerwin, Senior Medical Director, Allergy and Asthma
Center of Southern Oregon......................................   177
Prepared statement...........................................   179

Submitted Material

Letter, dated February 29, 2012, from Mr. Burgess to President
Barack Obama, submitted by Mr. Burgess.........................     5
Letter, dated July 17, 2012, from Nancy Sander, President and
Founder, Allergy & Asthma Network Mothers of Asthmatics, to Mr.
Whitfield, submitted by Mr. Barton.............................    12
Letter, dated July 17, 2012, of Eric Larson, Executive Director,
San Diego County Farm Bureau, to Mr. Whitfield, submitted by
Mr. Bilbray....................................................    18
Article, dated 2012, ``Moving away from methyl bromide: Political
economy of pesticide transition for California strawberries
since 2004,'' Journal of Environmental Medicine, submitted by
Mr. Rush.......................................................   102
Letter, dated July 17, 2012, from Larry Jacobs, Farm Fuel Inc.,
to Mr. Whitfield and Mr. Rush, submitted by Mr. Rush...........   111
Letter, undated, from Jim Cochran, President, Swanton Berry
Farms, to Mr. Whitfield and Mr. Rush, submitted by Mr. Rush....   113
Letter, dated July 14, 2012, from Albert S. Marulli, Agricultural
Trade Services, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr. Whitfield.......   116
Letter, dated July 17, 2012, from Kelly Covello, President,
Almond Hullers & Processors Association, to Mr. Upton,
submitted by Mr. Whitfield.....................................   117
Letter, dated July 12, 2012, from Bob Stallman, President,
American Farm Bureau Federation, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr.
Whitfield......................................................   120
Letter, dated July 12, 2012, from Albert P. Keck, Chairman,
California Dates Commission, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr.
Whitfield......................................................   121
Letter, dated July 16, 2012, from Carl Eidsath, Technical Support
Director, California Walnut Commission, to Mr. Upton, submitted
by Mr. Whitfield...............................................   123
Letter, dated July 16, 2012, from John L. Hoblick, President,
Florida Farm Bureau Federation, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr.
Whitfield......................................................   125
Letter, dated July 10, 2012, from Reginald L. Brown, Executive
Vice President, Florida Tomato Exchange, to Mr. Upton,
submitted by Mr. Whitfield.....................................   126
Letter, dated July 17, 2012, from Charles T. Hall, Jr., Executive
Director, Georgia Fruit & Vegetable Growers Association, to Mr.
Upton, submitted by Mr. Whitfield..............................   128
Letter, undated, from John C. Holzinger, Holzinger Flowers, Inc.,
to Mr. Whitfield, submitted by Mr. Whitfield...................   129
Letter, dated July 16, 2012, from Robert Y. Harper, President,
Hopkinsville Milling Company, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr.
Whitfield......................................................   131
Letter, dated July 16, 2012, from C.B. Knappen III, President,
CEO, Knappen Milling Company, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr.
Whitfield......................................................   132
Letter, dated July 13, 2012, from Elizabeth Elwood Ponce, Co-
Owner, Lassen Canyon Nursery, Inc., to Mr. Upton, submitted by
Mr. Whitfield..................................................   134
Letter, dated July 16, 2012, from Dennis Rochford, President,
Maritime Exchange for the Delaware River and Bay, to Mr. Upton,
submitted by Mr. Whitfield.....................................   140
Letter, undated, from Fred Leitz, Jr., None Better Fruits and
Vegetables, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr. Whitfield...........   141
Letter, dated July 17, 2012, from Arthur Loeffler, President,
Star of the West Mining Co., to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr.
Whitfield......................................................   144
Letter, dated July 16, 2012, from Michael Wootton, Senior Vice
President, Sunkist, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr. Whitfield...   145
Letter, dated July 11, 2012, from Eric Nissen, Vice President,
Sunshine State Carnations, Inc., to Mr. Whitfield, submitted by
Mr. Whitfield..................................................   147
Letter, dated July 11, 2012, from Eric Nissen, Vice President,
Sunshine State Carnations, Inc., to Mr. Rush, submitted by Mr.
Whitfield......................................................   148
Letter, dated July 13, 2012, from Mike Miguel, Director of
Industrial and Environmental Process Applications, Sunsweet
Growers, Inc., to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr. Whitfield........   149
Letter, dated July 13, 2012, from Miriam Borja-Fisher, Western
Industries, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr. Whitfield...........   151
Discussion Draft of HR --------, the ``U.S. Agricultural Sector
Relief Act of 2012,'' submitted by Mr. Whitfield...............   201
Discussion Draft of HR --------, the ``Asthma Inhalers Relief Act
of 2012,'' submitted by Mr. Whitfield..........................   209
Letter, dated October 28, 2011, from Nancy Sander, President and
Founder, Allergy & Asthma Network Mothers of Asthmatics, et
al., to Honorable Pat Roberts and Honorable Jim DeMint, U.S.
Senate, submitted by Mr. Rush..................................   213
Letter, dated November 28, 2011, from Mark Salyer, Executive Vice
President and General Manager, Teva Respiratory, to Lisa
Jackson, Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency,
submitted by Mr. Rush..........................................   217
Letter, dated December 12, 2011, from Dave Stirpe, Executive
Director, The Alliance for Responsible Atmospheric Policy, to
Margaret A. Hamburg, Commissioner, Food and Drug
Administration, submitted by Mr. Rush..........................   219
Letter, dated July 17, 2012, from Alpha-1 Association, et al., to
Mr. Whitfield and Mr. Rush, submitted by Mr. Rush..............   223
Statement, dated July 18, 2012, of Maureen Hardwick, Secretariat,
International Pharmaceutical Aerosol Consortium, submitted by
Mr. Rush.......................................................   225
Letter, dated November 17, 2011, from Bob Corcuera, Category
Manager-Health Care, Kinney Drugs, to Cynthia Giles, Assistant
Administrator, Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance,
Environmental Protection Agency, submitted by Mr. Whitfield....   229
Letter, dated November 22, 2011, from Kevin N. Nicholson, Vice
President, Government Affairs and Public Policy, National
Association of Chain Drug Stores, to Cynthia Giles, Assistant
Administrator, Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance,
Environmental Protection Agency, submitted by Mr. Whitfield....   231
Letter, dated December 8, 2011, from Ronna B. Hauser, Vice
President, Policy & Regulatory Affairs, National Community
Pharmacists Association, to Cynthia Giles, Assistant
Administrator, Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance,
Environmental Protection Agency, submitted by Mr. Whitfield....   233
Letter, dated December 30, 2011, from Cynthia Giles, Assistant
Administrator, Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance,
Environmental Protection Agency, to Bart Stupak, Attorney for
Amphastar and Armstrong Pharmaceuticals, Venable LLP, submitted
by Mr. Whitfield...............................................   236
Statement, dated July 18, 2012, of Regina McCarthy, Assistant
Administrator for the Office of Air and Radiation,
Environmental Protection Agency, submitted by Mr. Whitfield....   238

H.R.------, THE U.S. AGRICULTURAL SECTOR RELIEF ACT OF 2012, AND H.R.--
----, THE ASTHMA INHALERS RELIEF ACT OF 2012

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 18, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:20 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed
Whitfield (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Shimkus,
Walden, Terry, Burgess, Bilbray, Scalise, Olson, McKinley,
Gardner, Griffith, Barton, Upton (ex officio), Rush, Sarbanes,
Dingell, Engel, Green, Capps, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Anita Bradley, Senior Policy Advisor to
Chairman Emeritus; Allison Busbee, Legislative Clerk; Cory
Hicks, Policy Coordinator, Energy and Power; Heidi King, Chief
Economist; Ben Lieberman, Counsel, Energy and Power; Mary
Neumayr, Senior Energy Counsel; Jeff Baran, Democratic Senior
Counsel; Phil Barnett, Democratic Staff Director; and Caitlin
Haberman, Democratic Policy Analyst.
Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call this hearing to order
this morning. This morning, we will be focused on two pieces of
legislation: the U.S. Agricultural Sector Relief Act of 2012
and the Asthma Inhalers Relief Act of 2012. Our friends on the
other side of the aisle are not here yet. They have been
delayed except for Mrs. Capps of California, so the way we will
proceed is that I will give my 5-minute opening statement.
Then, I will call on the chairman of the full committee, Mr.
Upton, to give his 5 minutes. And by then, we believe Mr.
Waxman will be here and then if Mr. Rush is not here, I think
Mrs. Capps is going to give an opening statement. So you all
have to listen to the Republicans for about 10 minutes first
before we hear the other side.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

As I said, we are holding a legislative hearing on the U.S.
Agricultural Sector Relief Act of 2012 and the Asthma Inhalers
Relief Act of 2012. Both bills relate to Title VI of the Clean
Air Act, specifically, the Montreal Protocol. This
international environmental treaty seeks to phase out the use
of ozone-depleting substances. One of the substances to be
phased out is the fumigant methyl bromide. And basically, it
has been phased out except for certain critical use exemptions.
Now, this substance is used by many agricultural groups
around the country, those who grow eggplant, flowers, peppers,
strawberries, used in milling companies and so forth. And while
many of these farmers have been able to switch to substitutes
for certain purposes--for example, sulfuryl fluoride--we now
discover that EPA wants to ban sulfuryl fluoride, the
substitute. So we think that that does provide a problem.
And I might also add that this methyl bromide is very
important--I think I indicated this earlier--in milling
operations. So it is also critical uses that the U.S.
Agricultural Sector Relief Act sets out a process to allow
limited but continued availability of methyl bromide. And we
want to set that out clearly in the statute.
I would also like to just say a brief word about the Asthma
Inhalers Relief Act. This bill simply allows the CFC inhalers
already manufactured before the ban to be sold or distributed
providing a temporary supply for those asthmatics who would
like the option to purchase this. So it is a limited amount. It
has already been manufactured. It is just sitting on the
shelves and there are many people out there who have requested
the ability to continue to use this over-the-counter medicine
for their asthma condition. So that is the purpose of this
legislation.
At this time I would like recognize the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Burgess, for 2 minutes and 35 seconds.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. I thank the chairman for the recognition.
You know, this past January 1, a common over-the-counter
emergency asthma inhaler was taken off the pharmacy shelves due
to an international treaty agreement known as the Montreal
Protocol. Now, asthma sufferers who find themselves awakened at
2:00 a.m. with an unexpected attack and who don't have other
medicines in the home don't have immediate access to an inhaler
and they are forced to undergo a time-consuming and expensive
emergency room visit, or worse yet, stay up the rest of the
night using the accessory muscles of breathing, wondering if
they are going to live through the experience.
A replacement inhaler has been before the Food and Drug
Administration's approval board for some time, but the FDA has
taken no action to allow for another over-the-counter inhaler
to be available for consumers. When the January 1, 2012, ban
went into effect, people expected that its replacement would be
available. They did not expect disruption to health services
for asthma patients. But this is not the case. Because of the
Food and Drug Administration's intransigence, asthmatics
currently do not have an over-the-counter remedy when they have
an unexpected attack, especially if that attack happens when
they are traveling and they don't have access to their regular
medicines.
However, there is a fairly simple solution. The
Environmental Protection Agency has within its authority to
ability to waive the ban on the over-the-counter epinephrine
meter-dosed inhaler to allow the existing stock to be sold, at
least until a replacement can be approved. Yet, despite
multiple letters to the EPA and in fact to the President of the
United States and questions during committee hearings, the EPA
remains unresponsive to the plight of millions of asthmatics.
Why does EPA refuse to grant a waiver? I simply cannot tell
you because they will not tell me. It is because of their
refusal, EPA's refusal to account for the health and safety of
asthma patients that we are in the predicament that we are in
today. We have got a straightforward piece of legislation--
require the EPA to grant a waiver to allow for the sale of
remaining stock, which otherwise would be wasted on the shelves
of storage facilities where it sits, allowing perfectly good
inhalers to sit unused when patients need them really cries out
for remedy. The miniscule amount, I mean miniscule amount, of
chlorofluorocarbons that exist in the over-the-counter inhalers
will have a negligible effect on the hole in the ozone,
especially considering the limited supply left.
The Environmental Protection Agency should be on the side
of patients and consumers. In this case, it is not.
Administrator Lisa Jackson and President Obama need to stop
this senseless war on asthmatics.
And I will yield back my time.
Oh, Mr. Chairman, I would ask for unanimous consent to
provide for the record a copy of the letter I sent to the
President of the United States on February 29 of this year
asking for this waiver.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I would recognize the
gentleman from California, Mr. Waxman, for his 5-minute opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In the 1970s, scientists warned that manmade chemicals were
depleting the stratospheric ozone, which protects our planet
from harmful ultraviolet rays from the sun. In response,
governments around the world acted to address the threat. At
first, we acted unilaterally taking steps such as banning CFCs
from hairspray. Then, we entered into the Montreal Protocol to
ensure that all the nations of the world were working together
to solve the problem. The Montreal Protocol is widely
recognized as a tremendously successful international
environmental agreement. As a result of the protocol, global
emissions of the gases are a small fraction of their 1990
levels. And if we continue to comply with the protocol and
enforce the Clean Air Act, the ozone layer is expected to
recover later this century.
But this progress cannot be taken for granted. Legislation
like we are considering today would undermine the effectiveness
of the Montreal Protocol. The first bill we are considering
would increase the use of methyl bromide, a pesticide that is a
powerful ozone-depleting chemical. Methyl bromide has been
banned since 2005, but there is a mechanism in the law for
critical use exemptions.
Each year, growers apply for exemptions. EPA analyzes those
applications with the help of USDA and the U.S. Government
requests critical use exemptions under the Montreal Protocol.
This process is working. Since 2005, the level of critical use
exemptions requested by the United States and granted through
the Montreal Protocol has decreased dramatically. That is
exactly what is supposed to happen.
California's strawberry growers are the largest remaining
user of methyl bromide. They have been predicting for years
that these reductions in methyl bromide would ruin their crops,
but according to a recent study, ``the years of declining
methyl bromide use have been years of rising yields, acreage,
exports, revenues, and market share for California growers.''
This bill reverses the progress that has been made on
methyl bromide. Instead of requiring growers to justify
continued use of methyl bromide, the bill reverses the
presumption. It would require EPA to accept growers' requests
unless EPA can prove they are unnecessary. The bill also
freezes into law an outdated list of approved critical uses. As
a result, sectors that have completely phased out the use of
methyl bromide during the last 7 years would be permitted to
use methyl bromide again. Incredibly, even golf courses would
once again be allowed to seek critical use exemptions. And the
bill creates a gaping emergency event loophole.
I also have concerns about the Primatene Mist bill.
Primatene Mist is an over-the-counter epinephrine inhaler from
the 1960s. It was phased out at the end of 2011 and has been
off the shelves for over 6 months. The bill would put Primatene
Mist back on the shelves to its manufacturer could sell off its
remaining inventory. A long list of physician, patient, public
health, and industry groups strongly oppose the bill. Medical
and public health organizations don't want Primatene Mist back
on the market because they say it is not safe or recommend it
for treating asthma. Physician groups are concerned that the
bill will result in patient confusion and companies that made
the necessary investments to develop CFC-free inhalers argue
that the bill would unfairly provide special treatments to a
single company.
Mr. Chairman, we should be looking at these issues very
carefully. We should be celebrating and strengthening the
Montreal Protocol, not considering legislation to weaken it.
And I hope we will reject the methyl bromide bill and rethink
the Primatene Mist bill as well.
In the last 30 seconds I just want to point out some
history. I was here in 1977 when the first time the issue was
raised. We were considering Clean Air Act amendments. One of my
colleagues was able to dissuade the committee from doing
anything on CFCs because he said it had not been proved beyond
a reasonable doubt that CFCs were harmful, and therefore,
Congress didn't act. We finally did act and we acted first and
then went to complete and international agreement. It is
exactly the kind of thing we ought to do with carbon emissions.
We ought to be looking at that issue and dealing with it, not
denying the science, which is where we are now today in the
Congress of the United States.
I thank the chairman for allowing me to exceed my time by
22 seconds.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
At this time, I recognize the chairman of the full
committee, Mr. Upton, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Over the last several decades, environmental quality has
improved significantly, and our goal is to maintain that
progress without imposing unnecessary burdens on our economy or
the American people. And that is why we have consistently
advocated for regulatory common sense and balance. And that is
what we are going to talk about today--two sensible proposals,
I believe, that ensure environmental rules do not impose
unnecessary hardships.
Congress examined and addressed ozone depletion through the
1990 Clean Air Act amendments, which provide the framework of
the U.S. participation in the Montreal Protocol treaty. As a
result, the use of CFCs as refrigerants in air-conditioners and
refrigerators has been sharply curtailed. And other ozone-
depleting substances have also been restricted.
For the most part, the transition to the substitutes has
gone well, but there are two exceptions that we hope to address
through targeted legislation. One deals with the crop fumigant
methyl bromide, which was widely used in agricultural
applications until it was included on the list of ozone-
depleting compounds. For many crops and uses there are adequate
substitutes, and as a result, methyl bromide use is down by 90
percent. But for some crops, methyl bromide is still needed
because viable alternatives are not yet available.
And to address that issue, I am pleased that Michigan
farmer Russ Costanza has joined us today. Russ grows peppers,
eggplant, squash, tomatoes, cucumbers back on his farm in
Sodus, Michigan, and he employs 125 folks. And we need to hear
him out because his message is that of many farmers throughout
the country who doubt whether they can remain in business
without continued access to methyl bromide. The U.S.
Agricultural Sector Relief Act would allow farmers like Russ to
keep using methyl bromide on a limited basis.
While one bill provides relief to farmers, the other
provides relief to patients with asthma. The over-the-counter
asthma inhalers containing CFCs, most commonly marketed as
Primatene Mist, have been banned because they use very small
amounts of CFCs as propellants. But no non-CFC over-the-counter
inhalers are available at this time, leaving asthmatics without
an over-the-counter option. The Asthma Inhalers Relief Act
would allow for the remaining inventories of this inhaler,
which were available in the U.S. for more than 40 years, to be
temporarily sold or distributed without penalty.
So on behalf of the American people, we are working to
ensure reasonable environmental protections and we are doing so
while avoiding unnecessary harm. The two bills at issue today
satisfy those obligations.
And I yield to the chairman emeritus, Mr. Barton, the
balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Barton. Thank you, Chairman Upton. And thank you,
Chairman Whitfield and Mr. Rush, for holding this hearing. We
may have already done it, but I would like to welcome back
former Congressman Bart Stupak, who is in the audience and a
distinguished former member of the committee. We are glad to
have you, Bart.
I support the U.S. Agricultural Sector Relief Act of 2012
and I tend to support the Asthma Inhaler Relief Act of 2012
also, although I have got some concerns about that piece of
legislation.
Methyl bromide is essential as an agricultural fumigant.
There are some alternatives for agricultural uses, but methyl
bromide is still needed for others where there doesn't appear
to be a viable alternative. Under the Montreal Protocol, we
have seen a considerable decrease in the critical use
exemptions since 2005. This bill is important not only for
American jobs but as a matter of national security as well.
In terms of the Asthma Inhaler Relief Act, Dr. Burgess has
got a well intended piece of legislation. I am going to put
into the record, Mr. Chairman, by unanimous consent, a letter
from the Allergy and Asthma Caucus and the Mothers of
Asthmatics. Their president and founding member is in the
audience today, Nancy Sander, and we are glad to have you, too,
Nancy, here.
Their group has got very legitimate concerns about Dr.
Burgess' bill, and I have worked with them and put them in
touch with Dr. Burgess to try to alleviate some of those
concerns. I think it is important that Americans have an over-
the-counter alternative to a prescription inhaler. And that is
basically what Dr. Burgess's bill intends to do. The letter
that I will ask unanimous consent to put in the record at the
end of my statement, Mr. Chairman, does say that there is an
alternative. There is a handheld bulb nebulizer that is
available over-the-counter, and that is one reason I have some
concerns about Dr. Burgess' bill.
With that, I would ask unanimous consent to put a letter
dated July 17, 2012, from the Allergy and Asthma Network
Mothers of Asthmatics, into the record and then yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection, it will be entered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I would like to recognize the
gentleman from Illinois, ranking member of the subcommittee,
Mr. Rush, for a 5-minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, in keeping in line with the majority party's
overall agenda of bypassing, overriding, and curtailing the
Clean Air Act, as well as any and all regulations that may
hamper industry profits regardless of the health or
environmental benefits that those rules were designed to
protect, we are here yet again holding this hearing on the
Agricultural Sector Relief Act and the Asthma Inhalers Relief
Act of 2012.
My Republican colleagues, Mr. Chairman, continue to ignore
the fact that the U.S. has set more than 40,000 high
temperature records this year and that the last 12 months have
been the hottest ever recorded in U.S. history. And the fact
that more than 113 million Americans are living under extreme
health advisories, while the USDA has declared a Federal
disaster area in more than 1,000 countries covering 26 States
also does not seem to concern the majority party.
Mr. Chairman, while the country literally burns around us,
I can't believe that we are here today holding yet another
hearing on two issues of far less importance to most Americans
other than a few industry lobbyists.
Today, fully 2/3 of the country is experiencing extreme
drought and 30 percent of the Nation's corn crop is in poor or
very poor condition. While at the same time, water levels of
four of the five Great Lakes have plummeted due to high
evaporation rates and insufficient rainfall. We are still here
having hearings on two not very important bills to the majority
of the American people.
Mr. Chairman, I ask this committee to not to deal with
these two bills but to deal with a different kind of drought,
the drought of laws that come from the inaction of this
subcommittee. While even all the heat-related and fire-related
and the atrocities that are occurring to farmers of our Nation,
to the consumers of our Nation, the two bills before us would
only serve the interests of select industries by rolling back
gain we have made under the Montreal Protocol.
The Montreal Protocol is widely recognized as a
tremendously successful international environmental agreement,
and in 2009 became the first of its kind to achieve universal
ratification by every country in the world. Mr. Chairman, let
us get on to some real business.
And with that, I yield a minute, the balance of my time, to
Mrs. Capps of California.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LOIS CAPPS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mrs. Capps. I thank my colleague for yielding to me. And I
want to focus a few comments on the methyl bromide bill, a very
important issue to my constituents.
I represent some of the very best strawberry and cut flower
growers in the country, and just a couple of weeks ago, I was
invited by the Strawberry Commission of California to meet with
them in Santa Maria to discuss this exact issue. We met in the
midst of the strawberry fields. While I have seen firsthand the
tremendous progress in finding alternatives to methyl bromide,
I have also seen firsthand why methyl bromide is still a
necessity to many if not most strawberry growers.
I am proud to say that many of the flower farmers in my
district like June and Rene Van Wingerden of Ocean Breeze Farms
and Lane Devries of Sun Valley Floral no longer use methyl
bromide because they have pioneered innovative new methods that
are effective. But let us be clear. These alternatives don't
work for everyone and they don't work in every situation. And
the cost of the disease our growers face are very real, very
threatening. During my recent visit, I saw firsthand the
impacts of charcoal rot in some fields in Santa Maria, as well
as other diseases. They can literally shut down an operation
hurting not only the growers but also their workers and the
local economy.
I must add that agriculture is a growing force of my
congressional district, strawberries are the number one crop,
and these local economies stretch far and wide in central and
southern California, including the local economies of my
colleague, Mr. Bilbray, I know.
So it is very important that this issue be addressed but I
am, I must say, Mr. Chairman, disappointed that we are going to
be back here in just a very few hours to mark up this
legislation without hearing from the administration or really
adequate time to fully consider the testimony of our witnesses.
I am pleased to say that one is from the Strawberry Commission
in California. It is a very important issue that should not be
rushed through the legislative process.
That being said, I do look forward to hearing the witness
testimony and working toward a solution on this matter. And I
yield back. Thank you, Mr. Rush.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mrs. Capps.
And I will say that while we did invite EPA to testify,
they were unable to be here, but they have submitted a pretty
detailed statement for the record relating to these two bills.
And this will be part of the record, so thank you.
We have two panels of witnesses this morning and I would
like at this time to call up the first panel of witnesses. And
on that panel we have five people. First, we have Mr. Russell
Costanza, who is the owner of Russell Costanza Farms. Number
two, we have Mr. Scott DiMare, who is vice president and
director of farm operations, DiMare Ruskin, Inc. We have Mr.
David Doniger, who is no stranger to our committee, and he is
the policy director of Climate & Clean Air Program at the
Natural Resources Defense Council. And I would like to call on
Mr. Bilbray to introduce our next witness, please.
Mr. Bilbray. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Whitfield, thank you for holding this hearing on
this very important issue, especially to certain segments of
our society and economy.
Methyl bromide is a critical application, as my colleague
from California said, in certain situations, limited but
critical in those limited. And I wish to ask for unanimous
consent to enter into the record a letter supporting the U.S.
Agricultural Sector Relief Act.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bilbray. It is my honor to introduce Michelle Keeler.
She is one of our panelists today. Ms. Keeler, I apologize for
the un-San Diego weather that you have to endure at this time.
I hope you understand what a sacrifice those of us in
California who serve in Congress do every day, OK, at least
during the summer.
Mr. Chairman, Ms. Keeler is vice president of Mellano &
Company. It is a prestigious family-owned business that
specializes in cut flower growing in the sunny San Diego/
Carlsbad area and right along the coast. As you are driving up
Highway 5, you can see the hillsides filled with her products
and the beauty that has been appreciated by the community.
The company prides itself in progressive ideas of cut
flowers. Many of them have been developed as an industry-wide
standard as improved logistics in growing techniques. These
achievements have utilized pre-cooling allowing flowers to be
shipped with optimum freshness.
Mr. Chairman, let me point out that when Mrs. Keeler
speaks, she is not just speaking about her endeavor to keep a
family business alive, to keep American jobs in America, but as
a former California Coastal Commissioner, I want to remind
everybody, too, that the California Coastal Commission has
determined that Mrs. Keeler's operation is a cultural heritage
that needs to be preserved. It is actually mandated in the
Coastal Act's enforcement that she keep her production of
flowers in this area.
And Ms. Keeler, I want to welcome you to California and
welcome your ability to enlighten those of us in Washington of
the challenges you face on the West Coast.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. And welcome, Ms. Keeler.
And the final witness in the first panel will be Mr. Mark
Murai, who is the president of the California Strawberry
Commission. And we appreciate your being here.
I will be calling on each one of you to give a 5-minute
opening statement and on the table there are a couple of little
small boxes that have colors red, yellow, and green. And when
you get to red, we hope you will be finished, but if not, we
will let you go over for a brief period of time.
So Mr. Costanza, we will recognize you first and you are
recognized for 5 minutes to give an opening statement. And make
sure your microphone is turned on as well. Thank you.

STATEMENTS OF RUSS COSTANZA, OWNER, RUSSELL COSTANZA FARMS;
SCOTT M. DIMARE, VICE PRESIDENT AND DIRECTOR OF FARM
OPERATIONS, DIMARE RUSKIN, INC.; DAVID D. DONIGER, POLICY
DIRECTOR, CLIMATE AND CLEAN AIR PROGRAM, NATURAL RESOURCES
DEFENSE COUNCIL; MICHELLE CASTELLANO KEELER, VICE PRESIDENT,
MELLANO & COMPANY; AND MARK MURAI, PRESIDENT, CALIFORNIA
STRAWBERRY COMMISSION

STATEMENT OF RUSS COSTANZA

Mr. Costanza. Well, thank you. And thank you for the
warning because it takes me about 6-1/2 minutes to read this
and I am going to skip over some of this keeping this in mind.
OK.
First of all, I want to thank each and every one of the
members for allowing me this opportunity to speak before you
today and represent my farm, my workers in the State of
Michigan.
My name is Russ Costanza. I grew up on our family farm. I
am the owner of Russell Costanza Farms. My wife and I
established our farm in 1976 with 10 acres. Today, we have
grown that farm with our two kids and their families to over
500 acres of peppers, eggplant, squash, tomatoes, and
cucumbers. Our farm is labor-intensive. Over the years, we have
grown from my wife and I doing all the work on the farm to 125
farm workers. Sadly, the inability to use methyl bromide and
the lack of a truly viable alternative is threatening our
family and our remaining workers' livelihood.
Mr. Whitfield. Would you mind just moving the microphone a
little closer?
Mr. Costanza. I am usually a little loud anyway.
Methyl bromide is a fumigant that controls insects,
nematodes, pathogens, and weeds, and we use the fumigant on our
farm to treat the soil prior to planting. Fumigation with
methyl bromide allows us to grow a higher quality crop with
increased yields and provides more onetime effective pest
control than any other alternative product.
Methyl bromide has allowed us to treat our fields and
cultivate abundant, high quality, high demand produce. This
year, however, we were not granted any critical use exemptions
for methyl bromide. Without any CUEs, the only way to use
methyl bromide is to purchase dwindling stocks of the chemical
that were produced prior to 2005. Such stocks are not readily
available and are cost prohibitive. I currently have enough
methyl bromide to last through one or perhaps two growing
seasons for eggplant only, but after that, I do not know how I
will be able to continue to produce adequate crops.
I used to be able to purchase methyl bromide for about $1 a
pound. Today, the cost averages $9 a pound. It costs over $800
an acre to use methyl bromide. Between the scarcity and high
cost, it is impossible to compete with inexpensive, quality
produce from other countries whose growers are able to legally
use methyl bromide. Further, the quality of our produce will
deteriorate due to the lack of methyl bromide use, further
eroding our ability to compete with foreign growers in our own
markets.
While we have a limited supply of methyl bromide available
for eggplant, we cannot use methyl bromide for our other crops.
Due to the loss of quality and yields associated with these
crops, we have experienced decreased profits for our remaining
workers and our farm. Our dwindling profits also mean a loss of
tax revenue for local, State, and Federal governments.
Our family and our workers pride ourselves on providing
high quality and affordable food to U.S. consumers and to
making a meaningful contribution to our country's economy.
Unfortunately, our ability to do this is diminishing due to the
lack of methyl bromide and an effective, affordable
alternative.
Our farm has spent a great deal of money and effort seeking
viable alternatives to methyl bromide. In 2005, staff from the
EPA Chicago office was invited to tour our farm. They came,
observed our operation, how we worked, and how methyl bromide
was used. We demonstrated how methyl bromide increased our
yield of our eggplant and pepper crops. These increased yields
and lack of effective alternatives were documented through the
research conducted on our farm with Michigan State University
on all methyl bromide alternatives. We donated the land, the
manpower, and the resources to research the efficiency of
alternatives on eggplant. Sadly, we did not find any
affordable, usable replacement.
Due to the weather in Michigan, we have a narrow window of
time before planting in which we can apply a fumigant. We
cannot wait an additional 2 or 3 weeks to reenter the field
prior to planting, as was required by iodomethane, Midas, and
some other alternatives, or we would lose our market window.
Further, Midas is no longer being sold in the United States.
For my Michigan operation, methyl bromide is truly the only
treatment option available. And then we will go on with a study
from Michigan State University. Our circumstances are dire,
which I am very appreciative of the committee. I and other
Michigan growers are facing an emergency situation on our
farms, and for that reason, I am grateful that the legislation
includes the provisions related to the emergency use of methyl
bromide under certain circumstances.
The law must allow for flexibility when a planned,
affordable alternative is no longer an option or another
unanticipated event occurs. While I understand that EPA is the
lead organization in making CUE recommendations to the parties,
I appreciate that the legislation includes consultation with
the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Because of its close
working relationship with growers, the USDA and extension
agents are best equipped to determine when an emergency
situation exists. The Department's role in this process is
critical.
I cannot overstate the importance of access to methyl
bromide for my farm operation and my fellow Michigan growers.
We are facing a crisis and need relief. I am hopeful that
Congress will pass the Act of 2012 and the EPA and USDA will
quickly implement a process to allow for limited emergency
exemptions when circumstances exist.
Thank you very much for your leadership in addressing this
critical issue for myself and other Michigan growers.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Costanza follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Mr. Costanza.
And Mr. DiMare, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT M. DIMARE

Mr. DiMare. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Be sure and turn your microphone on and move
it up close.
Mr. DiMare. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ranking Member, the
rest of the committee, I want to thank you for having me here
today. My name is Scott DiMare. I am a director of farm
operations for a family business that is over 80 years old. I
am a third-generation farmer. We are based in Ruskin, Florida.
We farm tomatoes. I employ about five to six hundred people.
And we are here to talk about methyl bromide for emergency use.
With rising costs, we have a cost of about $2,500 to $3,000
an acre to lay our plastic mulch and do our fumigation process
before we ever put a plant in the ground. Methyl bromide is the
foundation for our operation. It allows for uniformity and
consistency, which is key in our industry. It kills soil-borne
diseases, pests, and weeds. The idea is to sterilize the ground
before you plant it. We used to call methyl bromide idiot-
proof. And basically, it is not a reckless term; it is how we
view under all conditions--and the key being all conditions,
OK, because the rest of the alternatives that we will talk
about are very sensitive to soil, moisture, temperature, and so
forth, whereas methyl bromide worked uniformly across the board
under all conditions.
Furthermore, with the tools that we have available today, I
feel pretty confident that we have reduced any if not all
emissions. And among those tools we use are a Raven computer,
which is on the tractor, which precisely turned on and off the
system, allows for no leakage. We are also using the VIF or
high barrier films, which reduce the emissions down to
virtually nothing.
And let us just talk about the alternatives for a minute.
We have made numerous capital investments over the years. We
have known the phase-out was coming. For many years, we have
tried to be ahead of the curve by being proactive in trying the
number of different alternatives that are available. As Mr.
Costanza mentioned earlier, one of the tools that we had has
been taken away--Midas--which I felt was one of the most
comparable or efficacious products out there but still had its
limitations.
But be that as it may, we have the alternatives that are
there, and among them, we cannot use them in certain areas
because of groundwater issues. In the other areas we can use
them, we still have many unresolved issues and most of them are
attributed to weather. Soil conditions, soil temperature mainly
being wet or cold, does not allow for the dispersion of the
product, which again brings us to the point where we have an
unpredictable situation. As a farmer, we can control only so
many things. And what we do before we lay our plastic mulch is
crucial. And once we do that, we are at the hands of Mother
Nature. And we can't control the weather. In Florida we live in
a subtropical climate. With these alternatives, the plant-back
periods are up to 2 months that I have to have this plastic
sitting out there with nothing being grown because of the fact
that it is damaging to the crop because we don't know what the
result is going to be, whereas methyl bromide in the past we
had a maximum of a 2-week leeway time. That is a huge risk that
we have created.
OK, we have got, as I told you, $3,000 in the ground before
we ever put a plant in the ground. You got leeching of
fertilizer, you got more weed control issues, herbicides,
weeding by hand, which is very labor-intensive for that extra
month-and-a-half period. We got tropic storms. We have laid
hundreds of acres before and been wiped out by storms. The
longer time you have between your planting periods, the more
risk you have, the higher your cost is going to be. And with
methyl bromide we didn't have that.
I guess, you know, when all is said and done, you know,
this comes down to a need of a product that we I feel need,
must have, in order to clean up some of these situations that
we have. Since the phase-out of methyl bromide, we have an
increasing incidence of soil-borne diseases. You can see it
getting worse every year behind methyl bromide and it is going
to continue to get worse. We have, you know, Fusarium, Fusarium
crown rot, southern blight, which we never had. Fusarium I have
in fields this year that I have never had before ever. Weeds,
nutsedge is getting out of control and, you know, again these
are things that we never had issues with when we had methyl
bromide.
I just again appeal to you to use some good foresight and--
it is a tool that we need. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. DiMare follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
And Mr. Doniger, you are recognized for a 5-minute opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF DAVID D. DONIGER

Mr. Doniger. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Rush.
Protecting the ozone layer is a huge bipartisan public
health success story. The treaty was signed under Ronald Reagan
and it has had the support of four Presidents since then. The
phase-out of ozone-destroying chemicals, including methyl
bromide, is saving literally millions of Americans and tens of
millions of people around the world from death and disease,
from skin cancer, cataracts, and immune diseases. And it is
also savings farmers billions of dollars in avoided ultraviolet
light, ultraviolet radiation crop damage.
Now isn't the time to tamper with the Protocol or the Clean
Air Act. I won't mince words. By slowing or actually reversing
the transition from methyl bromide, this bill will lead to more
skin cancers, more cataracts, more immunological disease. It
will benefit a number of growers who have profited by abusing
the critical use exemption for more than a decade. Some of the
people now seeking relief now haven't even asked for critical
use exemptions for years. Thousands of other farmers growing
other crops will suffer more crop losses as a result.
Now, the treaty and the Clean Air Act already allow for
well supported exemptions and no one is suggesting that the
pursuit of exemptions under existing law isn't possible. This
has been done for 7 years and well supported exemptions have
been forwarded by the U.S. and granted by the parties. But this
industry has dragged its feet on replacing this dangerous
compound. No other industry has had more time or more leeway to
transition away from dangerous ozone-destroying chemicals.
The U.S. is responsible for more than 90 percent of all
methyl bromide exemptions. Every other strawberry- and tomato-
growing country with California-like growing conditions or
Florida-like growing conditions--including Italy, Spain,
Greece, and Australia--has ended use of methyl bromide. There
is a lot of concern expressed over the years about competition
from Mexico. Mexican growers use less methyl bromide per acre
than their California counterparts, and Mexico will end the use
of methyl bromide entirely this year.
California strawberry growers have done very well during
this whole experience. Strawberry acreage is up despite ground
rules that countries would not use methyl bromide on expanded
acreage. Yields are up, grower prices are up, crop values are
up.
U.S. critical use exemptions have been coming down.
California strawberries are now the only field use for which
the U.S. still seeks exemptions. And there are several other
structural and commodity uses. Together they amount to about a
little more than 400 tons. That is significantly down from
10,000 tons 7 years ago. And as I said, there is an opportunity
to keep asking for well supported exemptions. There is also a
stockpile of 1,200 tons, three times the requests now being
made.
This bill would do reckless damage in three ways. First, it
would permanently define as critical uses all of the uses that
were deemed critical in 2005 even though the vast majority of
those uses don't use methyl bromide anymore. Why would we make
golf course turf grass a critical use again? It makes no sense
to freeze into law the utterly out-of-date list from 2005.
Second, the bill relieves the applicants of the need to
show why they need exemptions. Doesn't it make sense that if
you are asking for an exemption for a banned product, you
should explain why and you should produce the data that shows
that you need it? Some people do that and some people make the
case. Some people's case is convincing and the U.S. makes the
application and the other parties agree to it. Other people
don't even ask. Some people make exemption requests that can't
even get past first base.
So EPA under this bill would bear the burden of saying why
any wish list shouldn't be forwarded to the parties. And this
is actually going to backfire for the applicants because it
actually helps the U.S. to win approval for the exemptions to
show that it has exercised judgment and discipline in framing
its requests and hasn't mechanically asked for everything that
domestic applicants may have wanted.
Lastly, the bill would blast an enormous loophole into the
Clean Air Act and our pesticide safety laws by allowing any
individual user to write his own ticket for up to 20 tons of
methyl bromide per farm simply by asserting the existence of an
``emergency.'' There could be hundreds of emergency exemptions
per year, totaling up to 2,000 tons, the 2011 critical use
amount.
The testimony today illustrates the abuse that this
emergency exemption would provide where some witnesses are
saying, well, we just needed to go in and ``clean up'' problems
for which we didn't get critical use exemptions. So it is just
an alternate route to write your own critical use exemption.
This is a bad bill. It is an unneeded bill. It would harm
public health, harm other farmers, and indeed it would even
harm the farmers it is intended to help because it would make
it even more difficult to get critical use exemptions through
the current process. The current process is working and this
committee should leave well enough alone. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Doniger follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Doniger.
At this time, Ms. Keeler, you are recognized for a 5-minute
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MICHELLE CASTELLANO KEELER

Ms. Keeler. Thank you.
As Congressman Bilbray stated, my family grows cut flowers
in the San Diego area of California where we employ over 200
employees. We farm approximately 400 acres at any given time,
have over 50 varieties of flowers growing on our farm. Unlike
other farms, you have to picture our farm sort of like a
patchwork quilt because we just don't have one product; we have
several products. So you might have 2 acres of tulips next to
10 acres of lilies next to 20 acres of myrtle, so there is all
kinds of things taking place. And each of those squares is
constantly changing in terms of the crops, cultivating times,
diseases, pests, irrigation needs, and the market demands.
We are very concerned by EPA's arbitrary cuts of our
allocations with no real burden of evidence showing a feasible
or technical alternative exists for certain crops. We are also
concerned about situations that are emerging on our farms
requiring emergency cleanup applications of methyl bromide.
As a grower, we have a limited number of tools in our
toolbox, and when you take a tool away from us, it puts
pressure on the remaining tools. And when you leave us with
only weak tools, we become as weak as the tools are. As soon as
these tools become useless, we have to walk away, and sadly,
many growers are starting to walk away from growing their
crops.
Please understand, we are using alternatives whenever
possible, and in some instances, they work for a short time.
But then issues start to pop up. A good example is nut grass.
We have been using alternatives such as Telone, chloropicrin,
and Vapam, and while they did a decent job for a little while
of knocking down the nut grass, it never eliminated it and
after a few years these popped back up and take over our crop.
We then find ourselves applying excessive amounts of these so-
called alternatives. So not only are we compounding the use of
alternative chemicals, we are also finding now later on that
there is a detrimental effect to our crops, which forces us to
prematurely disk under our flowers and we are disking under our
investment as well. A periodic application of methyl bromide is
more effective and we believe it is safer.
We also have difficulty in the cut flower industry because
we can't fit our growing practices into one neat formula due to
this ever-changing patchwork quilt that I described earlier. In
these squares we have perennials, annuals, bulb crops, seed
crops, and shrubs. Our crops at Mellano & Company can have a
planting value of $60,000 an acre, and some of these perennial
crops will be in the ground from anywhere from 5 to 25 years.
We can't afford to put plants like this that are this expensive
into dirty soil. We also can't predict when in that 5 to 25
years we will be replanting this crop based on issues that pop
up. So periodic applications--it is difficult for us to fit
into an application process because it is not every year. It
might be in 5 years; it might be in 8 years.
The cut flower industry has converted many, many crops over
to alternatives, but in a few instances, alternatives do not
exist. This year, the cut flower industry submitted a similar
application to EPA as in the previous few years. However, EPA
determined we had no need and submitted nothing to the
international body. We understand EPA assumed methyl iodide
would be a drop-in replacement for our entire industry despite
the fact that we provided scientific information showing that
methyl iodide was not useful to California growers. We can't
afford for EPA to make assumptions in our dynamic industry
about our growing practices without understanding our industry
first. Not only is methyl iodide not a replacement in
California, the manufacturer withdrew sales of that compound in
the U.S., so now, what does our industry do?
The United States agricultural community has complied with
the CUE requirements where no alternatives exist, despite the
fact that this process is cumbersome, time-consuming, and
costly. We are willing to do so because in a few instances, we
still need this strong tool in our toolbox, yet our
applications continue to be arbitrarily reduced without any or
inadequate scientific explanation. So now we are left with weak
tools or with nothing at all.
I personally cannot understand why EPA can so easily make
these cuts. Every miniscule cut that they make means so much to
our survival and so little in the grand scheme to the other
parties. Why is our government hurting us? And we are being
hurt. In the floral industry, many growers, including my
family, is cutting back on our crop mix to a very limited
number of varieties to ensure that we have access to the proper
growing tools. This means fewer varieties available and
certainly nothing new in the marketplace. Thus, other
developing countries are taking on these varieties and
providing them to the consumer, which begins the decline of our
business.
People are in pain. Our family farm is in pain. And it is
something that Congress can do something about. Please reaffirm
the CUE process beyond 2014, ensure that EPA protects its
American growers with scientifically sound reasoning, and make
available the tools we need to grow our crop, especially in
emergency rescue and cleanup situations. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Keeler follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Ms. Keeler.
And Mr. Murai, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK MURAI

Mr. Murai. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Whitfield,
Ranking Member Rush, and members, thank you for holding a
hearing on this very important issue. My name is Mark Murai and
I am a third-generation strawberry farmer and president of the
California Strawberry Commission, representing all of
California's strawberry growers, shippers, and processors.
Farmers lead the way in the world to find alternatives. The
United States has eliminated over 90 percent of ozone-depleting
products and the ozone layer is healing faster than predicted.
As we all know, legacy fluorocarbons, CFCs, from a variety of
consumer products such as plastics, foam, solvents, and fire
extinguishers----
Mr. Whitfield. Sorry. You can continue.
Mr. Murai [continuing]. Are the largest impact on the ozone
layer. Because these legacy fluorocarbons have a long life, the
scientists forecast it will be another 39 years before the
ozone layer is fully restored. But methyl bromide can also
impact the ozone layer, and I am proud to say the strawberry
farmers have taken this seriously. We have innovative new
farming techniques such as drip fumigation and employed new
technologies such as emission reduction measures to reduce our
methyl bromide imprint.
California strawberry farmers are also leaders in organic
production methods. These farmers grow more organic
strawberries than all other 49 States combined. In fact, nearly
1 out of 5 California strawberry farmers grows both organic and
conventional.
By combining all of these approaches, California strawberry
farmers transition to non-methyl bromide alternatives faster
than any other strawberry farmers in the world. And
unfortunately, we have learned that there are still some
diseases that can only be treated by methyl bromide.
In the late '90s, I made the decision to phase down my
farm's use in methyl bromide ahead of the official 2005
deadline. I was past chairman of our Research Committee and an
officer of the Commission, so I believed my family's farm
should demonstrate that using alternatives were feasible. I was
confident; I was cavalier. The first year, the yields looked
comparable. The second year, my new plants didn't look so good,
a little peaked. And by the third year, my field was dying
before I picked my first berries. Calling your banker is a
difficult call to make having to explain your field is dying,
and notwithstanding a miracle, I would not be able to pay back
my crop loan that year. And by the way, I need to borrow more
money for next year's planting in a few months. That is a tough
call to make.
But the worst part was telling my family that we are deep
in the hole and our soil is now contaminated with disease. That
is a tough thing for a farmer to swallow. So farmers need clean
soil.
As you can see in my written testimony, I am not alone in
my experience. After multiple years of repeated use of
alternatives, we learned that alternatives do not work on all
the soil-borne diseases. In 2008, we saw the emergence of new
diseases that resulted in widespread crop failure.
The CUE process needs to be improved. In 2011, a new
fumigant called methyl iodide was approved for use in
California. Everyone thought the fumigant would be an effective
treatment for these tough soil-borne diseases. EPA immediately
rushed to try and force farmers to use methyl iodide. EPA
stated, ``our 2013 critical use nomination assumes an
aggressive transition rate to methyl iodide of 7 percent per
year between now and 2013 and resulting in a reduction of 21
percent.'' When I heard this, I could hardly believe my ears.
Doesn't EPA know about the community concerns in California? We
specifically made a trip to EPA to show news clips and
newspaper articles to give them a flavor of what we were going
through back in California and how our communities and State
and legislators were in an uproar around this compound. There
was an obvious disconnect between DC and our farming
communities. And we believed at best our transition, if this
product was registered, would be at a rate of maybe 1 to 2
percent and that was aggressive.
Well, 4 months ago, the manufacturer decided that this
controversy was too big and they cancelled methyl iodide in
California. We immediately advised EPA and asked that they
restore the 21 percent but they did not take any action to
request a supplemental CUE for 2013. I wanted to believe our
government would work to ensure that our critical needs were
met within the rules of the treaty, but this has not happened.
At every turn, there is always another arbitrary reason our
application should be cut. This is just not right. Our farmers
have followed all the rules, but now EPA doesn't want to follow
the rules. They should substantiate their new reasons with data
standards that we are held to. I should be able to go back and
tell our growers that the system is fair, the interpretations
are correct, and we should all just live with it, but I can't.
The new science report on methyl bromide CUEs, perhaps what
is most frustrating is that nobody seems to be following the
science. Scientists have always described methyl bromide as
quickly dissipating in about 1 year and having a relatively
smaller impact compared to other ozone-depleting products. The
newest scientific assessment by NOAA, NASA, UNEF, WMO, and the
EU concludes the ozone layer is improving faster than predicted
due to legacy products that were required by 39 years to fully
restore the ozone layer and continued use of methyl bromide
will add less than 73 days to the 39 years. More specifically,
the report stated, ``the scientific assessment of ozone
depletion 2010 is the product of 312 scientists from 39
countries of the developed and developing world who have
contributed to its preparation and review, 191 scientists
prepared the report, and 196 scientists participated in the
peer-review process''--196. They said methyl bromide
``continuing critical use exemptions at the approved 2011 level
indefinitely would delay the return of the equivalent effective
stratospheric chlorine 1980 levels by .2 percent of a year.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Murai, your testimony is very
interesting and you have gone over considerably, so if you
would try to summarize it here, we would appreciate it.
Mr. Murai. Sorry about that.
So what is the benefit to the economy of allowing continued
use of methyl bromide while the California Department of Food
and Agriculture commissioned an economic study and they said if
there is no methyl bromide and no methyl iodide, the California
communities will lose over $1.5 billion annually and more than
23,000 jobs annually.
So if all the scientists and economists are accurate and
the environmental impact of continued use of methyl bromide
CUEs would just add no more than 73 days to a 39-year schedule
while the economic downside for not allowing this would be $58
billion and 897,000 jobs over those same 39 years, I just ask
please bring some common sense to this issue and restore our
CUE. Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Murai follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
And I thank all of you for your testimony.
At this time, we will have some questions for you and I
will recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Murai, Mr. Doniger in his testimony said that
California strawberry growers have led the pack in coming to
Congress playing the hardship violin. And he said that your
growers have done very well, you have increased your yields,
you have increased the strawberry acreage, and that you all are
doing very well. But from what you said, that doesn't sound
like that is the case. Now, have you increased your yields?
Have you increased your acreage or----
Mr. Murai. Yields have increased and it has barely kept us
floating. The margins are razor thin. I think the economic
studies only show one side of the story, and I don't think I
would even really be here if we were doing well, right?
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Murai. I think this is a priority and an important
issue because the growers are in a risky situation, very
difficult to plant. The bankers are even asking about what are
you doing to ensure----
Mr. Whitfield. How much do you borrow to put out a crop?
Mr. Murai. It is about $20 to $22,000 per acre per year.
Mr. Whitfield. And what about you, Ms. Keeler?
Ms. Keeler. At the high end, we are at $60,000, so between
$20 and $60,000 depending on the varieties. I----
Mr. Whitfield. Per acre.
Ms. Keeler. Per acre.
Mr. Whitfield. And Mr. DiMare?
Mr. DiMare. The operating costs alone are around $10,000 an
acre. That doesn't include harvesting or land cost or anything
like that.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Costanza?
Mr. Costanza. Our operating cost per acre is between $10
and $12,000 an acre per year.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes. Now, from my understanding, it is very
difficult to obtain a critical use exemption for methyl
bromide, is that correct, Mr. Costanza?
Mr. Costanza. Yes. In our case, we were told we were going
to have Midas to use this year.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. What about you, Mr. DiMare? Have you
tried to get a critical use exemption?
Mr. DiMare. Yes, it is an exhausting process.
Mr. Whitfield. Ms. Keeler?
Ms. Keeler. Yes, we have been part of the process from the
beginning. And like I said earlier, it is a very time-consuming
process, and private sector, we are doing a tremendous amount
of research looking for these alternatives. There seems to be
this idea that we are not doing this research looking----
Mr. Whitfield. Right.
Ms. Keeler [continuing]. For alternatives and we just want
this simple free ticket for methyl----
Mr. Whitfield. Right.
Ms. Keeler [continuing]. Bromide. It is not an easy
process.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes. Mr. Murai?
Mr. Murai. Yes, Mr. Chairman, every year.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes. Mr. Doniger mentioned that in other
countries, Mexico, Italy, so forth, that they are using less
methyl bromide and being quite successful. What would be your
reaction or statement or comment about that? Or do you have any
information about it, any of you?
Ms. Keeler. In our industry, I can comment to that. Mexico
produces some pretty unsophisticated flowers, so they have no
need for it. And my family immigrated from Italy and we still
have some connections there, and in the EU, the same thing is
happening there. The EU is off-shoring a lot of their flowers
over to Africa. And so like we are seeing flowers going down to
the South American countries. The Italian growers are getting
rid of the same products we are getting rid of for the same
problem----
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Ms. Keeler [continuing]. And they are being grown in Africa
for some of those countries.
Mr. Whitfield. You know, one of the common things that
seems to be coming through a lot of hearings that we have is
that we are hearing a lot of concerns about EPA that many
people in various businesses dealing with EPA view them almost
as an adversary. And I would just like to ask you, do you view
EPA as a partner trying to help solve a problem or do you view
them as an adversary?
Mr. Murai. Well, the actions result in an adversarial
result. I would say we work closely and try to collaborate and
really flesh the data out. You know, like Mr. Doniger said, we
want to put up a nomination that is credible and we are using
the best data.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Murai. And so I think we try to have a collaborative
effort but there is nobody listening over there.
Mr. Whitfield. So you feel it is an adversarial
relationship, is that correct?
Mr. Murai. Yes, at times----
Mr. Whitfield. Ms. Keeler, what about you?
Ms. Keeler. Yes, like Mr. Murai, I hate to use that word
because we have been trying to work with them and so we are all
going to this international body together----
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Ms. Keeler [continuing]. But at the end when our
application just gets denied and we don't really get the
scientific research of why our crops were denied, it is----
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Mr. DiMare----
Ms. Keeler [continuing]. Hard to say we work together.
Mr. Whitfield [continuing]. What about you?
Mr. DiMare. I feel basically the same way they do. We try
to work in concert with them----
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Costanza, how do you feel?
Mr. Costanza. I invited EPA out to our farm----
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Costanza [continuing]. And their minds were made up
before they got there.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Costanza. They didn't want to hear what we had to say.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Costanza. They didn't want to see what we had to show
them.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, without methyl bromide and this methyl
iodide, is there something else you can use?
Mr. DiMare. Well, it depends on where you are at in the
country. Even in the State of Florida we have from one end to
the other Telone cannot be used in south Florida because of the
groundwater issue----
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. DiMare [continuing]. But we do use that as one of the
alternatives in other places----
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. DiMare [continuing]. As well as others. Methyl iodide
that they are talking about is gone in the U.S. It is off the
shelf. They have taken it away so that is not an alternative
anymore.
Ms. Keeler. And some of those alternatives have different
buffer requirements, so for us in San Diego you can't really
picture a farm like out in the middle of Iowa.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Ms. Keeler. We have houses and industry coming right up to
us. So buffer zones, township caps put a lot of limitations
on----
Mr. Whitfield. Well, my time is expired but I mean it is
pretty clear that all four of you feel like methyl bromide is
essential and that is my impression.
Mr. Rush, I recognize you for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Well, and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Doniger, somehow I am feeling like I am a registration
clerk at heartbreak hotel when I listen to the testimony of
some of the witnesses here. And, first of all, you raised your
finger up because you wanted to react or respond to something
that I think Ms. Keeler said. Is there something that you
wanted to respond to?
Mr. Doniger. Well, I wanted to make one point in connection
with the issue of whether the relationship with EPA is
adversarial. If anything from the environmental perspective I
see the EPA bending over backwards to service these
applications, to consider these applications. I thought they
were grossly too large in the beginning. The numbers have come
down. That is true. But I would offer you one factoid to think
about. To my knowledge, there has not been one lawsuit filed
against EPA for denying these applications. There has not been
one agricultural association or individual grower who has taken
EPA to court over these supposedly too-small allocations. What
other industry hasn't sued EPA? It is very hard to take the
matter that seriously if that is the situation we have. I mean
I don't want to encourage these guys to sue EPA but everybody
does.
Mr. Rush. This industry is one of EPA's favorite
industries, then, whether they are being adversarial.
Let me just move on. What are some of your biggest concerns
with the definition of critical use in the discussion draft
that is before us today?
Mr. Doniger. Well, the most serious problem is the--the two
problems are, one, putting into law a list of critical uses.
The idea is supposed to be dynamic, that some uses would start
out being critical, and then as alternatives were found, they
would no longer be critical and they would drop off the list.
And that in fact is what has happened. Now, some of the growers
can have concerns about individual decisions but that is the
way it is supposed to work. You work your way to alternatives
and then that use is no longer a critical use exemption. So why
would we go back to the original list?
The second thing is how is it going to work now? A grower
can write on a piece of paper I need x tons. I don't have to
tell you why. I don't have to give you any information or
evidence about what I tried and whether it works and so on. It
is now up to you, EPA, to tell me why I don't need that many
tons and you would have the obligation, EPA, to go abroad to
the other countries and say this is what my guys say they need.
So where is the support for it? The reason that the exemptions
have been granted--and more than 88 percent, I think,
nominations have been granted--is that the U.S. comes in
frankly with a bulldozer of a case for each one. And that
starts with the growers being challenged frankly to come up
with a very convincing case, that they have tried all the
alternatives, that they don't work in these particular
situations and thus the methyl bromide is still needed. When
you get a case that is sound, the nominations are forwarded and
the nominations are granted.
Mr. Rush. Do you share my concerns with the provision of
the bill that would shift the burden of proof to the EPA and
that a requested use of the exemption is unwarranted?
Mr. Doniger. Yes, I mean that is what I am saying leads to
the counterproductive result because if the U.S. goes to the
other parties and says this is the piece of paper I got. I
don't have any scientific backup or I don't have the full
backup I used to have, but my guys say they need it so I say I
need it. It is not a very persuasive case. And it is more
likely to lead to the nominations being turned down than the
current situation.
Mr. Rush. How would this bill impact the Clean Air Act in
your opinion?
Mr. Doniger. Well, right now, the Clean Air Act allows for
the critical use exemptions and that is the process under which
the nominations have been made for the last seven years and the
requests have been made by the government to the treaty parties
and that is the process that is working. The folks here are
concerned, some of them, that, gosh, there is some expense
involved, there is some work involved in making the
applications. And even the best applications you only get, you
know, roughly 90 percent of them approved by the parties.
Remember that all the other strawberry-growing and tomato-
growing countries in the western world have stopped using
methyl bromide. So they look at these applications and say what
is going on? Why can't the U.S. do what we do in Australia,
Greece, Italy, Spain with respect to strawberries and tomatoes?
And it is a tough sell. So if EPA doesn't get the full dossier
of data from the growers, they are not going to be able to make
that sale and I don't think they should make that sale.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman's time is expired.
At this time, I recognize the gentleman from Oregon, Mr.
Walden, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Chairman, thank you. And I want to thank
our panel of witnesses, appreciate your testimony and the
answers to the questions the subcommittee has posed.
Mr. Murai, do you want to take what the gentleman just
said, so when it comes to dealing with strawberries and all,
what is your take on what he just said about the international
situation and be able to explain why every other country
doesn't use methyl bromide and we need to?
Mr. Murai. I think those growers need a process that they
can come to a hearing like this and voice their opinions,
because I visited those growers and they are under extreme
pressure of disease. They are exporting strawberry-growing to
Morocco. They are exporting the problem rather than dealing
with it in their own community and that is what our California
strawberry growers are trying to do. We are trying to deal with
it in our own community but the rules keep changing every page
we turn. And that is what we want. We need transparency, we
need accountability, we need data coming back that shows the
argument coming back, not just arbitrary. The process is
broken. I don't want to say we are adversaries but it is broken
and it needs to be fixed. I want to go back to my growers and
say this is the way it is, guys, or ladies. This is the way it
is. But I can't say that with conviction because I know how
broken it is.
Mr. Walden. I appreciate that. You know, methyl bromide has
obviously been used in nursery crops in Oregon. It is a nursery
business, of course, one of our biggest in Oregon. I know they
had a big outbreak of potato cyst nematode in Idaho recently.
And while they don't usually use methyl bromide for potatoes,
it has been successfully used against potato cyst nematode,
which, as you know, can just wreak havoc on potatoes if it gets
away from them. And I know the industry is conducting research
to find alternatives but none have been found to date. Can any
of you speak to the potato side of the world and what happens
in that respect?
Mr. Murai. I can't speak to the potato crop but I would
only add that the strawberry industry went through the same
types of mass destruction. And what we are trying to do is
provide food for the world with a consistent supply of healthy
nutritious food, and I think we go to school and we learn the
newest techniques and we try to innovate----
Mr. Walden. Um-hum.
Mr. Murai [continuing]. To try to avoid mass destruction of
crops. We don't need to go back to the potato famine days. Why
do we have to revisit that where people are suffering? That is
not what our intent is, and as farmers, we want to feel good
about what we do and provide that food and we will work within
the rules. But the rules and the structure and the process must
be corrected.
Mr. Walden. And can you elaborate on the efforts that have
been undertaken by the strawberry sector to identify potential
alternatives?
Mr. Murai. We have invested over $10 million over the last
15 years to look at steaming the soil using anaerobic soil
disinfestations. We are looking at growing strawberries in
substrate, peat moss, coconut coir, but there are other issues
around that. How sustainable is that when our strawberry
industry would use up the North American supply of peat moss in
1 year? Or steaming takes 21 hours to steam an acre of
strawberries right now. How much fossil fuel is needed, how
much emissions are needed to steam one acre? You know, 20
hours.
Mr. Walden. How many acres do you have in production,
strawberries in California?
Mr. Murai. Thirty-eight thousand acres in California.
Mr. Walden. That is a lot of steaming.
Mr. Murai. And the----
Mr. Walden. Or you could just try and grow them here where
we have steam all the time, or at least today, or a lot of hot
air.
Mr. Murai. The funny part is you have to soften the water
before you put it through the steamer. So we have to have a
water softener on the road with the long hose that takes it to
the big steaming machine, and the steaming machine creeps
along, inches, and covers 1 acre in 21 hours.
Mr. Walden. So what does that mean to your cost, your
ability to compete?
Mr. Murai. There is not enough time in the year to put your
crop in.
Mr. Walden. So I guess the question is how do these other
countries grow strawberries without using methyl bromide? Do
they just have different pests and different issues?
Mr. Murai. They are trying to grow in substrate. If you go
into like northern European areas, they are growing in a lot of
the coconut coir ----
Mr. Walden. I see.
Mr. Murai. --but even that is becoming controversial there.
So, you know, you move to one solution but it creates other
problems.
Mr. Walden. Got it.
Mr. Murai. And I think that is where we need a
comprehensive look and a realistic look, right?
Mr. Walden. Yes, I appreciate that. I know my time is
expired. I grew up on a cherry orchard and represented a lot of
ag interests in Oregon, farmers and ranchers that just feel
like there is a whole onslaught out of the Federal Government
that is going to shut down our way of life in the West and
especially on the farms.
Mr. Murai. We are California farmers and we want to stay in
California.
Mr. Walden. Yes. Well, we Oregonians want you to stay in
California. It has been an issue dating back--no, I am just
kidding. Yes, but----
Mr. Murai. That is a good one.
Mr. Walden [continuing]. We want you to come up and spend
your money in Oregon, then go back. Thank you. Thanks for your
testimony.
Mr. Whitfield. Mrs. Capps, you are recognized for 5 minutes
for questions.
Mrs. Capps. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As my colleague knows, I was trained as a nurse in Oregon
and I moved to California so, you know, I guess it can go both
ways, just an aside. And actually, I want to thank you because
I know this is not the same as standing in the fields, but we
are getting close to getting the feeling of what the various
challenges are to complying with regulations that I believe in
with all my heart but that are complicated and need to have a
discussion. If you can't be there to smell the strawberries and
see for ourselves what the peppers are like in the fields, we
need this kind of discussion. We need this back-and-forth and
this give-and-take.
And I was going to continue the same line with you, Mr.
Murai. I have got two Californians here I am going to pick on
for my time. I know growers have put millions of dollars into
developing alternatives to methyl bromide. Could you continue
this explanation of why your growers are putting so many
valuable resources into finding these alternatives? And you are
not doing it just because of the Montreal Protocol. It is not
just that.
Mr. Murai. I think we are trying to improve and innovate
our practices to be an example for the world. And the
regulatory environment and the environmental laws are very
strict in California. It is a whole other layer, and I believe
that is what the world bodies don't understand is the sovereign
power within California to have those laws, but the California
growers will meet that challenge. We have invested our
resources, we have put in a lot of time, we have lost a lot of
crop----
Mrs. Capps. Um-hum.
Mr. Murai [continuing]. In this time frame and we have had
a lot of hurt. And I think that is why we believe in what the
Montreal Protocol is doing and we want to be part of the
solution, but we also have to understand if there are
exemptions due to critical use, they should be recognized and
held to a standard as the applicant is doing. So if there is a
change in the nomination put forth to the United Nations
unbeknownst to the California strawberry growers and in our
application, we should understand why they are doing that and
what data backs that up.
Mrs. Capps. OK. Ms. Keeler, would you agree that the flower
growers are similarly committed to phasing our methyl bromide
and finding alternatives?
Ms. Keeler. Absolutely. I can only repeat what Mr. Murai
just said. Our industry is absolutely committed. We have a much
more dynamic industry with so many different crops and
varieties, so there has been a tremendous amount of research
that maybe something works in one crop, we try it in a
different crop. We have actually teamed up with the strawberry
growers. We share our information----
Mrs. Capps. Yes.
Ms. Keeler [continuing]. University, private sector, we put
in so much research into this. And like Mr. Murai said, we want
to cooperate. We believe in the Montreal Protocol.
Mrs. Capps. Well, as Mr. Murai told me before, you are
there, you breathe the air, your families are suffering
whatever health consequences there are to whatever you put into
the soil.
I wanted to move on if I could--I didn't mean to interrupt
you--but Mr. Murai, you mentioned the CUE process, which I am
going to expand on just briefly. When the critical use
exemption process is working, growers get the methyl bromide
they need while you also phase out its use and incentivize the
development of viable alternatives. No matter how well
designed, however, no complex international system can fully
anticipate every issue that may come up down the road, and that
is why we always need to be looking at ways to improve and
adapt the system to the current needs of its stakeholders while
still moving forward, ultimately achieving its original goals.
Mr. Murai, I am aware of several fields in Ventura County,
California, which is in my district, that have had some issues
transitioning to Telone. And I know that California has banned
certain alternative chemicals like methyl bromide for its
cancer-causing and water-polluting qualities, yet EPA has not
responded accordingly. Perhaps, Mr. Murai, you could expand on
that just a little, touch on the types of flexibility and
coordination that could be built into the current system to
help prevent these problems in the future.
Mr. Murai. Well, we are very intentional on maximizing the
alternatives that are available within the law and we explain
that in our application every year. And what changes, though,
sometimes when you are using some of these alternatives, they
don't do a thorough enough job. And so in order for a family
farm not to abandon their land, they need to be able to have a
way to clean that soil up and make it healthy again. And, you
know, in this global economy, we are moving products back and
forth and think new pests are coming in, new diseases, and
there has got to be a mechanism. The authors of the protocol
were very smart and that is why they wrote it in the critical
use exemption because they anticipated there might be critical
needs.
Mrs. Capps. Could I ask for time to ask one further
question? I know I have used my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, your time has expired.
Mrs. Capps. All right.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I would like to recognize the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Barton.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Chairman, my questions are for the second
panel, so I am----
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Barton [continuing]. Going to defer or yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Then I recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. Bilbray.
Mr. Bilbray. David, would you upgrade me on the latest
status? We are talking strawberries and I know we have had a
conflict and have consistently had a conflict between EPA and
ag on importation of certain issues. What alternative to methyl
bromide has the ag people put on importation of strawberries,
the fumigation of those fruits? Do you know----
Mr. Doniger. I think you are asking, Congressman, about
quarantine of pre-shipment?
Mr. Bilbray. Yes.
Mr. Doniger. And I am not sure I precisely understand your
question----
Mr. Bilbray. We have run into----
Mr. Doniger [continuing]. And I am not sure I know the
answer.
Mr. Bilbray. You know, when I was working the Air Resources
Board when I got over here we had this big conflict because the
accord we were trying to follow but then we had the Federal
Government mandating the use of methyl bromide as a condition
of importing certain fruits----
Mr. Doniger. Right.
Mr. Bilbray [continuing]. And vegetables.
Mr. Doniger. So one of the problems in that field, which is
outside the scope of this bill, is double-dosing where the
importing country requires the treatment even though it may
have been treated on the way out of the exporting country. So I
think there has been some progress made in reducing that kind
of double-dosing.
Mr. Bilbray. But they are still looking at methyl bromide
as being their----
Mr. Doniger. Well, this is an area where sulfuryl fluoride
may be quite promising and----
Mr. Bilbray. Maybe, but, you know, I----
Mr. Doniger. No, I mean more than that. It is almost ready
to be approved as a substitute for methyl bromide in certain
quarantine uses. And sulfuryl fluoride was mentioned in the
beginning if I may----
Mr. Bilbray. No, no, no, no, wait, wait a minute.
Mr. Doniger. I just want to make sure people----
Mr. Bilbray. Let me double back----
Mr. Doniger [continuing]. Understand that NRDC is opposed
to the withdrawal of the tolerances for sulfuryl fluoride.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. My biggest concern is that we have known
since the early '90s there was a conflict between our mandated
procedures in one department and a treaty that we were agreeing
to in another. And it has been at least 15 years, if not 20
years, we still haven't kind of put that together.
Mr. Doniger. The treaty doesn't cover quarantine and pre-
shipment.
Mr. Bilbray. OK.
Mr. Doniger. I believe it should but it doesn't. So there
are no restrictions on quarantine and pre-shipment use of
methyl bromide under the treaty.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. I appreciate you clarifying that. It is
frustrating to me to see the government that says this is so
essential that we reduce the use and everything else.
And Mr. Chairman, you know, my family has been personally
affected by diseases directly related to the ozone issue. So I
really believe, you know, this is a concern. But it is a
reasonable application of the concept. I think any law, no
matter how good intentioned, if there isn't a reasonable
application, there is going to be major problems of not only
unforeseen adverse impact but also unforeseen inefficiency in
acquiring the original goal. And that is one of the things I
want to address.
And Dave, why I asked you about that is that we talk about
priorities in the Federal Government but it isn't reflected by
our actions at getting to go. We always love to say no. It is
easier to say no. But getting to go, getting to an alternative
answer, we know what is bad but getting to what we are willing
to say is good takes 20 years at a time that we are saying the
ozone is being depleted as we speak, people are going to be
dying, but don't ask me to rush to finding a viable
alternative. And I think there is an obligation that those of
us in the system, if we want to claim the moral high ground
like some members on this committee love to do, that we are
saving lives and we are avoiding this and that, we have more of
a responsibility than just saying no. We have a real obligation
to find a yes and doing it quicker than 20 years down the pike.
Mr. Doniger. Well, the one thing I think we can all agree
on is that there has been--all of the witnesses here can agree
on--is there has been a lot of progress in phasing down methyl
bromide. If you had this hearing 5 years ago--actually, you did
have this hearing 5 years ago--the crisis of impossibility of
terrible impact was at the then current level where we are now
down some 80 or 90 percent below that. And that is why the
critical use exemption process is there. If the case can be
made, the exemption should be granted.
Mr. Bilbray. I just worry we are quick here to put
regulations on to outlaw stuff and we are not quick here at
creating the vehicles to create an opportunity to make that
product obsolete. In other words, just outlawing something is
not answering the problem. The problem is identifying the
problem and then finding an alternative answer to be able to
move things forward without the social economic impacts and the
health impacts that may be related.
Mr. Doniger. There has been a fair amount of USDA research
and we would have supported there being more to help the
growers find these alternatives.
Mr. Bilbray. Well, I would just say 20 years is pretty
slow.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
At this time, I recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Scalise, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, appreciate you having
this hearing on these two bills that----
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Scalise, I am sorry. I didn't see Mr.--
--
Mr. Scalise. Oh, I will yield to the gentleman from
Michigan.
Mr. Whitfield. OK, you go ahead and then I will come back
to Mr. Dingell. Thank you.
Mr. Scalise. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank
the former chairman, the gentleman from Michigan.
As we are talking about strawberries, I, you know,
represent a city called Ponchatoula, and the Ponchatoula
strawberries I would argue are the plumpest, juiciest, most
bright red. We could probably have a taste test and we would
both enjoy it. But, you know, I look at these new regulations
and, you know, really have concern about what it is going to
mean to those strawberry farmers in Ponchatoula just as it is a
concern to those of you in whether it is California, Michigan,
all across the country. Do you all have any estimates on how
many jobs are at risk if this industry is threatened with the
inability to use methyl bromide? I will just start with you,
Mr. Costanza, and we can go down. Any kind of estimates on job
losses that may be in play?
Mr. Costanza. On our farm presently we have about 125
employees. I am 30 employees short for harvest. We are leaving
product in the field. In the local economy in the State and
Federal level, there is about four jobs for every farm worker I
have on the farm. So the economic impact across the country if
we are out of business is dramatic.
And I would like to mention that I have been to your
district and I have visited some of your growers, Anthony
Liuzza being one of them----
Mr. Scalise. I know him well.
Mr. Costanza [continuing]. Looking for an alternative to
use other than methyl bromide.
Mr. Scalise. And what have you all been able to come up
with?
Mr. Costanza. Nothing. We need a product that is affordable
and that will produce----
Mr. Scalise. And effective.
Mr. Costanza [continuing]. A crop that the public demands.
Now, these European countries, they will accept a lower quality
berry. Americans won't accept that quality. So----
Mr. Scalise. And it is my understanding that under the
protocol, developing nations are exempt from this. They don't
even have to comply what is being imposed on you, but a
developing country that competes against you would not have to
comply, is that correct?
Mr. Costanza. My understanding that is correct but the
other thing is accountability. How are you going to account for
what goes into Mexico from China? How are you going to account
for what goes into some of the European countries from China?
How are you going to account for what goes into Morocco?
Because they produce a lot of methyl bromide in China because
we pay for the plant to be built.
Mr. Scalise. Yes. And then that would be just more jobs
outsourced, exported that we lose that go to foreign countries.
I want to ask Mr. Murai, because you represent the
California growers, if you can give me any kind of estimates on
jobs as well, kind of similar questions as I was asking Mr.
Costanza. I am not sure if you have met Mr. Liuzza as well but
he is a good man.
Mr. Murai. Our California Department of Food and
Agriculture commissioned an economic study with the University
of California Davis, and their latest numbers show that without
methyl bromide and without methyl iodide now, they are
anticipating California communities would lose over $1.5
billion annually and more than 23,000 jobs annually.
Mr. Scalise. How many jobs?
Mr. Murai. Twenty-three thousand.
Mr. Scalise. Just in California that would be lost?
Mr. Murai. Just California coastal communities.
Mr. Scalise. OK, thank you.
Mr. DiMare, if you can answer the same question?
Mr. DiMare. I can't speak from a study standpoint on the
data or statistics but just from our own perspective, on the
one farm location that we have where I am at in central Florida
is about 5 to 600 people, but for the whole company we are in
the thousands. We employ thousands of people.
Mr. Scalise. OK. And then Ms. Keeler.
Ms. Keeler. I don't have specifically those numbers. I
could get them to you. The California cut flower industry is a
$10 billion industry from farm to florist, so it is a pretty
big industry. Our farm alone employs over 200 people for 400
acres. But I could get the stats to you afterwards.
Mr. Scalise. OK. And then we don't have any kind of
indirect jobs. You know, we are looking at this regulation.
Unfortunately, if this was the only one, you could kind of
isolate it and deal with it, but we have seen time and time
again it is far from this one. We have already seen job losses
in other industries due to EPA coming out with regulations that
do nothing to address the problems they are concerned about. I
mean if you are concerned about carbon emissions, jobs that are
being sent overseas from greenhouse gas regulations, those
countries where we lose our jobs to, they emit even more
carbon.
You know, you look at this, you know, the farms, it is
going to go to developing countries. These jobs will go to
developing countries that under definition can still use the
product. And so you just cost American jobs. You do nothing to
reduce usage of the product. And again, it is one more
regulation that makes no sense. I know we have got legislation
that we passed called the REINS Act that tries to rein in some
of these radical regulations.
But I know I am out of time. I appreciate the discretion,
Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Doniger, you want to make a comment.
Mr. Doniger. I would just like to correct the record on a
couple of points. 1) Mexico is ending its use of methyl bromide
this year, 3 years before the obligation. They have an
obligation under the protocol to end it in 2015. They are
ending it in 2012.
Mr. Scalise. I don't know if you are correcting the record
because other witnesses are shaking their head no.
Mr. Doniger. Well, I am sorry. That is fact. The second
fact I want to correct is that the United States didn't pay for
or contribute in any way to the production capacity of China
from methyl bromide, and it is because of this treaty that
their production and use is also coming down. The treaty
protects Americans because it controls the dangerous chemicals
and the impact on the stratosphere around the world. We cannot
protect our people by ourselves. That is why we need----
Mr. Scalise. Can Mr. DiMare respond? Because it looks like
he disagrees----
Mr. Whitfield. Well, now, the time is up but I am just
going to make one other comment. You had asked the question
about jobs and Mr. Murai in his testimony pointed out I believe
that the California Department of Agriculture said without
methyl bromide, that there would be a loss of 23,000 jobs
annually, is that correct?
Mr. Murai. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. At this time I recognize the gentleman
from California, Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Dingell, for allowing me to ask my questions.
Mr. Doniger, the whole idea of the protocol international
agreement is that we are not going to give an advantage to
other countries. We are going to require everybody to reduce
what is a threat to all of us in this planet. And in the case
of CFCs, U.S. acted unilaterally and then moved forward. I
sometimes think if we had that problem today, we would probably
treat it the way we are treating greenhouse gases. They are not
doing anything, we are not going to do anything. Cost us jobs?
Well, we are not going to allow that to happen. And of course
the result is every day we hear about another drought
destroying the crops and I am sure more crops are being
destroyed by the drought which I think has to do with global
warming and climate change than the issue that we are
discussing today, which is an important one but a very narrow
one.
The bill freezes an outdated list of approved critical
uses. As a result, sectors that have completely phased out the
use of methyl bromide during the last 7 years would be allowed
to use methyl bromide again. Incredibly, as I understand it,
even golf courses would once again be allowed to seek critical
use exemptions.
Let me ask, does anyone on the panel think that we should
amend the Clean Air Act to allow sectors that have completely
eliminated the use of methyl bromide to start using it again?
No one? Do you think that we ought to allow sectors of our
economy that have completely eliminated the use of methyl
bromide to start using it again?
Mr. Murai. Yes, because they were eliminated under false
pretenses of an alternative being available and that
alternative has been now taken off the market.
Mr. Waxman. I see. What alternative has been taken----
Mr. Murai. Methyl iodide.
Mr. Waxman. I see. So you would let them--we would go back
and allow methyl bromide----
Mr. Murai. For critical use exemption----
Mr. Waxman. For critical use exemption.
Mr. Murai [continuing]. Under the critical use exemption
process.
Mr. Waxman. Well, do you think it makes sense to have a
critical use exemption to allow golf courses--to allow the turf
grass to be preserved with methyl bromide?
Mr. Murai. I think if it is under the law, if it is within
the law, it is within the law.
Ms. Keeler. And I think that is what Congresswoman Capps
was asking earlier when she was talking about the flexibility
and her time ran out. I can't speak to golf courses. That is
not my area. But in some areas we thought we found an
alternative in a certain crop and we tried it, and this is our
commitment to the protocol. But sometimes you try something new
and after 3, 4, 5 years, you find out there is a problem. A new
disease develops. Something you thought was taking place
didn't. So I think what Mr. Murai is saying if there is
adequate information for a critical use exemption, whether it
is golf courses, strawberries, flowers, that is how the
protocol was written.
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Murai, the California strawberry growers
are by far the largest remaining users of methyl bromide in the
United States. I know you have concerns with the amount of
methyl bromide available to your industry, but do you really
think that this legislation is the most constructive way to go
about addressing these concerns?
Mr. Murai. I think there could be several approaches and I
think this has probably gotten to a point where we were so
frustrated that we needed people to listen. We tried to
collaborate with EPA. We tried to introduce what we best
thought best information, put forth a package of application
for the critical use exemption. If they could tell us otherwise
based on data, then, you know what, that is how it is. But they
weren't providing that data back, Congressman, and that is what
bothered me about the system is when you can make a cut based
off methyl iodide and now methyl iodide is gone, so what
happens now with all the CUEs that have gone by the wayside
because of this alternative? There needs to be some resolution
to that.
Mr. Waxman. But I am concerned----
Mr. Murai. There are no alternatives coming off the shelf
ready for the field.
Mr. Waxman. I am concerned about the provision of the bill
that would allow growers to obtain methyl bromide without a
critical use exemption for so-called emergency events. This
could create a big loophole that would allow for the use of
large quantities of additional methyl bromide. Mr. Doniger, my
understanding is that a Montreal Protocol decision allows for
the use of methyl bromide in true emergencies. Do you know how
many times this emergency event provision has been invoked?
Mr. Doniger. Yes, it has been invoked twice and they were
true emergencies, once by Canada and once by Australia. It was
not a routine thing and that is what this bill would allow.
Emergencies would become routine. It would be like every time
you don't have enough money in your bank account, you just
declare an emergency and write another check.
Mr. Waxman. Well, Ms. Keeler, in your testimony you argue
that growers should be allowed to develop an emergency cleanup
process that will allow you to go into your fields every few
years and use methyl bromide to clean up any pests or diseases
that have developed, is that right?
Ms. Keeler. What I was referring to, in our industry we
have perennials we have to take out of the fields when certain
diseases pop up. So we don't have situations in many of our
crops where it is an every-year process. So the way that the
protocol is set up in the application process, it is very
difficult for us to fit in because we aren't scheduled.
Mr. Waxman. So it is not an emergency. It is the opposite
of emergency. They are planned, routine use of methyl bromide
without a critical use exemption.
Ms. Keeler. Well, I am referring to a cleanup process that
would allow us to go in and clean those fields up when----
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Doniger, what do you think of that idea?
Mr. Doniger. Well, I think if this problem of not needing
it every year, you figure that out, you build that into the
critical use exemptions. If the case can be made for it, that
is what the critical use exemption process is for. The
committee is approaching this as though there is no exemption
and we need to create one. Actually, there is one already and
it is working. We don't need to enlarge it.
Mr. Waxman. Well, Mr. Murai doesn't think it is working.
Mr. Murai. I think it has worked well for a while and I
think lately in the last 2, 3 years it has gotten very tenuous
because there hasn't been a real listening to what is really
happening in the field. And so when we come to EPA with our
package to demonstrate the need, it is very easily put forth,
here is what you can do. In this case, methyl iodide was put
forth and you are going to transition 21 percent in 3 years. I
don't think so but OK. That went away. Now, there is no
restoration for any of the crops that were dependent on methyl
iodide based on EPA's aggressive nature with that product.
Mr. Waxman. So you think EPA is not being reasonable in
deciding when emergency event should take place and this
exemption should be allowed?
Mr. Murai. Yes, I believe they are not being reasonable and
I believe the rules change at every corner. And that is where I
want to be able to go back to our growers and say, hey, the
process is the process and it is correct, it is transparent,
their interpretations are right on the science, and it is fair
and we have to live with it. But I can't honestly go back to my
growers and speak with conviction that that is the process
right now. And that is what I am talking about today is that
this process needs to be corrected.
Mr. Waxman. OK, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I recognize the gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy. I
am sorry.
Mr. Whitfield. Go ahead, Mr. Griffith.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do appreciate
that.
Mr. DiMare, a couple times Mr. Doniger has said that Mexico
is outlawing the use this year or ending the use this year of
methyl bromide, and each time you have indicated at least with
your body language that you didn't agree with that, so I am
giving you an opportunity now to explain what disagreement is
with that or other statement regarding the use in other
countries of methyl bromide you might have disagreed with Mr.
Doniger on.
Mr. DiMare. Well, you know, I don't know that that is
written into law there, but I will believe that when I see it.
Mr. Griffith. Trust but verify, is that what you are
saying?
Mr. DiMare. I am sorry?
Mr. Griffith. Are you saying trust but verify?
Mr. DiMare. That is correct.
Mr. Doniger. It is a commitment that Mexico has made under
the Multilateral Fund, which is part of the Montreal Protocol
and it is in writing. It is referenced in my testimony.
Mr. Griffith. I understand.
Mr. Doniger. And it is firm.
Mr. Griffith. I think what Mr. DiMare is saying, though,
that illegal drug trafficking takes place, you know, on both
sides of the border. It is written into law but he will believe
that they stop using methyl bromide when he sees it because he
is not sure they are going to follow the law. I understand what
you are saying but I understand what he is saying, too.
Mr. Doniger. It is harder to get methyl bromide than it is
to get illegal drugs.
Mr. Griffith. And that is what, apparently, even the people
who want to use it legally are saying and it is one of the
reasons we need the bill is that it is harder to get methyl
bromide than it is to get the illegal drugs. And they have got
a concern and they are hoping that maybe it can be a little
easier so they can use this substance legally and
appropriately.
Along those lines, Mr. Doniger, is there anything in this
bill that would force the EPA or the State Department out of
compliance with the protocol?
Mr. Doniger. I think what would happen, Congressman, is
that if the United States went forward with unsupported
applications, they would be turned down. And that would be the
normal operation of the protocol but it wouldn't be a good
result for my colleagues here on this panel. They want the
nominations to succeed, not to fail because they weren't
supported.
Mr. Griffith. But inherently there is nothing in this bill
that would put us out of----
Mr. Doniger. Yes, actually, I believe the emergency
exemptions provision would be grossly out of line with the
protocol and freezing the critical use list, you know,
permanently at the 2005 list would be contrary to the protocol.
Mr. Griffith. All right. And if I might ask Ms. Keeler and
others who have talked about this, and feel free to jump in,
because I am not as familiar with methyl bromide, I don't know
what happened that made methyl iodide--what were the negative
effects that we decided as a country to take methyl iodide out
of the mix--either one of you--as a potential fix for using
methyl bromide?
Mr. Murai. I think methyl iodide was identified as an
effective fumigant but the science on health effects was
debated and there were two sides of the science. And it was
deemed a cancer-causing agent and so it caused definite uproar
in the communities. And as growers, we were just as sensitive
to that and we believed that the process of science and
examination should go forward. And so we weren't resting on
that product as being the replacement for methyl bromide and
that is what we tried to articulate back to EPA is that we
aren't convinced this will be the tool for California or the
Nation.
Mr. Griffith. And then am I also hearing the testimony
correctly when I was listening to your opening statements, the
four of you that are in production of various types of
vegetables or fruits that to replace the methyl bromide you are
using a lot more pesticides and things that would get into the
water supply? Is that accurate? And Mr. Costanza, you want to
comment on that?
Mr. Costanza. When using methyl bromide eliminates a lot of
sprays across the field that we are going to have to do with
methyl bromide. As far as Midas is concerned, I am concerned
about my workers because it is not worker-friendly, whereas
methyl bromide is easier to work with and it is less risky to
my employees. But one of the biggest worries I had about Midas
was the fact that it could affect my workers more than anything
else. But this was the replacement the EPA gave us, said we
were going to have, and then that is gone. So they promised us
that we would have a drop-in replacement. And the reason I am
here is because we don't. If somebody has got a magic wand here
that I could use, I don't want methyl bromide. But you don't
have a replacement.
You know, if I need a blood transfusion today and I am A
positive and you don't have A positive and you give me
something else, you are going to kill me. But with methyl
bromide it worked. And my customers demand the product that it
produced. My employees liked the product because it yielded
more fruit. And they get paid an incentive on volume. They made
more money. So why don't produce it? The chain stores are going
to go to where it is if they have to import it. It doesn't
matter if it comes from--you know, you could fly anything
anywhere from the world today. You know, I have got Chinese
product in the stores in my hometown. My grandson was eating
Chinese-produced diced pears, not American, Chinese. We don't
need that. We can do it here. But all you are doing is
eliminating jobs and exporting the production to other
countries. Give me a break.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Dingell, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you.
I am very sympathetic with the witnesses here. I am very
much concerned about their views and their need for a
pesticide, but I have a feeling that we are like the surgeon
who conducted a superb operation in which the patient died. I
don't see here, Mr. Chairman, EPA. They have a story to tell.
Where are they? I don't see here the Department of Agriculture.
I don't see here others who could tell us whether there are
substitutes or why those substitutes are available or not
available.
I note here as I am looking at it the annual critical use
exemption summary. I don't know whether the panel has seen this
or not but it shows a continuing decline in the exemption that
has been given by the folks up at the Montreal Protocol. It
started out they were getting about 10,000 tons and it is down
now to less than 2,000 tons. My concern here is that every time
we have seen this, it has gone down and down and down but I
don't see any real prospect of getting relief through the
Montreal Protocol. If I look, they have consistently been below
what the farmers have requested and they have not given the
amount that the farmers say they need.
And we are going to take this legislation to the floor
after virtually no hearings. We have had a panel and I am sure
the panel are most respectable of folks in their fields, but we
haven't heard a word from the government agencies. Frankly, I
am in the view we ought to have EPA up here and let us find out
what the facts are from EPA's view. I am in the view we ought
to hear from Department of Agriculture. Let them tell us what
is the need but I don't see that. So we are going to take this
bill to the floor, probably pass, and then when it passes it
goes to Senate. And it is going to sink out of sight.
And if it doesn't sink out of sight in the Senate, it is
probably not going to be signed by the President and it is
going to be opposed with utmost diligence by the
environmentalists, and I don't think this committee is going to
afford the relief that quite frankly our agriculture community
needs. I don't think that we are going to see them get the
opportunity to have new pesticides that will address the
concerns of our farmers. And I see us lining up if the dire
predictions I hear today are to be realized, I see just nothing
but trouble coming from this legislation. And I see under the
legislation the farmers tell EPA what they go to the Montreal
Protocol with and the Montreal Protocol takes a look at it and
says, well, we are just not going to do that. So the farmers
walk away and the farmers got nothing and there is no methyl
bromide or anything else that is available to help our farmers
with their problem.
So we are giving our farmers the most successful operation,
but when we are done, the patient is going to fall off the
table and he is going to die. And we are going to have a huge
fight on the floor and everybody is going to get all torn up,
but the farmers aren't going to get the relief that they need
or they want. And to me that is not only bad policy but it is
very bad legislating and it is going to leave this committee
quite frankly looking kind of whoosh because we really didn't
do the job that we should have done in terms of having an
intelligent bunch of hearings where we heard the witnesses.
And, you know, I warned about this in earlier times. I
remember one morning Chairman Staggers brought in the swine flu
bill and we had a great big hearing on swine flu and my friend
John Moss, who was a member of the committee, and I, we said
this is a hell of a way to do business. We don't have the
vaguest idea what this is going to do. So we had a magnificent
program for the production of vaccine. We produced a hell of a
lot of vaccine. We absorbed liability for everything from the
building burning down while the patient was in it to being
raped or assaulted in the parking lot. And lawyers said oh, my,
isn't this wonderful? So they rushed out and had swine flu
seminars at which they told everybody how to sue the
government. We wound up with about $7 billion of liability.
They developed this wonderful inoculant but they never found
the damn disease and they never found the virus. And the
government got about a $7 billion liability and the trial
lawyers had a wonderful time and made lots and lots of money.
I am not going to say that that is what is going to happen
here but I think we are working most diligently to create red
faces on the members of this committee, and I just hope, Mr.
Chairman, that you will slow down and you will bring in the
witnesses from the Department of Agriculture, witnesses from
EPA, and maybe somebody else and let us find out why they are
not producing what our agriculture needs and exposing them to
what looks like is the work product of a snake oil salesman.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much. I might add, Mr.
Dingell, that we do have a document from the EPA making
comments on this particular legislation, even though they are
not here today. But we do have comments from them.
At this time----
Mr. Dingell. If you want EPA up here, they will come and
the committee will support you. And if you want the Department
of Agriculture up here, they will come and the committee will
support you. And that is the way to do the business. Let us
find out----
Mr. Whitfield. We don't want to sit around and subpoena
them every time we ask them. We try to work with them and----
Mr. Dingell. Did you invite them, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Whitfield. We did invite them, absolutely.
Mr. Dingell. And did you get on the phone and say we want
to have you up here? I have run committees for about 20 years
and I am somewhat knowledgeable----
Mr. Whitfield. We contacted them one month ago about this
hearing.
Mr. Dingell. I never had any trouble getting anybody in
here. I have watched my Republican colleagues waiving subpoenas
and throwing them around here like confetti, and they don't get
anything done. But it is fairly simple, let them know, By the
Great Horn Spoon, you are coming and we are going to have you
up here.
Mr. Whitfield. See, our goal is to accumulate the esteem
and respect that you have so that when we ask them, next time,
they will show up immediately.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, with all due respect I have to join
in here with Mr. Dingell. You know, here we have this hearing
and we are going to finish maybe these hearings by 1:30, maybe
2:00. And then at 4:00 the markup starts. You know, that is not
enough time. I think that if we delay this pending markup, I
will certainly join in with you and I am sure Mr. Waxman would
and the chairman of the full committee would. We would join
with you if you want to do a telephone call, request that the
EPA appears before a hearing we could schedule tomorrow
morning, I am sure we would be able to do that--or the
following day. But just to rush pell-mell into a markup less
than probably 2 hours after a hearing on this obviously very
important matter in your opinion, I think that is ludicrous on
its face.
And so I would strongly suggest and recommend that you
consider postponing your markup until we are able to get EPA
and USDA here so they could have some testimony from the
departments.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Rush, you and I both know that whether
Democrats are in control or Republicans are in control, there
are times when the other party does not agree with the
procedure. There were a lot of things, for example, about the
healthcare procedure bill we didn't agree with, and I have a
number of letters. I have farmers talking to me all the time,
milling companies all the time about methyl bromide, the
importance of methyl bromide. And we have this panel of
witnesses that reflects the agriculture community, reflects the
environmental groups, and we are going to intend to have
opening statements today at 4:00. And I guess the markup is
scheduled for tomorrow at 10:00.
Mr. Rush. But Mr. Chairman, why the hurry? Why do we have
to hurry up and get this done? Why----
Mr. Whitfield. We are trying to be responsive to the
agriculture community----
Mr. Rush. I would like to have the opportunity to invite,
along with yourself, along with Mr. Waxman, along with Mr.
Upton, to request that the EPA appear before the markup. I
would like to have that opportunity and I would respectfully
request that we be given an opportunity. Mostly Democrats and
the Republicans send invitation over the phone, however you
want to send it, email it, asking them to show up for a hearing
before we go into a markup.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, have you had the opportunity to read
their comments on this bill?
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I want to ask them questions. I
want them sitting right there at that table so that we can have
a vigorous debate or discussion and ask questions and ask them
some important questions that I and other members of the
committee want to get some answers to. The departments need to
be here.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, we invited them and you know what, I
would be happy to join with you, Mr. Waxman, and we can sit
down with EPA between the subcommittee markup and the full
committee markup and we can ask them all the questions you
would like to ask them.
Mr. Rush. It should be public and every member of this
committee should have that opportunity.
Mr. Whitfield. We will invite the public in.
Mr. Rush. And in fact, Mr. Chairman, I don't know why we
can't delay the markup for 24 hours if necessary so that we can
be responsible and have some real deliberative discussions with
the administration, with the EPA, and Department of
Agriculture. I don't see what----
Mr. Whitfield. So you prefer to do it on Friday instead of
tomorrow?
Mr. Rush. Yes, and we can do it on Friday. I don't have any
reason why that isn't OK, but we need to get the EPA and the
Department of Agriculture at the witness table.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, listen, I really do thank you and Mr.
Dingell for your comments. And like I said, we will make sure
that you get a copy of this. And like I said, I would be happy
to join you all in having EPA come up and talk to us, but we do
believe that this is an important issue. A lot of jobs are at
stake.
And at this time I think, Mr. Olson, you are the only one
who hasn't asked questions, so I recognize Mr. Olson from Texas
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. And I thank the chair. And welcome to our
witnesses. I appreciate your time and your expertise this
afternoon.
One of the largest annual festivals back home in Texas 22
is the Strawberry Festival in Pasadena, Texas. It just was
completed this past May and so because of those strawberries,
American strawberries, strawberry production in America is
important to me. Beyond strawberries, I am concerned about some
of the comments you made, Mr. Doniger. You essentially said
that citizens who are impacted by the loss of methyl bromide
have an avenue to have their objections heard, and that is a
lawsuit suing the EPA. That apparently is how the NRDC sees a
remedy for people who are impacted by loss of methyl bromide.
But I am curious if the people working on the farms think a
lawsuit is a viable alternative.
So my first question is for you, Mr. Costanza, and I will
work down to the other three. Do you have the money, the time,
and the resources to sue the EPA?
Mr. Costanza. No. When I was using methyl bromide on the
other crops, I was paying a lot higher income tax. My employees
were paying a lot higher income tax than they are now. So both
my employees and myself, our incomes have been reduced because
we are not using methyl bromide. And to sue the EPA, where am I
going to get this kind of money from? You know, we are a family
farm. Our margins are 2, 3 percent.
Mr. Olson. So a lawsuit is not a viable alternative for
yourself?
Mr. Costanza. Not unless you got some money.
Mr. Olson. We got a spending problem here in Washington,
see. No, we don't have the money, sir.
Same question to you, Mr. DiMare. Do you have the time,
money, and resources to sue the EPA?
Mr. DiMare. We are in the business of farming. We are not
in the business of suing people. We are just looking for an
alternative that is viable. If methyl bromide is the only
product, this will not be disputed. The only product out there
that did kill all the pathogens that it killed, all the weeds
that it killed, all the alternatives that are out there are
lesser, OK, which increases our cost, decreases our yield,
which is not a productive way to do business.
Mr. Olson. And probably lose jobs as well, just like----
Mr. DiMare. Well, the jobs will follow, yes. As we know it,
the type of farming we do will go under.
Mr. Olson. Ms. Keeler, same question for you, ma'am. Do you
have the time, money, resources to sue EPA?
Ms. Keeler. No, we barely have profit margins. I have to
repeat what Mr. Murai said earlier and we appreciate the
opportunity to be here to tell you our story. It should be not
an adversarial situation with EPA. We in our government should
have a conversation about what is going on on our farms. We
don't expect you all to know how to run a flower farm. That is
what we do. But we can come here and tell you and tell EPA how
that is taking place and the struggles that we have.
And Mr. Murai made a wonderful comment earlier. Italy,
Greece, they don't have the opportunity to come and talk to
their governments. At the very first international meetings
that I attended, I actually went and talked to the Italians and
the French because we know what they are growing. And we
basically said how are you guys going to grow these cut flower
products without methyl bromide? And they said we are not. The
EU came to us and told us this is what the EU is agreeing to.
There was no discussion. The Italians were on a vacation and
all these international locations at the meetings because there
was nothing for them to talk about.
So, no, we don't have the money, no, we don't want to sue
EPA. We want to be here, discuss with you, discuss with EPA and
follow the CUE process the way it is laid out and get our
allocations when necessary.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. And finally, for you, Mr. Murai,
being a strawberry man, very special to my heart with the
passing of the Strawberry Festival, so I mean again, same
question. Do you have the time, resources, money to sue EPA?
Mr. Murai. Our time and resources should be invested in
researching alternatives to methyl bromide. That is where our
efforts should be. And the process just broke down. It needs to
get fixed. People need to listen, get their boots dirty, and
clean their ears out because it is just not computing. And we
are not making things up. It is based on real data, real
science, and I think the EPA really needs to prove to all of us
that they have legitimate reasons for reducing our nominations
or eliminating them.
Mr. Doniger. So instead what these folks are doing is
coming to you at no small expense and asking you to change the
law, not to get EPA to carry out the law but to change the law,
to tilt the playing field in their direction. All I am saying
is there is an existing law and an existing process. Let us
make it work. It does work in my opinion. And use all the tools
that people have under existing law. If we change it----
Mr. Olson. Mr. Doniger, with all due respect, sir, the four
panelists sitting next to you disagree completely with that
statement there. I mean EPA is hurting their business, is
killing their jobs, and again that is not EPA's role. I mean
again we need to get the Federal Government off the peoples'
backs and let the American people grow their products, create
jobs in this country. That is the biggest challenge we have
right now.
I guess one more question for you, last one, Mr. Costanza.
Mr. Costanza. I don't want the EPA to change their rules. I
just want them to do what they told me they were going to do.
They were going to get me a viable, affordable alternative and
they have not. So until they give me a viable, affordable
alternative, give me the CUEs.
Mr. Doniger. Mr. Costanza hasn't even requested one----
Mr. Costanza. That is not correct.
Mr. Doniger [continuing]. Since 2007.
Mr. Costanza. No, that is not correct.
Mr. Olson. Well, we will settle that later, gentlemen.
Again, one commonsense thing from Mr. Murai----
Mr. Costanza. We are in the process of doing it now.
Mr. Olson. Dirt on the boots, wax out of the ears, that is
how we get through this problem. Thank you. I yield the balance
of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Time is expired.
That concludes questions for the first panel. We appreciate
all of you being here and talking to us about----
Mr. Rush. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to insert three
items related to methyl bromide into the record. And one is a
recent article from the Journal of Environmental Medicine
citing that the California strawberry industry is experiencing
rising crop yields while methyl bromide use declines. And there
are also two letters from the California growers describing
their success with alternatives to methyl bromide.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. And then we have some additional letters
from millers and Agricultural Trade Services, Almond Processing
Association, the American Farm Bureau, California Date
Commission, California Walnut Commission, Florida Farm Bureau,
Florida Tomato Exchange, Georgia Fruit & Vegetable Growers,
Holzinger Flowers, Inc., Knappan Milling Company, Lassen
Nursery, Maritime Exchange for the Delaware River and Bay, None
Better Fruits & Vegetables, Star of the West Milling Company,
Sunkist, Sunshine, Sunsweet, and Western Industries. Without
objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. At this time I would like to call up the
second panel of witnesses for testimony on the Asthma Inhalers
Relief Act of 2012. On that panel we have Mr. Jason Shandell,
who is general counsel and secretary, Amphastar
Pharmaceuticals. We have Dr. Monica Kraft, who is the professor
of medicine at Duke University, president of the American
Thoracic Society, and director of the Duke Asthma, Allergy, and
Airway Center. We have Dr. Edward Kerwin, who is senior medical
director, Allergy & Asthma Center of Southern Oregon. And we
have Mr. Chris Ward, who is the former chairman of the Board of
Directors of the Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America.
And I would like at this time call on Mr. Walden for the
purpose of introducing Dr. Kerwin.
Mr. Walden. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It is my
honor to introduce Dr. Edward Kerwin, an allergy, asthma, and
clinical research physician who traveled from Oregon out here
today. We appreciate your being here. Dr. Kerwin founded the
Allergy & Asthma Center of Southern Oregon in 1997, and prior
to that, practiced in the area since '93.
Today, he is going to provide the committee with insight on
his years of experience as a physician serving patients in and
around Medford, Grants Pass, Klamath Falls, and Ashland. In
addition to his role as health provider, Dr. Kerwin is a
leading clinical trial investigator on issues that we will
discuss today. He authored over 25 medical publications on
allergy and asthma, and even previously worked for NASA on
solar energy technology and space antenna projects in the '80s.
So maybe Mr. Olson will be back and we can talk NASA antennas.
He is active in multiple professional trade associations,
even finds time to participate in the Medford Rotary Club. And
after this hearing he will be able to add testifying before
Congress to his long and impressive rsum. And with that, Mr.
Chairman, we thank you for having Dr. Kerwin invited to testify
today.
Mr. Whitfield. We have got a meeting in here for just a
minute, but Dr. Burgess is going to go on and get the opening
statements started and then we will be right back.
Mr. Burgess [presiding]. So again, welcome to our
witnesses. We will first hear from Mr. Jason Shandell, 5
minutes for opening statement, please.

STATEMENTS OF JASON SHANDELL, VICE PRESIDENT AND GENERAL
COUNSEL, AMPHASTAR PHARMACEUTICALS, INC.; MONICA KRAFT,
PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE, DUKE UNIVERSITY, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN
THORACIC SOCIETY, AND DIRECTOR, DUKE ASTHMA, ALLERGY AND AIRWAY
CENTER; CHRIS WARD, FORMER CHAIRMAN, BOARD OF DIRECTORS, ASTHMA
AND ALLERGY FOUNDATION OF AMERICA; AND EDWARD M. KERWIN, SENIOR
MEDICAL DIRECTOR, ALLERGY AND ASTHMA CENTER OF SOUTHERN OREGON

STATEMENT OF JASON SHANDELL

Mr. Shandell. Thank you. Good afternoon and thank you for
this opportunity to testify. I am Jason Shandell, Vice
President and General Counsel for Amphastar Pharmaceuticals,
which is the parent company of Armstrong Pharmaceuticals. We
are grateful to the Members and professional staff of the
Energy and Commerce Committee for their assistance in helping
us to hopefully distribute the remaining units of Primatene
Mist. We strongly believe that allowing Americans to have
access to Primatene Mist is better than leaving it to expire in
a warehouse in California.
Primatene Mist, an epinephrine inhaler with CFC as
propellant was developed by Wyeth Labs in July 2008. Primatene
Mist is approved for temporary relief of occasional symptoms of
mild asthma. There are at least 2 to 3 million loyal Primatene
Mist users in the U.S.
When our company purchased Primatene Mist brand in 2008, we
knew it would be going off the market and that there were
technical challenges in creating an epinephrine inhaler without
CFCs. This is referred to as Primatene HFA. We accepted the
challenge, and in fact, we have developed Primatene HFA and we
are targeting to file a new drug application with the FDA in
the fourth quarter of this year.
Because Primatene Mist was removed from the market on
January 1, 2012, there is currently no over-the-counter inhaler
for asthmatic patients on the U.S. market. An individual who
previously used Primatene Mist must now pay to see a doctor and
then buy a prescription inhaler that costs four to five times
more than Primatene Mist.
We have received thousands of inquiries from users of
Primatene Mist who are desperate for availability of an over-
the-counter inhaler. Unfortunately, these inquiries have also
cited two possible deaths because of the lack of such an over-
the-counter inhaler, and I have these emails here.
Last December, we submitted a request to the EPA to allow
for the sale of the remaining units of Primatene Mist based on
public health and economic interests. The public health
interest is growing since the untreated and undertreated asthma
patient population is largely comprised of uninsured,
economically disadvantaged black and Hispanic communities. This
includes a large number of women and children. Without
Primatene Mist, those asthmatics who have no insurance, they
may have to seek care in emergency rooms, which can take many
hours and cost thousands of dollars.
The company's request for enforcement discretion was denied
by the EPA on December 30, 2011, citing that it would not be in
the public interest to allow for the sale of the remaining
units of Primatene Mist. Since the EPA did not address the
economic factors raised in our original request, we again
requested enforcement discretion from the EPA on January 4,
2012. The 2008 Final Rule stated that removing Primatene Mist
from the market will cost consumers between $300 million to
$1.1 billion. That is based on 2007 estimates. The cost to the
Federal Government and taxpayers for Medicare and Medicaid
could run as high as $75 million in each program, not to
mention the severe financial burden that an emergency room bill
can place on a family.
We have not received a response from the EPA on this
subsequent request based on economic concerns.
Amphastar understands that Members of Congress have also
written to the EPA expressing their concerns, and they have not
received any response from the EPA as far as I can tell. The
company has repeatedly asked why Primatene Mist was pulled from
the market when actually there are two prescription drug
inhalers that also use CFC as their propellants and they have
been allowed to stay on the market through December of 2013. No
one from EPA has ever explained why these two inhalers, with
CFC, are allowed to remain but Primatene Mist is not.
Primatene Mist has been on the market for almost 50 years
and has a safe and effective track record. To remove Primatene
Mist from the market because it contains CFC with no over-the-
counter replacement inhaler jeopardizes the health and safety
of the 2 to 3 million Americans that have relied on this
product for many years.
Amphastar believes in putting people over profits, and
throughout our efforts, we have offered to distribute all of
the remaining units of Primatene Mist as a donation to public
health clinics. This offer has been rejected by the government.
We are not interested in profiting from the sale of the
remaining inventory. Therefore, we hereby commit that we will
donate all the net profits from the sale of the remaining units
of Primatene Mist to charity.
Amphastar believes in its product, Primatene Mist. It
should be available in the United States over-the-counter so
individuals who are suffering from asthma and depend on this
product can enjoy instant relief when they experience asthma
symptoms such as shortness of breath. We sincerely believe that
there must be a readily available over-the-counter inhaler for
Americans who have difficulty accessing a doctor to obtain a
prescription and cannot afford to pay four to five times more
for a prescription inhaler.
In closing, let me again thank the members of this
committee, specifically Dr. Michael Burgess and also
Congressman Mike Ross and your professional staff for holding
this hearing. Our goal is to get the remaining units of
Primatene Mist out of the warehouse and into the hands of the
American people.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shandell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. I thank the gentleman for his testimony.
Dr. Kraft, you are recognized 5 minutes for testimony,
please.

STATEMENT OF MONICA KRAFT

Ms. Kraft. Very good, thank you. I would like to thank the
committee for allowing me to speak to you today.
I am Dr. Monica Kraft, and I am a professor of medicine at
Duke University and currently the president of the American
Thoracic Society. This is a specialty society made up of about
16,000 physicians who are pulmonologists with an interest in
obviously respiratory issues, critical care physicians, and
sleep physicians. So I also direct the Duke Asthma, Allergy,
and Airway Center and have been involved in both research and
care of patients with asthma. And my group and I have over 140
publications along these lines.
So it is with this professional scientific background that
I come to you today to present testimony on the behalf of the
American Thoracic Society on this issue of restoring
epinephrine inhalers back to the U.S. marketplace. It is my
strongly held view and the view of the American Thoracic
Society that returning these inhalers to the U.S. market even
for a limited time is ill-advised. But this view isn't just
shared by me or my societies. It is also shared by several
other societies, including the American Academy of Pediatrics,
two asthma and allergy societies, and two respiratory therapy
societies. So we are not unique in this view.
Now, when we think about asthma we think of it as a very
common disease. It affects between 5 and 10 percent of the
population, so most of us know someone with asthma. We also
have this perception--this is at least what I hear from
people--that asthma is relatively mild and not a problem when
actually I certainly take care of patients with very severe
disease who die of their asthma. And one of the reasons that is
is because the airways are red and swollen in asthma so they
become narrowed. And it is somewhat like breathing through a
straw. So really the mainstay of therapy is anti-inflammatory
therapy like inhaled corticosteroids. You may have heard of
that.
We also use bronchodilators, which dilate the airways and
we use this combination together. And in more severe asthma we
may need to use oral steroids like prednisone or adopt other
strategies such as focusing our allergic symptoms, which are
very big triggers of asthma.
So I am here to tell you that healthcare professionals play
a really critical role in the management of asthma in that we
form partnerships with our patients to get them not only the
best combination of medications that they need that are safe
and effective but also to educate them so that they can control
their disease.
So the takeaway message is the majority of cases asthma can
be managed and patients with the appropriate therapy can live
full and active lives.
But I would say to you today that epinephrine is not one of
those medications considered safe. So I am coming to you from a
safety perspective. So epinephrine is a nonselective
bronchodilator. So yes, it dilates. It bronchodilates. That is
good, but it also has other effects, primarily cardiac that is
very concerning to me and my colleagues. This can lead to
excessive cardiac stimulation, heart rate, that can lead to
heart attacks, especially in the older patients or those folks
who have heart disease. And sometimes we don't always know who
has heart disease.
Now, for years, the medical community has recognized the
dangerous side effects of epinephrine in the treatment of
asthma and recommended against its use. The American Medical
Association has urged warning labels. They have encouraged FDA
to consider removing inhaled epinephrine. They have requested
studies to really determine does it contribute to increased
asthma morbidity and mortality.
Now, I would be interested in hearing more about these
deaths that we just heard mentioned in the last testimony
because in speaking to my colleagues in emergency medicine--and
my husband runs the emergency department at the University of
North Carolina Chapel Hill--and my colleagues at Duke, their
perception is since Primatene Mist has been off the market,
there have been fewer severe exacerbations. And so we
hypothesize that in fact patients are now getting the care that
they need.
We have a mechanism to take care of those patients who are
uninsured, those underrepresented minority patients. I live in
Chapel Hill. I see patients from Durham. We have a very
significant contingent of underserved patients that we take
care of at our institution. And we can provide them with the
right medication. So I don't necessarily think it is all about
access.
So furthermore, the guidelines that put forth the treatment
of asthma do not mention epinephrine as a viable option for
treatment and I want to make sure that that is clear. The
National Asthma Education and Prevention Program, put together
by our own National Institutes of Health here in Washington,
the U.S., have emphasized that inhaled medications are critical
for asthma therapy but not epinephrine.
So the American Thoracic Society strongly encourages any
patient who is using over-the-counter medications like
Primatene Mist to seek care from a provider and there are ways
that these patients can get help. And I am a strong advocate,
again, for allowing patients to learn how to take care of their
own asthma and manage their disease because it is really all
about putting the power in the hands of the patient and
teaching them what they need.
So if one of the goals of today's hearing is to discuss the
pros and cons of enacting legislation to permanently or
temporarily restore inhaled epinephrine for the treatment of
asthma to the U.S. market, if the intent is to restore a safe
and effective medication, I think that is a laudable cause but
it is misinformed. Inhaled epinephrine is not safe for the
treatment of asthma and no current clinical practice guideline
calls for the use of epinephrine.
If the legislative intent is to provide access to an
inexpensive drug for the treatment of asthma, then I think that
is laudable but misdirected. In my opinion and that of my
society and other societies, the epinephrine's risk outweigh
its benefits.
And lastly, I am concerned about the message we are sending
to patients. We spent a lot of time preparing patients for this
transition when Primatene Mist was being taken off the market,
moving towards approved asthma therapies that are effective and
safe, and I worry that putting Primatene Mist back on the
market, even temporarily, may send a confusing message.
I would like to propose that Congress should be considering
ways to increase patient access to healthcare professions who
can work with patients to find an effective combination of
drugs to control asthma. We should not be abandoning patients
with serious medical conditions like asthma to self-diagnosis
and self-medication with less-effective drugs that have known
side effects.
So I hope this committee will keep the view of the American
Thoracic Society in mind as it considers legislation on inhaled
epinephrine for the treatment of asthma. I thank you for the
opportunity to speak to you today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Kraft follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. Time is expired.
Mr. Ward, recognized 5 minutes for the purposes of an
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS WARD

Mr. Ward. Thank you, Dr. Burgess, members of the committee,
for your invitation to speak today. My name is Chris Ward. I
live here in Washington, DC, and I am past chairman of the
volunteer Board of Directors of the Asthma and Allergy
Foundation of America, and I have had asthma all my life. When
I was a child, there were very few choices for treating my
asthma. I have been fortunate, however, that more and better
asthma treatments have come into use. I have also been
fortunate to be under the care of an allergist, a specialist in
the care of patients with asthma, since childhood when I was
diagnosed. Now that there are a variety of safe, effective
medications from which to choose to treat my asthma, I am a
grateful beneficiary.
Making the epinephrine bronchodilators, Primatene Mist or
others, available over-the-counter may give patients a false
sense of security. I know that from a personal perspective. If
patients use this medication to achieve short-term control of
asthma, which is a chronic disease, when long-term control is
warranted, asthma is a chronic disease and short-term symptom
relief may lull patients into a false sense of security and
think they have no need to follow up with a healthcare
practitioner physician.
Asthma patients need professionals who can recognize levels
of asthma control and recommend the most appropriate, effective
medication to achieve control. Left on their own--I as well as
other patients and a lot of us know that with medication over-
the-counter, that patients can get into trouble. Sound public
policy should provide patients with opportunities to get
appropriate treatment directed by skilled professionals. Having
access to epinephrine bronchodilators over-the-counter may put
patients at risk if they delay getting an appropriate diagnosis
and effective treatment to keep their asthma in control.
Some may argue that in the case of an asthma attack,
patients need to be able to go to a drugstore or a market and
buy an over-the-counter inhaler like Primatene Mist or other
epinephrine inhaler. Should we recommend, however, that someone
who is having an asthma emergency go to a store to buy a device
rather than calling 9-1-1 or going to an emergency room or
hospital? If patients need unplanned refills or replacement
devices, they can contact their prescriber or even get those
medications prescribed for them by a physician in an emergency
room and then follow up otherwise.
Another assumption that may prove false is that patients of
low-income need these medications because they are low-cost. I
grew up in an area of the country where there were a lot of
low-income patients, and I certainly was not a child of means.
While the price of Primatene Mist may be lower than the total
cost or co-pay for more effective bronchodilators, the relief
from these epinephrine devices does not last as long. Thus, the
long-term control and long-term cost is actually higher.
Over-the-counter access to this product may seem to erase
the cost of visiting a prescriber. However, over-the-counter
bronchodilators can promote self-diagnoses, and we are all
subject to those kinds of self-treatment sometimes, which is
particularly unsafe for the symptoms of asthma because it can
be deadly. With proper diagnoses and treatment, people can
control their asthma symptoms, avoiding high-cost interventions
like emergency department visits and hospitalizations. Cutting
out care by a qualified medical practitioner could be dangerous
for the patient and costly to the healthcare system.
The decision to withdraw Primatene Mist from the U.S.
market was made years ago. Lifting the ban may now lead to
confusion. There will be little opportunity to inform patients
about the nature of the change and to urge them to seek care
from a professional if they think they have asthma. I have
worked with professionals like Dr. Kraft many years of my life
in the industry of healthcare and life sciences, worked for
pharmaceutical companies and other healthcare organizations. I
have also been a volunteer as a volunteer leader of the Asthma
and Allergy Foundation of America, and I know that asthma is a
serious chronic condition, and I know what a difference
effective treatment can make and even as a child with very few
available to me, I was very fortunate.
I urge you, for all asthma patients, to reject an attempt
to re-release an epinephrine inhaler to the market as an over-
the-counter product. Again, I thank all the members of the
committee for inviting me here to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ward follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. I thank the gentleman for his testimony.
Dr. Kerwin, you are recognized for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF EDWARD M. KERWIN

Mr. Kerwin. Thank you very much to the committee and the
subcommittee for inviting me to testify.
As Congressman Walden explained, I am an allergy
researcher, asthma researcher. I have conducted over 300
clinical trials with over 200 new state-of-the-art medicines
for asthma and I care for 10,000 asthma patients. And I trained
with Monica. I will say that I am a member of the American
Thoracic Society, a fellow of the American College of Allergy,
and the American Academy of Allergy and never once have those
organizations polled me or any of their general membership on
the issue of Primatene.
Now, my comments today briefly----
Mr. Burgess. I am sorry, sir. Your microphone popped. Could
you make that statement again? I missed it.
Mr. Kerwin. I thought the microphone was on. I wanted to
just state that I am a member of the American Thoracic Society
for the last 10 years, a fellow of the American College of
Allergy, and the American Academy of Allergy and never once
have those organizations polled myself or any others of the
general membership on the issue of Primatene and the safety of
Primatene. So what I will tell you is these organizations are
speaking on behalf of the administrative doctors working there
but not on behalf of the general membership.
Now, what I want to say is that I think we live in a
difficult era in science and culture. There are major
scientific advances happening all the time, and I will just say
that that is how I spend 90 percent of my time, doing clinical
research with some of the latest, most advanced medicines for
asthma. Science tells us CFCs can be harmful to the ozone layer
and they do need to be removed gradually over time and that has
happened with hairsprays and air conditioners and
refrigerators. And I am happy to say that there are many new
HFA medications that are available for asthma. So science is
moving forward. We hope that there will be an HFA Primatene
perhaps within a year.
But I have to say that there are also many issues of
practicalities that critically need to be considered when any
new law is implemented. And science cannot just be implemented
as a blanket process. It has to be implemented in a rational
way.
Asthma, as you have heard, is a disease that strikes in the
middle of the night, and I don't know many private practice
doctors who are going to be available 24/7 if you suddenly need
a prescription medicine. Asthma occurs at your 4th of July
picnic and it is going to occur when you visit your least
favorite relatives who have five cats at home. Asthma may
affect your college daughter when she moves into a basement
apartment that has mold in it. It may occur when you get out
and run a 5K or a 10K running race, and it will hit you when
you come to visit me in Oregon where we have horse farms and
hay farms.
What I need to make clear is that despite all of the
science, which I am happy to discuss endlessly, Primatene Mist
is a first aid situation kind of medicine. The reason it is
over-the-counter is that there need to be immediate access,
immediate use medicines available to children, poverty-stricken
patients, elderly people who have acute airway disease. It is
similar to choking where a Heimlich maneuver is needed. It is
similar to a bee sting where Benadryl can be picked up at any
convenience store. We need regular access to emergency
medicines.
Now, the American Thoracic Society and others may say you
can get albuterol HFA but I challenge them that is simply not
true. There are many, many Americans who have no insurance,
they have no doctor, they have no prescriptions. They cannot
simply get albuterol HFA.
The best analogy that comes to my mind is basically a life
vest or a life raft on a ship. We have all seen the Titanic
movie. We know what happens if there are not enough life vests
or life rafts. Now, we have seen the Costa Concordia ship. The
question is should all the life vests be locked up where only
the ship's doctor or the ship's captain has the key? That
simply does not make sense for a medicine that can be
lifesaving for poor people in inner cities.
I am going to end by reading a brief poem. This is a little
over the top but this is the poem engraved on the bottom of the
Statute of Liberty, a little excerpt that says, ``Give me your
tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,
The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. Send these, the
homeless, tempest-tost to me, I lift my lamp beside the golden
door!'' Now, what that means really is that we live in a
country where there are many people who don't have
opportunities to see fine and wonderful doctors. They need some
temporary relief medicines. Scientifically, we are all in favor
of HFA over-the-counter medicines, but there are none.
So I would ask the committee to consider extending the use
of Primatene. It is the only available rescue medicine for up
to 30 million Americans who don't have healthcare.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kerwin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. The gentleman's time is expired.
We thank all witnesses for their testimony. I am going to
start with myself.
If I was sitting down there, I would complain to the
chairman that we don't have the EPA here and we don't have the
Food and Drug Administration here because really that is who
needs to be at this hearing. And I do want to thank all of you.
I mean this has been difficult for me because I just simply did
not understand what in the hell was going on. You have got the
EPA saying the Montreal Protocol says we have got to take this
stuff off the market. The FDA is saying, yes, yes, we are
working on a replacement; we are going to get to it. But it
just wasn't happening and I couldn't get anyone to answer my
questions. Lisa Jackson, Gina McCarthy were not only
dismissive, they were derisive. Dr. Hamburg at the EPA just
simply evaded the question but now I understand. There is a
contingent of people who do not think that epinephrine belongs
as part of the armamentarium for treating asthma. OK.
Dr. Kraft, have you talked to the FDA about the withdrawal
of epinephrine as an asthma therapy? I mean it has been around
for 50 years. Presumably it was approved at some point. So have
you provided testimony or documentation to the FDA on this
subject?
Mr. Kraft. What I have done is we have been involved as a
society in looking at----
Mr. Burgess. So the answer to the question is no, you have
not----
Mr. Kraft. No, I have not talked to them directly other
than offline. So you won't find any documented testimony. One
thing I would like to put forth, however----
Mr. Burgess. Well, could you provide us those things that
you have sent to them offline? You have communications?
Mr. Kraft. And I am just being told the ATS other than
myself personally has commented on the transition process.
Mr. Burgess. OK, so you will----
Mr. Kraft. We can provide that.
Mr. Burgess. On the transition process, but I mean look, if
you want a drug withdrawn from the market--and this happens all
the time--I mean you go to the FDA and say we have post-market
surveillance. This stuff is as bad as key tech. This stuff is
as bad as--I forgot what the anti-inflammatory was----
Mr. Kraft. VIOXX.
Mr. Burgess. VIOXX. And things happen.
Mr. Kraft. Sure.
Mr. Burgess. Have you done that?
Mr. Kraft. We can provide you with--absolutely. We have
been to the FDA. We have two issues actually if you permit me
to----
Mr. Burgess. Well, what did the FDA tell you?
Mr. Kraft [continuing]. Speak. We have issues on--there is
a CFC issue. To be honest, I am here today as a physician
caring for patients. I am really here for the patients' safety
piece because we have been calling for the removal of inhaled
epinephrine well before Montreal Protocol really became an
issue.
Mr. Burgess. Right. So that is the issue that you are
coming to discuss today, but the hearing is on the Montreal
Protocol and the CFC prohibition preventing asthmatic
patients----
Mr. Kraft. Right.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. From having a rescue inhaler.
Mr. Kraft. Absolutely. So----
Mr. Burgess. And I am speaking to you not just as a Member
of Congress. I am also a physician. I am also an asthma
patient----
Mr. Kraft. Right.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. And I use over-the-counter
epinephrine metered-dose inhalers and I have for some time. I
use them as part of the rescue phenomenon that we have all
heard talked about, and yes, OK. I am a doctor. I can go down
to the all-night pharmacy and write my own prescription for
albuterol. But if I get trapped in a situation without an
inhaler, it happened to me in Chicago at an NRCC fundraiser a
few years ago. The hotel put me in a room where somebody had
been smoking. So at 2:00 in the morning, guess what? I can't
breathe. So I got two options. I can stay up the rest of the
night holding onto the chair using the accessory muscles of
respiration and have a sleepless night or I can go down to the
front desk clerk and say where is your nearest 24-hour
pharmacy? He says one block over, two blocks up. I say thank
you very much, take my life in my hands, walk across the
streets of Chicago at 2:00 in the morning, but a rescue inhaler
is available to me.
Mr. Kraft. Right.
Mr. Burgess. And I could do this without being a physician,
just being a regular Joe you can go and get that but not
anymore. And this is the difficulty that I have is you have the
product in the warehouses. If you are really concerned about
CFCs, if this is really about the hole in the ozone, what is
going to happen to those canisters? I mean at some point they
degrade to the point where they blow up I guess. I mean I don't
know. I don't know what the lifecycle is of one of those
things. But the CFC is going to go into the environment. So
what are we preventing here? Are we going to go put them in
Yucca Mountain and entomb them in concrete so that they don't
ever get out? I mean I don't even know how much CFC we are
talking about here.
But it is just preposterous that we are having this
argument around CFC, around the propellant under the Montreal
Protocol when really your beef is with epinephrine and we
should have the FDA here and you should be asking them----
Mr. Kraft. I agree.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. To explain what studies have you
done? Why do you still allow this stuff to be sold? And I would
have some questions for them about that as well. But no one
would answer my questions. Can you understand the frustration?
I have had Lisa Jackson here at this table and she just looks
at me like I am nuts. I have had Gina McCarthy and she laughs
that I am even concerned about this.
Mr. Kraft. Um-hum.
Mr. Burgess. Margaret Hamburg won't even answer the
question. Can you understand why there is such frustration with
this?
Mr. Kraft. I do.
Mr. Burgess. And at the same time I am getting these same
letters from constituents, Doc, how come I can't go buy this
stuff anymore? How come you took it away from me? How come you
know better than I do about what is best to treat my asthma? It
is not just breathing through a straw; it is breathing through
a straw that is packed full of cotton. I mean this----
Mr. Kraft. Absolutely.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. You know, Mr. Ward. I mean this
is a dreadful set of symptoms to have visited upon someone. You
have got a rescue inhaler. If the issue is that it is not a
satisfactory pharmacologic agent, let us work on getting
albuterol over-the-counter----
Mr. Kraft. I agree.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. And I will just share with you my
personal preference is CFC is a much better propellant----
Mr. Kraft. Right.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. Than HFA. HFA is for wimps. CFC
delivers the right dose at the right time.
I am going to yield to the ranking member of the
subcommittee.
Mr. Kraft. Would I be permitted to answer?
Mr. Burgess. Oh, please.
Mr. Kraft. Thank you. So I agree with your frustration. I
can understand that. If I were your doc, I would make sure you
had three separate albuterol inhalers. I would have you put one
in your briefcase, I would have you put on in the glove box of
your car, and I would have you put one in your wife's purse to
make sure that you always have albuterol with you. So that is
the first part.
Mr. Burgess. I do that, but the best-laid plans don't
always work out. And sorry that I wasn't prepared that night
but it happens. It happened on a flight into Dulles where, you
know, I didn't have an inhaler. I had a long cab ride back. Oh,
my lands, I am really in trouble. I asked the cabdriver, would
you stop at a pharmacy and let me pick up a rescue inhaler so I
am not sitting here in the backseat of your cab suffocating----
Mr. Kraft. Right.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. And he was happy to accommodate
me. I mean those are real-world situations and they happen all
the time. My wife will likely not carry one in her purse for
me, but I do have one in my glove box. I do have one in my
backpack. I don't carry a briefcase but, yes, I have got them
scattered all over my life----
Mr. Kraft. OK.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. But sometimes I wander away from
them. I will let you respond.
Mr. Kraft. OK, thank you. The other issue is regard over-
the-counter. There actually is a movement going on to start
talking about over-the-counter bronchodilators that are safe.
It is still in the very early stages. It is somewhat
controversial because we are still on the same issue where we
want to make sure that practitioners interact with their
patients to be able to educate them on the principles of asthma
and know what combinations of medications work best for them.
So I don't know if you are aware of that or not. So I
wanted to just put that forth as something that is in the
works. If we are really focusing on this over-the-counter
piece, I think there is a thoughtful way to consider over-the-
counter medications for asthma that aren't necessarily
Primatene Mist per se.
I am also a critical care physician and I have seen more
patients coming into my intensive care unit with their
Primatene Mist inhaler clutched to their chest with a severe
asthma exacerbation on a ventilator. And I don't see that when
they are on proper therapy. We have seen a much lower incidence
of really severe asthma exacerbations because of people getting
in with their docs, getting on anti-inflammatory inhalers.
Because I worry this reliance on going down to the drugstore
and getting Primatene Mist and not being on something daily for
asthma--because it is about redness and swelling of the airways
is a problem.
Mr. Burgess. We need to go to Mr. Rush. I don't want you to
be concerned for my health and safety. I do have an ADVAIR
inhaler and I do use it----
Mr. Kraft. Well, I am.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. Regularly. But there are times
when you need that extra boost.
And I will yield to Mr. Rush, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Rush. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I
was headed along the same path. I think you might have
inadvertently--didn't mean any harm--mentioned the fact that
you took your life in your hands by walking outside of a hotel
in Chicago and I really take offense to that. But I have been
working on this issue of asthma for quite a while and it is a
real acute concern of mine and it has been and always will be
because it disproportionately impacts my community. In the year
2000, Congress passed the Asthma Reduction Act, which
incorporated aspects of a bill that I sponsored into the
Children's Health Act of 2000. And it came along and I still am
very much concerned about the issue of asthma. And I have to
say I am somewhat torn but I have to come down on the side of
my constituents.
Mr. Chairman, a month and a half ago I had a pastor at a
church and the person who is one of my--not my key person at
the church--had asthma and I think you might recall I had to go
and bury him. And he was a member of my church and he was an
asthmatic patient and he died of congestive heart failure. But
he was an asthmatic patient also. And his memory keeps
overpowering me and overwhelming me even now. And he was under
a doctor's care. But now, many, many people who are my
constituents, I have one of my long-time staff members is an
asthmatic patient. Every Tuesday she takes half a day off and
this has been going on for years. She goes to the doctor to get
the shots that I have seen her go into crisis situation on more
than one occasion.
And I know that the science and the goodhearted folks--but
I just have to say to Dr. Burgess, I think that this
legislation that you come up with, I don't like the fact that
we have to do this, but I just don't see, given the absence of
any other approach that this Congress can make, I don't see how
we can avoid it. I for one just find that there are too many of
my constituents who don't have access to healthcare, who don't
have a doctor, and who even think it would take too much time
right now if they would be able to do--they just don't have the
wherewithal. They are missing so many elements keeping them
from living productive lives, and asthma is becoming more and
more of an issue. It is probably one of the leading health
issues in my community.
And I hear the arguments but I think that this Primatene
should be allowed back on a temporary basis, understanding what
the problems are with it, what the short-term solution might
mean to other long-term issues--I haven't addressed the long-
term issues. But I don't see the solution to these issues. I
don't see that being eminent and overnight, reality, because it
has to do with access to healthcare. And this Congress, we have
tried to address it but we can't agree on what access to
healthcare really means to the American people. I know my time
is expired. I had some questions but I just had to get out what
I had to say about this particular issue.
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Mr. Rush.
At this time, I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Barton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
When I go to Chicago, which I don't do very often, I just
carry around Bobby Rush-is-my-friend cards and I have never had
a problem on the streets of Chicago. I just show them that card
and they say what can we do for you? They just couldn't be
friendlier.
So when Dr. Burgess indicated he was going to introduce
this bill, I was encouraging of him introducing the bill. You
know, but this goes under the heading of no good deed goes
unpunished because apparently a lot of the people in the
asthmatic community are fairly opposed to his bill.
My first question would be to the panel. Each of you
indicate you support the bill, oppose the bill, or are neutral
on the bill. Just start and go right down the line.
Mr. Shandell. Yes, I definitely support the bill. I find it
ironic that these third parties are now raising safety issues
when this really was an environmental issue. Primatene Mist has
been around for half a century.
Mr. Barton. So you support the bill?
Mr. Shandell. I support the bill.
Mr. Barton. I don't need the editorial right now.
Mr. Shandell. I support the bill.
Mr. Barton. OK. Dr. Kraft?
Mr. Kraft. I oppose the bill. Am I allowed to say anything?
Mr. Barton. Well, in a minute.
Mr. Kraft. OK.
Mr. Barton. Right now, we have got one for and one against.
Mr. Kraft. All right.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Ward?
Mr. Ward. As a patient, I think I would oppose the bill----
Mr. Barton. Oppose the----
Mr. Ward [continuing]. As it is currently constructed.
Mr. Barton. As it is currently constructed, OK.
And Dr. Kerwin?
Mr. Kerwin. And I definitely support the bill----
Mr. Barton. Support the bill.
Mr. Kerwin [continuing]. Only alternative out there for
people who don't have a doctor right next to----
Mr. Barton. So we are two to two. We have two for and two
against. That is not bad. I mean, you know, that is a tie. In
this committee, the tie goes to the sponsor of the bill.
So my next question, Primatene Mist, if it were allowed to
be sold over-the-counter, the existing stocks, what would that
cost an individual who just walked in and purchased it? What
would it----
Mr. Shandell. I can answer that. So we sell to the
retailers who then mark up, but we will not raise the price of
Primatene. As I said, we will donate all the profits. So based
on the past sales, we are looking at about $20 at the retail--
--
Mr. Barton. If it were allowed to be sold, it would be
around $20?
Mr. Shandell. Correct.
Mr. Barton. Now, if I don't have it and I have to go to a
doctor and get a prescription, what does that prescription cost
for the equivalent amount of dosages?
Mr. Shandell. Well, the prescription itself let us not
forget the doctor's bill but the actual inhaler is $110.
Mr. Barton. OK, Dr. Kraft, you have got----
Ms. Kraft. I would like to respectfully disagree. Yes,
there are places where in fact it is $120. If you look, which I
just did today, not in Canada, $30----
Mr. Barton. Thirty dollars.
Ms. Kraft [continuing]. You can find----
Mr. Barton. You can get----
Mr. Kerwin. Well, I will just have to say that having
practiced allergy and asthma care for 20 years, there is
nowhere in my State of Oregon where you can get albuterol
inhaler HFA for less than $60 to $70 a canister.
Mr. Barton. All right. So----
Mr. Kerwin. So that is the fact----
Mr. Barton. We are----
Ms. Kraft. Well, I guess I practice in a part of the
country that is a little less----
Mr. Barton. We are all in agreement that the prescription
is going to be somewhat more expensive. If you are an informed
consumer like Dr. Kraft, you can get it much less expensively,
but there is nowhere you can get it for the same price. That is
fair?
Now, the next question--which of you a medical doctor,
which of the two doctors? So we have two medical doctors. This
is great because you are on each side of the issue. What is
wrong with allowing the sale of the existing stocks and use
that as an emergency but also have your prescription where you
get the treatment regime that actually seems to be more
effective? What is wrong with that, Dr. Kerwin?
Mr. Kerwin. Well, thank you for making that point. That is
exactly the kind of care we think Americans should get. Like
Dr. Burgess does, they should see a doctor, they should get
educated about their asthma, they should reduce their allergy
exposures, they should get anti-inflammatory inhalers, and they
should have access to Primatene just for emergencies. I live in
a rural State. Many patients in southern Oregon live 50 miles
from the nearest doctor. That is quite common. Certainly, 100
miles from an emergency room. We believe there is a role for
Primatene or epinephrine or any over-the-counter inhaler. I
would support over-the-counter albuterol but it is not----
Mr. Barton. My time is about to expire.
Dr. Kraft, my friends at the Allergy and Asthma Network
Mothers of Asthmatics point out that there is a product
manufactured by Nephron Pharmaceutical that is a handheld bulb
nebulizer. What does that cost? And is that effective?
Ms. Kraft. That is epinephrine also is my understanding and
so I do not know the cost of that. But I would like to comment
on your first statement----
Mr. Barton. I mean that would take care of the Montreal
Protocol issue I think because it is a handheld. It doesn't use
a CFC.
Ms. Kraft. Right. The issue I see is that Primatene has
been around for 50 years, so that is one issue that people like
to bring up. I would argue that 50 years ago we didn't have a
lot of particularly effective asthma therapies. So that is all
there was. Now, we do.
Now, I am also in favor of over-the-counter options for
asthma and that is actually, as I was mentioning earlier, that
is in the works at the FDA.
Mr. Barton. Well, it has been in the works for----
Ms. Kraft. Well----
Mr. Barton [continuing]. A number of years.
Ms. Kraft [continuing]. Actually, I think there have been
hearings. It is actually heating up quite vigorously and we are
right in there part of it as supportive with thought.
Mr. Barton. Well, my time is expired and I appreciate the
chairman's courtesy.
Ms. Kraft. OK.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Barton. I do think Dr. Burgess has a good idea here. If
we can work with the community so it is not two to two, we may
have a bill that actually goes somewhere.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I will recognize the gentleman
from California, Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Obviously, if you have two on each side, it doesn't produce
a tie; it just means it is a balanced presentation and that is
always a good idea so we hear both sides of the issue.
But I am going to ask about the health effects of all of
this. Dr. Kraft, you are the president of the American Thoracic
Society and a recognized expert on asthma. And there is a long
list of medical and public health organizations who have raised
concern about the over-the-counter epinephrine inhalers. In
your testimony, you said epinephrine inhalers like Primatene
Mist are not a safe treatment for asthma and are not
recommended by expert guidelines. Why is that?
Ms. Kraft. You are absolutely right. That is true. The
reason is it is the compound itself, the chemical epinephrine.
It is nonselective. So yes, it can bronchodilate, so that is
the good news, but it has effects on other organs. And the
major concern is cardiac, excessive cardiac stimulation and can
lead to myocardial infarction, heart attack in patients who
have heart disease. And that is really the concern. I am not
against over-the-counter medications for asthma necessarily if
done in a thoughtful way. I think that this particular
medication is concerning. And there have been voices for many
years calling for the removal of this particular agent because
of the dangers and the side effect profile. That is really
where we are sort of coming from today.
Mr. Waxman. But it is not easy for FDA to take a drug off
the market. Do you know what the standard of proof is? I assume
it is pretty tough.
Ms. Kraft. I am sorry. Repeat that question, please.
Mr. Waxman. Has FDA tried to take it off the market? Is it
something that FDA should take off the market?
Ms. Kraft. You mean Primatene?
Mr. Waxman. Yes.
Ms. Kraft. Well, it has been off the market for 6 months
because of----
Mr. Waxman. But did they ever move to take it off the
market?
Ms. Kraft. There have been calls from the American Medical
Association----
Mr. Waxman. Um-hum.
Ms. Kraft [continuing]. To the FDA to consider it. But I
think it is a difficult situation because the question is can
we look at alternatives and can we improve access to care for
patients----
Mr. Waxman. Um-hum.
Ms. Kraft [continuing]. So that they can actually get the
right medications. So I like the idea of having something
available for patients but I would argue let us make it the
best medication and a safe medication.
Mr. Waxman. Well, Dr. Kerwin argues in his testimony that
Primatene Mist is necessary for an emergency situation where
someone suffering from asthma does not have a prescription
medication. He says people would die or could die without it.
What do you think in a potentially life-threatening situation,
should asthmatics use Primatene Mist?
Ms. Kraft. I have actually seen the ramifications of using
it in an emergency situation and relying upon it to improve
asthma symptoms. And the issues--it is very short-term in terms
of its action and the excessive additional side effects of the
cardiac piece actually, in my opinion, is not a safe
alternative. So I would actually recommend--and we have done
this in the community that I practice--we have the ability for
patients to get albuterol very easily and to have access to
emergency departments and follow up with us so they can get the
medications they need. And we have a big community program in
Durham for this purpose exactly to help the underserved because
I think that is who we are talking about today, those patients
who don't have the access that perhaps the rest of us do.
Mr. Waxman. Well, I take seriously when the health
professionals take a point of view that something is not safe,
particularly if it is--this bill would go to extraordinary
lengths to put it back on the market. It is not on the market
now. If I were convinced, however, that it is necessary, then I
would say fine. Let us keep it out there. But I don't think we
have got to push legislation to put a product back on the
market in the face of such strong opposition by public health
and physician organizations.
Am I correct that public health and physician organizations
take the same point of view you do?
Ms. Kraft. Yes, many.
Mr. Waxman. Now, I want to go into the question of how fair
this is to the company. The company obviously wants to sell the
product that they still have and they are not going to pursue
it after that. The initial proposal by FDA was to phase out the
drug and it was agreed upon it would be December 31, 2010.
Armstrong submitted comments to FDA requesting it be extended 1
year, and FDA granted Armstrong's request for a 1-year
extension. Isn't that right, Mr. Shandell?
Mr. Shandell. Yes. I would like to address that because----
Mr. Waxman. Well, I just want your answer because----
Mr. Shandell. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Waxman. No, my understanding is that about a dozen
other types of inhalers containing CFCs were phased out before
Primatene Mist. That includes the albuterol phase-out in 2008
which involved moving millions of asthmatics to new
treatments----
Mr. Shandell. Which was our product as well.
Mr. Waxman [continuing]. Only two CFC-based inhalers remain
to be phased out, and both are scheduled to be taken off the
market at the end of 2013. So Primatene Mist was actually
phased out several years later than many other types of
inhalers. Would it be fair to them to have you come back on the
market when they----
Mr. Shandell. Well, that is what I would like to address
because, you know, this is an environmental issue regarding
CFC. It is not a safety issue because otherwise----
Mr. Waxman. Well, this is not a safety question that I am
asking. I am just asking you in basic fairness----
Mr. Shandell. Well, yes, the----
Mr. Waxman [continuing]. If other companies follow the
rules----
Mr. Shandell [continuing]. Fairness question is that we
have been working with FDA since 2007 for HFA Primatene. So
obviously the FDA believes in Primatene because we have spent
tens of millions of dollars on clinical trials and we are
looking to get an approval next year. So obviously----
Mr. Waxman. No other company----
Mr. Shandell [continuing]. New drug applications----
Mr. Waxman [continuing]. Came back and said we are not----
Mr. Shandell. And the only reason we are----
Mr. Waxman. Excuse me, sir.
Mr. Shandell. Yes.
Mr. Waxman. I have already exceeded my time but I get to
ask the questions.
Mr. Shandell. Sure.
Mr. Waxman. And other companies phased out--not other
company was allowed to come back and sell off its remaining
inventory after the phase-out date. Isn't that right?
Mr. Shandell. That is correct. No other company is over-
the-counter so there is no----
Mr. Waxman. What difference does it makes if it is over-
the-counter or prescription?
Mr. Shandell. Because if you don't have a prescription, you
can't afford insurance, you have no choice.
Mr. Waxman. That is a different issue but a drug to be
extended and allowed to come back and sell off the----
Mr. Shandell. We have a million units remaining----
Mr. Waxman [continuing]. Inventory.
Mr. Shandell. We don't need to sell the inventory. We are
advocating on behalf of our customers who have been complaining
saying that people have died actually. So we are just coming
out not for money. We are saying, look, let the million be
sold. We are really interested in getting HFA approved so there
is an over-the-counter. In terms of fairness, there are two
prescriptions that are still not the market with CFC and nobody
has answered why those are allowed to stay if it is an
environmental issue and not a safety issue.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman's time is expired.
I will recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions now.
We have a situation here where we have in storage some
Primatene Mist. This legislation relates only to that. This is
a product that has been used 40, 50 years, was accepted by
people who used it and obviously people benefitted from it or
they wouldn't continue to buy it. We have a lot of letters or
emails here from people--``I just spent my last $200 on my son
at a doctor's appointment for asthma medicine and will no
longer be able to go to the doctor's'' because Primatene Mist
is gone. We have a lot to that effect. I understand a genuine
concern about, oh, this is not safe for people, and Dr. Kraft,
you have said that this is not a safe treatment. There are side
effects. There are cardiac problems with it. And now, Dr.
Kerwin, would you reply to that comment that Dr. Kraft made?
Mr. Kerwin. Yes, I would be delighted to reply to that. You
know, Primatene was released and approved by the FDA either in
1957 or 1963, and at that time, the approval process was less
rigorous than it is now. So Primatene has been what we would
call a grandfathered medicine that has been out for many, many
years. Every drug company is required to collect safety reports
if there is any episode where a drug fails a patient or where
they die for any reason that could be related to the drug. And
my understanding is Amphastar has received no complaints of
patients who have had life-threatening cardiac problems or
other what we call serious adverse events with this medicine.
It is truly unfair to say that it is not a safe drug. That is
100 percent speculative. The way safety is assessed is through
a clinical trial process, and epinephrine in the HFA form is
going through a very careful and rigorous FDA-authorized safety
process.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. I might----
Mr. Kerwin. Safety is roughly parallel. It is slightly more
cardiac stimulating.
Mr. Whitfield. I mean I can understand in Durham that there
may be a program developed that really addresses this emergency
need, but there are lots of places in the country that do not
have programs like that. And from my personal perspective, I
don't see what is wrong with giving patients a choice. If it is
available and they want it for a period of time, why not?
But I would like to yield the balance of my time to Dr.
Burgess.
Mr. Burgess. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would just reiterate the
observation that we are here today having this hearing. The
legislation has been introduced essentially because two Federal
agencies decline to be truthful with the committee. And that is
the real tragedy here. Yes, we should have the EPA here. They
should be answering the question why are there two prescription
products that are continuing to use CFCs still sold, not
affected under the ban? We should hear from the FDA. Have you
had post-market surveillance data on inhaled epinephrine
products that lead you to believe that it is unsafe?
But instead, we have got this mishmash, this backdoor
banning of a product that has been approved for 50 years on
which people depend under the Montreal Protocol. I mean this
really makes no sense. If we are really frightened of the CFC
in those remaining canisters that Mr. Shandell has secreted
away somewhere, I submit that we ought to reopen Yucca Mountain
and take them deep into the Earth and entomb them in cement
like we would radioactive waste.
But those canisters are eventually going to degrade, pop
open, and the CFC floats over the Antarctic and widens the hole
in the ozone. At least that is what we are led to believe that
this small amount of CFC is going to lead to all sorts of
global calamities.
Dr. Kerwin, look, I have been in the ICU when a young
patient has died from an aspirin overdose. I mean that is
tragic, the acidosis that accompanies like 24, 36 hours later.
Everybody thinks the kid is out of the woods and then he dies.
So we know people can die from over-the-counter products. Yet,
people take aspirin all the time for headaches. Would it make
sense that we told people if you have a headache, you really
shouldn't take aspirin anymore. Come to the emergency room, let
us give a CAT scan to make sure you are not dying of a brain
tumor and then we will get you something. I mean that is kind
of what we are saying here, isn't it?
Mr. Kerwin. I would say that the principle of having
medicines available over-the-counter is sort of a twofold
principle. One is America was settled by frontiers people who
came out to many of the big States and they didn't have a
doctor on their Oregon Trail wagon train. So we live in a
country where people have a fundamental right to try to treat
themselves first before they take the radical step of seeing a
doctor. The second thing I would say is medicines over-the-
counter are designed in order to help the many even if overuse
of the medicine or misuse might harm a few. And I think
Tylenol, 20 pills of that can hurt your liver. Benadryl, 20
pills of that could put you in a car crash, and yes, 20 puffs
of epinephrine might make your heart race. But these medicines
are consistent with the values that patients should have a
right to treat themselves initially and they should then seek
better medical care.
Mr. Burgess. Well, Mr. Chairman, I will just close with the
observation that we should require the two Federal agencies
involved--Environmental Protection Agency and the Food and Drug
Administration--to come before this committee and be honest
with us for a change, none of this hide-the-ball, oh, it is a
Montreal Protocol thing. If there is a danger to inhaled
epinephrine, then why the hell has the FDA not prevented it? We
have been through this round and round with the FDA where they
say, oh, we know that something is dangerous but we can't
prevent it being sold. That is nonsense. That is their job.
That is what they are there to do. If they have post-market
surveillance that says inhaled epinephrine multi-dose inhalers
are damaging to people's health, they owe it to this committee
to come here and share that with us.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I would like to recognize the
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Dingell, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dingell. I thank you for your courtesy. And I would
like to ask these questions of Mr. Shandell, yes or no.
It is my understanding that there are 1.2 million units of
Primatene Mist remaining in inventory, is that correct?
Mr. Shandell. Yes, approximately.
Mr. Dingell. Now, is this remaining inventory being stored
under safe and proper conditions?
Mr. Shandell. Yes, it is.
Mr. Dingell. You are sure of that?
Mr. Shandell. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. When will the remaining inventory expire?
Mr. Shandell. It expires at varying times, mostly in August
of 2013.
Mr. Dingell. OK.
Mr. Shandell. Starting in January.
Mr. Dingell. The remaining inventory has been stored
properly and has not yet expired. Do you know the reason or do
you have reason to believe then that any of the remaining
inventory is unsafe for use by patients?
Mr. Shandell. No, we do not. It should be very safe for
patients----
Mr. Dingell. Does anybody at the table have any reason to
believe that the storage of the remaining inventory of
Primatene Mist is creating an unsafe product? Yes or no?
Ms. Kraft. I just had a question on the expiration. It is
January to August of '13, right?
Mr. Dingell. Well, is anybody down there going to sit there
and tell me that this Primatene Mist is going to be unsafe when
it is put on the market if it is so?
Ms. Kraft. Based on the way it is stored, sir?
Mr. Dingell. Based on any fact. Yes or no. It is a yes-or-
no question. You should have no trouble doing it.
Ms. Kraft. Yes. Then I would say yes.
Mr. Dingell. You believe it is unsafe?
Ms. Kraft. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Why?
Ms. Kraft. For the reasons that I stated previously. It has
nothing to do with storage. I think they have been storing
their product----
Mr. Dingell. Do you have knowledge of this or is this
supposition?
Ms. Kraft. That it is unsafe? I have had personal
experience with patients who have taken it and had severe
asthma--I am talking about safety from a mechanism perspective.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you very much for that unhelpful
response.
Now, according to your testimony, Mr. Shandell, there have
been between 2 and 3 million Primatene Mist users. If Amphastar
is allowed to distribute and sell the remaining inventory of
Primatene Mist, how would your company do so equitably?
Mr. Shandell. Yes, we will do it equitably. We will not
raise the price from what it was previously. We also, as I have
stated, this is for the goodwill of our customers. We are not
looking to make any profit here, so we will actually donate all
the net profits to charity. And I really want to go back to
people are saying that this is an unsafe drug, then why has the
FDA been working with us since 2007 for an HFA version?
Mr. Dingell. May I persist in my questions?
Mr. Shandell. Yes, sure.
Mr. Dingell. Is there any reason to fear that pharmacies
may not be willing to restock Primatene Mist for any reason?
Mr. Shandell. There is some concern to that but if it is as
sought after as we believe by our customers, they can always
get it online by CVS.com. There are----
Mr. Dingell. So there is the fear that they would refuse to
stock it?
Mr. Shandell. No. Well, there is some fear on the shelf
life stocking----
Mr. Dingell. Yes or no?
Mr. Shandell. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. You have no reason?
Mr. Shandell. I have no----
Mr. Dingell. You have no fear that the customers would
refuse to stock this if it is put back on the market?
Mr. Shandell. I believe that there is a strong demand for
it.
Mr. Dingell. All right. Now, in order to assure the proper
education of patients regarding the phase-out of Primatene
Mist, these inhalers were packaged with labeling noting that
Primatene Mist would no longer be available after December 31,
2011, and encouraged patients to talk to your doctor or
pharmacist about other asthma medicines. How is your company
going to address potential confusion that will be caused among
your patient population when these inhalers become again
available?
Mr. Shandell. Yes. This message is on the box. If we are
allowed to sell the remaining inventory, such units will be
moved to our subsidiary. They will be relabeled to eliminate
this statement and then released by quality assurance.
Mr. Dingell. All right. Now, I have another question. There
are two remaining prescription products containing CFCs that
are not being phased out until 2013. These products are
Combivent CFC, which contains albuterol and ipratropium bromide
in combination; and Maxair, which contains pirbuterol. These
two drugs are subject of the separate rulemaking that was
financed on April 14, 2010. It seems to me that this tells me
that FDA and EPA didn't feel that there was a significant
problem with regard to the carrying medium that they have in
your product. Is that right?
Mr. Shandell. Yes. I have never received clarity as to why
the prescriptions are still out----
Mr. Dingell. All right. Thank you. My time has expired.
Mr. Chairman, your courtesy is much appreciated. I would
ask that the chair would be supportive of me. I am going to
send a letter down to FDA asking a number of questions. And I
am going to ask that the FDA would respond, and if they are
slow, I am going to look to you for your assistance in seeing
to it that they are properly responsive.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. We would be happy to assist in any way
possible.
At this time, I would like to recognize the gentleman from
New York, Mr. Engel, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I don't think I
will take 5 minutes because I think we have a vote on the
floor, and a lot of the questions have been asked.
But there are a lot of swirling issues here. I am co-chair
of the Asthma and Allergy Caucus and I have worked with the
asthma and allergy advocacy community for many years, and I
have been surprised by their strong opposition to allowing
Primatene Mist to continue to be sold. I signed a letter in
January asking Commissioner Hamburg to allow the remaining
units of Primatene Mist to be sold past the December 31, 2011,
deadline.
I mean I think there have been good points on both sides,
but I really want to ask Mr. Shandell. What is in it for you?
Tell me what is in it for you. You are not going to make a
profit on it because you are going to donate everything to
charity. You mentioned your company offered to distribute all
the remaining units as a donation to public health clinics and
the offer was rejected. So if you are not going to make a
profit, why are you fighting so hard to get another exception--
--
Mr. Shandell. Yes.
Mr. Engel [continuing]. From FDA and EPA?
Mr. Shandell. It is a good question because it is rare to
see corporations not doing something for profit, but we are a
private company in California. We are founded in science and
this is a discontinued product. It is not in our sales forecast
and we could walk away. However, we have received thousands of
complaints from our customers who just don't understand why
they cannot access this. So we really are advocating on behalf
of our customers.
Mr. Engel. I think I am going to leave it there, Mr.
Chairman. I do have a bunch of questions but I am concerned
about, you know, the vote. I mean the bottom line is is
epinephrine safe? That is also a question. What do you say to
people like Dr. Kraft who say it is not?
Mr. Shandell. Well, see I would love to answer that because
as a company, we receive all of the adverse events, and if
something is significant, we are required to report it to FDA
within 15 days. So I have talked to the departments that
receive these adverse events and people talk about heart
problems. We have never had any adverse event related to heart.
All we have is glass sometimes breaks.
Mr. Engel. Let me ask Dr. Kraft because she said before in
her testimony that she feels it is not safe.
Ms. Kraft. Right. I would argue that the mechanism to get
the reports depending on when the patient has taken the
medication and what their status is may or may not actually be
filed. And so I worry that there is some underreporting.
Mr. Shandell. After 50 years, nothing?
Ms. Kraft. Also, I would like to make another statement.
The company has done two trials to look at the HFA preparation,
which is good. But I was interested that they didn't have a
comparison armed with albuterol. They had a placebo armed
with--do the patients use albuterol in the placebo arm
presumably? Because I thought that would be a perfect situation
to compare albuterol HFA with Primatene.
Mr. Shandell. Thank you. Actually, we have submitted data
to the FDA, and as I indicated, we will be submitting the new
drug application in the fourth quarter, and we actually have
evidence that show that albuterol actually causes more adverse
events than our product.
Ms. Kraft. And the question is is these are mild patients.
I can tell from clinicaltrials.gov----
Mr. Shandell. Correct.
Ms. Kraft [continuing]. They are mild patients?
Mr. Shandell. Correct.
Ms. Kraft. So that was one of the concerns I wanted to
bring up. I think in mild asthma a lot of things may work but
what I worry about with having this drug available and looking
at my more severe patients, they are often the ones who will go
and get this medication in lieu of----
Mr. Shandell. But it has been available for 50----
Ms. Kraft [continuing]. Medical care.
Mr. Shandell [continuing]. Years, and, you know, to this
day people get good medical care but there are people that
don't. There are people who can't afford it.
Mr. Engel. Mr. Ward, let me ask you quickly. If Primatene
Mist is on the market for 13 months and then it is not, what is
the harm? Is there going to be people who are going to die in
13 months if they----
Ms. Kraft. Well, I think it is sort of an ethical issue. I
am not against over-the-counter medication for asthma, nor is
my society. I would like to have a safe and effective one out
there for patients. And so I would actually think that this
work being done at the FDA to put medications out there over
the counter such as albuterol, it should continue.
Mr. Shandell. But the work at FDA, they are working with us
on Primatene for 5 years now.
Ms. Kraft. But it is not approved yet.
Mr. Shandell. It is not approved yet but we have great
phase three trial data.
Mr. Engel. I would love to stay longer but we are going to
miss a vote, Mr. Chairman. So thank you and----
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you. And that would conclude
today's----
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I just want to reiterate and
restate my call that rather than us moving so quickly to
markup, especially in light of this discussion, that we take
time to invite the FDA and the EPA here so that we can get to
the bottom of some of these outstanding questions that we have
and get some real answers to these questions. And I want to
reiterate my request.
Mr. Whitfield. And Mr. Rush has asked unanimous consent to
enter into the record various testimonies from the
International Pharmaceutical Aerosol Consortium, various health
groups, Alliance for Responsible Atmospheric Policy, and a
letter from Teva Pharmaceuticals. And then we also have letters
from the National Association of Chain Drugstores, the National
Community Pharmacists Association, EPA, et cetera. So without
objection, they will be entered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Whitfield. I want to thank all of you for being with us
today. We appreciate your testimony very much and your concern
about this important issue.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:45 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


