- BUDGET AND SPENDING CONCERNS AT HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BUDGET AND SPENDING CONCERNS AT HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 9, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-142

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

78-988                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JIM MATHESON, Utah
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JOHN BARROW, Georgia
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey                Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

CLIFF STEARNS, Florida
Chairman
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina     Ranking Member
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         GENE GREEN, Texas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana                 Islands
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Cliff Stearns, a Representative in Congress from the state
of Florida, opening statement..................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, opening statement...........................     4
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     7
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     8
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     8
Hon. John D. Dingell, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Michigan, prepared statement................................    64

Witnesses

Norris Cochran, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of Budget,
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services...................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Answers to submitted questions...............................    78
James C. Cosgrove, Director, Health Care, U.S. Government
Accountability Office..........................................    18
Prepared statement...........................................    20
Carolyn L. Yocom, Director, Health Care, U.S. Government
Accountability Office..........................................    18
Prepared statement...........................................    20

Submitted Material

Article entitled, ``Official: No taxpayer funds went to neuter
Tenn. dogs,'' The Hill, May 9, 2012, submitted by Mr. Stearns..    65
Flyer from Nashville Humane Association, submitted by Mr. Stearns    67
Recovery.org report entitled ``Grants--Award Summary, Nashville &
Davidson County, Metropolitan Government of,'' submitted by Mr.
Stearns........................................................    68
Graph entitled, ``Rising Budget Authority and Full-Time
Equivalents at HHS: FY 2007-2013, submitted by Mr. Stearns.....    77

BUDGET AND SPENDING CONCERNS AT HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 9, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:07 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Cliff
Stearns (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Stearns, Terry, Burgess,
Blackburn, Scalise, Barton, Schakowsky, Christensen, and Waxman
(ex officio).
Staff present: Sean Bonyun, Deputy Communications Director;
Mike Gruber, Senior Policy Advisor; Carly McWilliams,
Legislative Clerk; Andrew Powaleny, Deputy Press Secretary;
Krista Rosenthall, Counsel to Chairman Emeritus; Alan Slobodin,
Deputy Chief Counsel, Oversight; Sam Spector, Counsel,
Oversight; John Stone, Counsel, Oversight; Roger Stoltz,
Detailee-Oversight (GAO); Tim Torres, Deputy IT Director; Alex
Yergin, Legislative Clerk; Alvin Banks, Democratic
Investigator; Brian Cohen, Democratic Investigations Staff
Director and Senior Policy Advisor; and Matt Siegler,
Democratic Counsel.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CLIFF STEARNS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mr. Stearns. Good morning, everybody.
We convene this hearing, the Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations, on ``Budget and Spending Concerns at Health and
Human Services.''
This is our fourth in our series of oversight hearings on
the federal budget. This hearing aims to determine the results
of the Department of Health and Human Services efforts to
identify wasteful, duplicative or excessive spending and to
assist in finding more spending cuts and savings, pursuant to
the President's ordered line-by-line review.
HHS is the largest agency, by budget, under this
committee's jurisdiction and is second only to the Department
of Defense. The President's fiscal year 2013 budget requested
$941 billion in outlays and $77 billion in discretionary budget
authority for Health and Human Services, an increase of nearly
8 percent over last year's outlays and a slight increase over
last year's discretionary budget. This increase is in addition
to the $140 billion in Recovery Act funds provided to Health
and Human Services programs.
HHS, as recently as 2009 fiscal year, was an agency of
nearly 80,000 Federal employees. According to fiscal year 2010
Office of Personnel Management data, these include 91 of the
federal government's top-100 highest-paid civil servants and
651 of the federal government's top-1000 highest-paid civil
servants. And Health and Human Services continues to grow.
Between fiscal year 2007 and 2013, the number of full-time
equivalents rose from 64,000 to 76,000, an increase of about 20
percent.
At an agency as large as HHS, opportunities are ripe for
wasteful and duplicative spending. It is clear that HHS has a
long way to go to streamline its many, many multi-billion-
dollar programs and restore trust in its management of our tax
dollars. For example, HHS, just like DOE, failed to heed the
President's April 2009 order to Cabinet secretaries to identify
a combined $100 million in budget cuts by July 2009. And there
is clearly waste.
The Centers for Disease Control's Communities Putting
Prevention to Work program, for which the Recovery Act made
hundreds of millions of dollars available, has paid for signage
to promote recreational destinations, intergenerational urban
gardening and community bike-sharing programs around the
country. CDC's Web site even boasts that money under this
program was provided to Kauai, Hawaii, ``to develop remote
school drop-off sites to encourage students and staff to walk
farther distances to school entrances.''
Perhaps HHS is telling Congress that we should eliminate
mass transit as part of our war against obesity. Incredibly,
this same program also funded free pet spaying and neutering.
While a laudable goal, the Department of Health and Human
Services should focus its limited resources on human health.
Now, my colleagues, just last month, GAO released a report
on the Medicare Advantage Quality Bonus Payment Demonstration
program, which it estimated will cost $8.35 billion over 10
years. Secretary Sebelius says that she intends to go forward
with this project despite the fact that GAO concludes that it
is unprecedented in size and scope and that its design
``precludes a credible evaluation of its effectiveness.''
Obamacare stipulates cuts in Medicare Advantage funding.
Therefore, the Wall Street Journal has suggested that the
purpose of the demonstration project is to give a program that
is popular with seniors a temporary reprieve past Election Day.
And I think the Wall Street Journal is right.
When we are borrowing 40 cents of every dollar we spend, we
need to ensure that the American taxpayer is getting the proper
value for their tax dollars. In order to learn more about
Health and Human Services' efforts, we will take testimony
today from the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Budget at HHS,
Norris Cochran, and Directors of Health Care at GAO, Carolyn
Yocom and James Cosgrove, who will be providing joint
testimony, and I welcome these witnesses this morning.
I would point out that the HHS Office of the Inspector
General declined the Subcommittee's invitation to testify at
this hearing, noting that due to statutory mandates and funding
streams, it spends 80 percent of its limited resources on
fighting fraud, waste and abuse in the Medicare and Medicaid
programs. The IG also confirmed that it has not done any
significant recent work looking at duplicative programs within
HHS, nor does it have plans to conduct such a review in the
near future.
For this reason, only GAO will be present at the hearing to
provide an independent, outside assessment of Health and Human
Services' efforts to identify wasteful, duplicative and
excessive spending within the agency. In the absence of the IG,
this Subcommittee's role in providing much-needed oversight of
HHS spending and operations becomes all the more crucial and
important.
This Subcommittee, and the Committee as a whole, must
remain deeply and regularly engaged with the agencies within
its jurisdiction, including HHS as they define their
priorities, identify their needs and set their goals for the
years ahead.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stearns follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Cliff Stearns

We convene this hearing, the fourth in our series of
oversight hearings on the federal budget. This hearing aims to
determine the results of the Department of Health and Human
Services' efforts to identify wasteful, duplicative, or
excessive spending and to assist in finding more spending cuts
and savings, pursuant to the president's ordered line-by-line
review.
HHS is the largest agency, by budget, under this
committee's jurisdiction and is second only to the Department
of Defense. The president's Fiscal Year 2013 Budget requests
$940.9 billion in outlays and $76.7 billion in discretionary
budget authority for HHS, an increase of nearly 8 percent over
last year's outlays and a slight increase over last year's
discretionary budget. This increase is in addition to the $140
billion in Recovery Act funds provided to HHS programs.
HHS, as recently as FY 2009, was an agency of nearly 80,000
federal employees. According to FY 2010 Office of Personnel
Management data, these include 91 of the federal government's
top-100 highest-paid civil servants and 651 of the federal
government's top-1000 highest-paid civil servants. And HHS
continues to grow. Between FY 2007 and 2013, the number of
Full-Time Equivalents, rose from 63,748 to 76,341, an increase
of about 20 percent.
At an agency as large as HHS, opportunities are ripe for
wasteful and duplicative spending. It is clear HHS has a long
way to go to streamline its many multi-billion dollar programs
and restore trust in its management of our tax dollars. For
example, HHS, just like DOE, failed to heed the president's
April 2009 order to cabinet secretaries to identify a combined
$100 million in budget cuts by July 2009. And there is clearly
waste.
The Center for Disease Control's Communities Putting
Prevention to Work program, for which the Recovery Act made
hundreds of millions of dollars available, have paid for
signage to promote recreational destinations, intergenerational
urban gardening, and community bike sharing programs around the
country. CDC's Web site even boasts that money under this
program was provided to Kauai, Hawaii ``to develop remote
school drop-off sites to encourage students and staff to walk
farther distances. . .to school entrances.'' Perhaps, HHS is
telling Congress that we should eliminate mass transit as part
of our war against obesity. Incredibly, this same program also
funded free pet spaying and neutering. While a laudable goal,
the Department of Health and Human Services should focus its
limited resources on human health.
Just last month, GAO released a report on the Medicare
Advantage Quality Bonus Payment Demonstration, which it
estimated will cost $8.35 billion over 10 years. Secretary
Sebelius says that she intends to go forward with this project
despite the fact that GAO concludes that it is unprecedented in
size and cost and that its design ``precludes a credible
evaluation of its effectiveness.'' Obamacare stipulates cuts in
Medicare Advantage funding. Therefore, the Wall Street Journal
has suggested that the purpose of the demonstration project is
to give a program that is popular with seniors a temporary
reprieve past Election Day. And I think the Wall Street Journal
is right.
When we are borrowing 40 cents of every dollar we spend, we
need to ensure that the American taxpayer is getting the proper
value for their tax dollars. In order to learn more about HHS'
efforts, we will take testimony today from the Deputy Assistant
Secretary for Budget at HHS, Norris Cochran; and Directors of
Health Care at GAO, Carolyn Yocom and James Cosgrove, who will
be providing joint testimony. I welcome the witnesses.
I would point out that the HHS Office of the Inspector
General declined the subcommittee's invitation to testify at
this hearing, noting that due to its statutory mandates and
funding streams, it spends 80 percent of its limited resources
on fighting fraud, waste, and abuse in the Medicare and
Medicaid programs. The IG also confirmed that it has not done
any significant recent work looking at duplicative programs
within HHS, nor does it have plans to conduct such a review in
the near future.
For this reason, only GAO will be present at the hearing to
provide an independent, outside assessment of HHS efforts to
identify wasteful, duplicative, or excessive spending within
the agency. In the absence of the IG, this subcommittee's role
in providing much-needed oversight of HHS spending and
operations becomes all the more crucial.
This subcommittee, and the committee as a whole must remain
deeply and regularly engaged with the agencies within its
jurisdiction, including HHS, as they define their priorities,
identify their needs, and set their goals for the year ahead.

Mr. Stearns. With that, I recognize Ms. Jan Schakowsky, the
ranking member who is substituting, as I understand, for Ms.
DeGette.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my honor to
be sitting in for Congresswoman Diana DeGette this morning as
ranking member.
Led by my Republican colleagues, we are here to talk about
spending priorities in the Health and Human Services' budget.
Given the substantial short- and long-term deficit challenges
we face, I understand the need to root out wasteful spending,
and I am sure that every agency is being fiscally responsible.
Because our test is to address those challenges while
simultaneously constructing a strong foundation for a healthy
and bright economic future for our country, I must point out
what I see is the misplaced focus of my Republican colleagues.
In March, the Republicans passed an irresponsible budget that
will only make things worse for the middle class and those who
aspire to it. The Republican budget makes it clear that their
party puts the very richest Americans as the top priority and
makes everyone else bear the burden.
The Republican budget would do nothing to address income
inequality. Instead, it would make it worse by increasing
defense spending while slashing investments important to job
creation, seniors, children and the middle class. The
Republican budget mandates additional cuts to discretionary
programs like Medicaid, food stamps, the Social Services Block
Grant and the Prevention and Public Health Fund to insulate the
Department of Defense from spending cuts triggered by the
failure of the Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction.
Our committee was directed to find at least $97 billion in
cuts, nearly half of which came from public health programs.
The committee has lost valuable time--time that we could have
spent discussing ways to get needed health care to Americans
who have lost their health insurance along with their jobs, who
cannot afford costly insurance premiums. Instead, my Republican
colleagues have repeatedly attacked Obamacare and once again
they seek to repeal the law in their budget. We should be
working to lower health care costs by improving efficiency and
providing access to prevention.
Instead, my Republican colleagues have railed against the
Prevention and Public Health Fund and repeatedly used its
funding to force choices we shouldn't and don't have to make,
like the choice between the elimination of funding for the
Prevention and Public Health Fund or relief for students who
are saddled with student-loan debt.
If we want to build a healthier, economically strong
America, we must maintain our investment in prevention.
Understand what the fund is about: It is about preventing
diabetes, heart disease, cancer, and it is about getting money
to State and local governments and organizations so they in
turn can put prevention programs in place that are designed to
meet the needs of their communities. This is about keeping
America healthy.
My colleagues on the other side of the aisle lose sight of
this goal when they try to rile people up by labeling the
Prevention and Public Health Fund as a slush fund. It isn't.
Under the President's 2013 budget, the fund would support
breast and cervical cancer screenings. Americans know that
mammograms and pap smears are not slush. They are basic,
routine and often lifesaving services for women. Cutting
funding for prevention programs like breast and cervical cancer
screening now will only lead to increased costs down the road.
I have to say, I am really disappointed that some of my
colleagues continue to that the CDC funds or the Prevention
funds are used to spay and neuter dogs. They are not. HHS has
confirmed it. Yet the same talking point that was used in
committee making this claim was used on the floor during the
student loan debate.
The late Senator Moynihan said, ``Sir, you are entitled to
your opinion, not your own facts.''
And Mr. Chairman, the priorities in the Republican budget
are deeply flawed. They do not reflect the priorities of
everyday Americans.
While I believe the focus of this hearing is misplaced, I
still hope that we can have a serious discussion about reducing
our deficit without hurting the programs that benefit low-
income families, children, seniors and individuals with
disabilities.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentlelady.
I have here the recovery.gov Web site that confirms that
the spay and neuter and wellness clinics for cats and dogs have
been received in zip codes with higher rates of animal nuisance
reports. And also, it was included in the Department of Health
and Human Services as part of the Metro Public Health
Department's Community Putting Prevention to Work campaign.
With that I look at the chairman emeritus of the full
committee, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Barton.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing along with the ranking member, Ms. DeGette.
Department of Health and Human Services is an agency that
spends over a trillion dollars. A trillion dollars is more than
the entire federal budget spent the first year I was in
Congress in 1985. A trillion dollars is more than the total GDP
of almost every nation in the world. A trillion dollars is so
much money that we can't even get our hands on it. It is
obvious that HHS can't their hands on managing it either.
The Inspector General at HHS declined to testify, admitting
to subcommittee staff that the Department was so big and their
resources so constrained that they have to focus everything
they are doing on two programs, obviously, the two biggest,
Medicare and Medicaid. Obviously, HHS has a huge mission to
protect the health of the American people. This is a daunting
challenge. Having said that, it doesn't mean that we just throw
up our hands and throw money at the problem. There are over
80,000 employees at HHS. There are about 40,000 cardiologists
and neurologists in this country, so we have two HHS two
bureaucrats for every cardiologist and neurologist that are
actually trying to provide health services to the American
public.
President Obama has talked a good game about trying to
manage the agencies better but HHS is one of the agencies that
when the President specifically directed that certain steps be
taken to eliminate waste, fraud and abuse and to cut overhead,
HHS didn't provide a program, didn't even attempt it.
So Mr. Chairman, here we have an agency that has a huge
mission, admittedly, but their answer to ever problem is to
create more bureaucracy that is more unmanageable and more
uncontrollable. Hopefully this subcommittee on a bipartisan
basis will first determine what the facts are and then perhaps
we can get with the Health Subcommittee and start some sort of
a reauthorization to put into statute some of the things that
need to be done.
With that, I thank the chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Barton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joe Barton

Thank you Mr. Chairman. The Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) has been growing, expanding, and spending its
way to an annual budget of 941 billion dollars in entitlements
and 76.7 billion dollars in discretionary spending, which is
over a trillion dollars. And, the agency received over 140
billion dollars in Recovery Act funding.
The core mission of HHS is to protect the health of the
American people. I understand that this is a challenging
objective to meet, however, at a time when the federal
government is borrowing over 40 cents of every dollar it
spends, unemployment is over 8 percent, and medical and
insurance costs are increasing, it is imperative that we
maintain stringent oversight of these dollars to ensure that
this money is working for the public to protect both their
physical and economic health.
During my congressional service, I have remained a strong
advocate for systematic reform within HHS and its operating
divisions. Bureaucracy has exploded at HHS, especially since
the passage of President Obama's health care law. This is
evident on their organizational outline posted on their Web
site. In the immediate Office of the Secretary alone there are
six different chains of command.
After that, there are seven Assistant Secretaries to the
Secretary and they each have an office and support staff, the
Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Office of Budget is a witness
today. In addition, there are another 9 different official
Offices and Departments complete with their own staffs, like
the Office for Civil Rights and the newly created Office of
Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight. All of this is
within the single Office of the Secretary, under her control,
and so far with inadequate oversight.
On top of this HHS Secretary-level bureaucracy, there are
eleven different Operating Divisions under HHS, the largest
being the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and
including the Food and Drug Administration, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention and the National Institutes of
Health. HHS employs nearly 80,000 people, many of whom fall
under the Title 42 program enabling them to earn more than
$200,000 a year. According to the American Medical Association,
there are only about 16,000 Neurologists and around 23,000
Cardiologists practicing in the United States. So, there are
five times as many HHS employees as there are Neurologists and
three and a half times as many HHS employees than
Cardiologists.
The Government Accountability Office and the HHS Inspector
General's Office have commented on the perpetual financial
managements problems that are endemic at this agency. Today, I
hope we illustrate to HHS and this
Administration that we are serious about conducting
meaningful oversight of federal agency budgets financed on the
backs of hardworking American taxpayers.

Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from Texas, Dr. Burgess, is recognized for 2
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. I thank the chairman for the recognition.
We are today focusing in the discretionary budget
authorities within Health and Human Services, and recognize it
represents almost a quarter of all federal outlays. President
Obama has proposed $76 billion in discretionary spending for
fiscal year 2013 in Health and Human Services.
Now, both as an agency working on public health and
administering public health programs, it has got to be, it has
to be the center of universe in government integrity efforts.
If we cannot get it right at HHS, where can we get it right?
And if we get it right at HHS, everything else looks easy by
comparison.
On November 14, 2011, the Inspector General of Health and
Human Services, Inspector General Levinson, notified Secretary
Sebelius that an independent audit of Health and Human
Services' fiscal year 2011 financial statements found that
``weaknesses continue to exist in financial management
systems.'' The Inspector General also confirmed that it has not
done any significant recent work in looking at duplicative
programs within Health and Human Services.
So I guess we have to ask ourselves, how much fraud is
enough for the government to take notice? I will tell you the
answer. The answer is zero, and it must be zero, and that must
be the focus at Health and Human Services, but really, the lack
of internal oversight, the lack of prosecutors with a
background in health care law really compromises our abilities
to actually get anything done.
So we are comfortable with the current situation? I can't
believe that we would be, and if we are not, when are we going
to correct it? And that applies to the committee, both sides of
the dais, and it applies to the agency, everyone from the
Secretary on down.
Health care expenditures are going to go nowhere but up,
and Health and Human Services' work in public health is going
to continue to rise. Developing new and innovative approaches
must make sure that every dollar is spent where it belongs, and
that is delivering services to the people.
I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. The gentleman's time has expired, and our side
is complete. Oh, Mrs. Blackburn. I am sorry. The gentlelady
from Tennessee is recognized for 1 minute.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank you for
the hearing. Welcome to our witnesses. We are glad that you are
here.
As you have heard, this is a necessary hearing. It is our
fourth in a series to look at waste, fraud and abuse, and the
reason we are doing this is because our constituents come to us
and they let us know they are taxed too much, they are tired of
it and they are frustrated with seeing the waste in our federal
bureaucracies. HHS employs over 80,000 federal workers, and you
do have a large portion of our budget that you are expending
every day.
Mr. Cochran, specifically for you, I want to hear about the
steps that HHS has taken to comply with the President's call
for agencies to identify $100 million worth of administrative
savings nearly 2 years ago, see where you are in that process.
Additionally, let us quantify generated savings from the
President's Executive Order 13589 from November 9, 2011, and I
want to know what is actually savings and then where you have
double counted or used funds to justify your cost increases or
activities.
Finally, after our experience with the Department of Energy
and Solyndra, I have very real concerns about similar financial
mismanagement at HHS as brought to our attention by Ernst and
Young, and we will explore that a bit today, and I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentlelady and now recognize the
ranking member of the minority, Mr. Waxman from California.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Mr. Chairman, wasteful federal spending should
be eliminated. Fraud and abuse should be wiped out. I have long
supported bipartisan efforts to cut spending and reduce waste
and fraud. But we must recognize that HHS and the agencies
contained in the department have a vital, lifesaving mission:
providing health care to millions of Americans; investing in
disease prevention and scientific research; keeping the food
and drug supply safe. We must be smart about how we achieve
savings or we put these important programs at risk.
Mr. Chairman, if you want to learn how to cut the budget in
a sensible way, I would suggest you take a look at the work we
did in the Affordable Care Act. A Democratic Congress, working
with President Obama, passed into law provisions that cut waste
and abuse from Medicare and Medicaid. We gave HHS important new
authority and power to identify and prevent Medicare and
Medicaid fraud. The net result is hundreds of billions of
dollars in savings without the need to cut Medicare benefits or
erode the core promises of the program.
Unfortunately, the cuts in the Republican budget passed by
the House don't meet this standard. They take direct aim at our
Nation's commitment to provide health care to seniors and our
most vulnerable citizens. The Republican budget would repeal
the Affordable Care Act, end the basic Medicare guarantee by
turning the program into a voucher system, directly cut
seniors' benefits by increasing the Medicare eligibility age,
and slash funding for Medicaid, breaking the social safety net.
The Republican budget would also deny coverage to 33 million
Americans and allow the worst abuses of the insurance industry,
like denying coverage to those with preexisting conditions, to
continue, and it would cut off benefits like coverage of young
adult children and closing the Part D drug donut hole that
millions of Americans are enjoying today.
The Republican budget's Medicare cuts would eliminate the
program's basic guarantees. They would increase costs for
seniors, according to CBO, by up to $2,200 per beneficiary
starting in 2030. This is not holding down costs. This is
simply shifting costs. And the Republican budget would increase
the Medicare eligibility age from 65 to 67, meaning millions of
older Americans would be stuck waiting for Medicare with no
employer coverage or inadequate coverage.
The Republican budget also cuts Medicaid by a stunning
amount--$1.7 trillion over the next decade--turning the program
into a block grant and threatening access to health care for
millions of low-income children, families, pregnant women, and
seniors in nursing homes.
And Mr. Chairman, the Republican budget does more than
devastate Medicare and Medicaid. FDA, NIH, CDC, and the Head
Start program are all part of HHS. The Republican budget would
hurt all of them. The Republican budget cuts non-security
discretionary spending for all government agencies, including
HHS, below levels agreed to under the Budget Control Act, by 5
percent in 2013 and by 19 percent in 2014 and beyond.
The Republican budget lacks specific details, but the
implications are clear: cuts in the FDA budget for food safety
and inspection, cuts in the NIH budget for basic science
research, reduced capacity for CDC to respond to emerging
diseases, fewer kids who are eligible for Head Start, less
money to fight Medicare and Medicare fraud. These cuts in basic
health programs would be a huge mistake. They would be
pennywise and pound foolish, costing our Nation more money and
more in terms of human suffering than they could possibly save.
Mr. Chairman, I hope we can find a way to work together to
find bipartisan solutions to cutting waste, fraud and abuse at
HHS and at other agencies in the federal government. But the
Republican budget proposal is not the answer. It cuts Medicare
and Medicaid, eliminates health care coverage for 30 million
Americans under the Affordable Care Act, and includes
devastating cuts to basic programs at FDA, NIH, CDC, and
throughout HHS. I hope the Republicans will rethink that
approach, and I yield back my time.
Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentleman. I just remind him, we
are looking at budget and spending----
Mr. Waxman. I am going to reclaim my time and say that I
don't think it is appropriate for the chairman to comment on
each Democratic statement. We have 5 minutes each side.
Mr. Stearns. I know.
Mr. Waxman. If somebody on your side wants to yield you
time----
Mr. Stearns. Well, I appreciate what you are----
Mr. Waxman. But I do want to point out that I don't
understand this business of neutering dogs. Is this an anti-
abortion issue? Is it a family planning issue? Is this
something where we have--is this waste, fraud, and abuse?
Mr. Stearns. It certainly----
Mr. Waxman. I would like to yield to the chairman unlimited
time, because I don't have the power to do that.
Mr. Stearns. Well, I have given you the brochure just to
corroborate my opening statement and also to point out we are
talking about budget spending concerns at HHS.
With that, let me introduce our witnesses. Mr. Norris
Cochran, Deputy Office Secretary, Office of Budget, the United
States Department of Health and Human Services; Ms. Carolyn L.
Yocom, Director, Health Care, U.S. Government Accountability
Office; and Mr. James C. Cosgrove, Director, Health Care, U.S.
Government Accountability Office. And I understand the two of
you, there will be a joint statement from the two of you. Is
that correct?
As you know, the testimony that you are about to give is
subject to Title XVIII Section 1001 of the United States Code.
When holding an investigative hearing such as this committee is
doing, the Committee has a practice of taking testimony under
oath. Do you have any objection to taking testimony under oath?
The chair then advises you that under the rules of the House
and the rules of the Committee, you are entitled to be advised
by counsel. Do any of you wish to be advised by counsel? In
that case, if you would please rise and raise your right hand,
I will swear you in.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Stearns. We now welcome your 5-minute summary, and we
will start with you, Mr. Cochran.

TESTIMONY OF NORRIS COCHRAN, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, OFFICE
OF BUDGET, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES; JAMES
C. COSGROVE, DIRECTOR, HEALTH CARE, U.S. GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE; AND CAROLYN L. YOCOM, DIRECTOR, HEALTH
CARE, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

TESTIMONY OF NORRIS COCHRAN

Mr. Cochran. Thank you, Chairman Stearns, Representative
Schakowsky, members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak about the Department of Health and Human
Services' stewardship of the resources provided by Congress.
In my role as the Budget Director at HHS, I oversee the
formulation of our annual budget. I and my colleagues in the
Department are committed to efficiently achieving the outcomes
intended by Congress. I will keep my initial remarks brief and
respectfully request that my written testimony be incorporated
into the record.
Mr. Stearns. So ordered.
Mr. Cochran. I will briefly summarize key aspects of the
President's fiscal year 2013 budget request for HHS including
the use of unobligated balances and highlight efforts to
improve program performance and integrity and to achieve
savings.
The fiscal year 2013 budget for HHS totals $932 billion in
budget authority and $941 billion in outlays. It is comprised
of many types of funding including Medicare, Medicaid and other
entitlements and other mandatory spending, discretionary budget
authority, user fees, and funding made available through
transfers from sources such as the Prevention and Public Health
Fund, and the Public Health Service Evaluation set-aside.
As HHS develops the annual budget request, we conduct a
thorough review of our ongoing activities and eliminate or
reduce funding for outdated, duplicative and low-performing
programs. The HHS discretionary budget request includes more
than $2 billion in reductions and eliminations across HHS's
many components. These reductions and terminations are informed
by analysis of impact and performance data and the setting of
priorities in a tight budget environment. These reductions are
enabling HHS to propose a discretionary budget that is cut
overall by $218 million while still making priority investments
in key areas including biodefense to protect the safety of our
Nation through the development of medical countermeasures, the
Indian Health Service to address extreme health disparities
experienced in Indian Country, and the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services to keep up with beneficiary growth and
implement the Affordable Care Act.
In addition, HHS proposes net mandatory savings of $366
billion over 10 years. These savings include $303 billion in
Medicare, $56 billion in Medicaid, program integrity savings,
as well as mandatory investments to strengthen child support
enforcement, child care and foster care, and to continue TANF-
related activities.
In developing our annual budget, HHS with OMB also assesses
whether the presence of unobligated balances enables the
Department to request less funding from Congress than would
otherwise be needed. For example, the budget request this year
for bioterrorism and emergency preparedness assumes the use of
more than $400 million in unobligated balances to achieve our
preparedness goals.
As HHS components execute the budget, we continually work
to eliminate unnecessary costs. For instance, HHS is currently
in the process of reducing our spending in targeted categories
such as travel and supplies by more than $800 million.
HHS program and policy leaders also monitor the outcomes of
the programs we administer and make needed adjustments to
improve program performance. This is exemplified by regular
data-driven meetings chaired by our Deputy Secretary during
which senior officials review progress and key next steps for
achieving measurable priority goals. In the areas of program
integrity and budget execution, HHS benefits from the expertise
of the HHS Office of Inspector General and the Government
Accountability Office. For instance, before we spent funding
from the Recovery Act, we worked with our OIG colleagues to
better prevent waste, fraud and abuse with those investments.
With respect to program integrity, we are particularly
proud of a joint effort with CMS, the Office of Inspector
General and the Department of Justice through which multi-
agency teams of federal, State and local investigators combat
Medicare fraud. Just last week, charges were made against 107
individuals for their alleged participation in Medicare fraud
schemes involving approximately $452 million in false billing,
which represents the largest single takedown in the history of
this effort.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, thank you again for inviting
me to testify about HHS stewardship of taxpayer resources. I
look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cochran follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Cosgrove, your opening statement, please.

TESTIMONY OF JAMES C. COSGROVE

Mr. Cosgrove. Chairman Stearns, Ms. Schakowsky, members of
the subcommittee, I am pleased to be here with my colleague,
Carolyn Yocom, as you discuss budget considerations at HHS,
which is responsible for both discretionary spending and
mandatory spending. These funds support a variety of important
activities. However, the overwhelming share goes to Medicare
and Medicaid, and for that reason, our remarks today focus on
HHS's responsibilities for those two programs, which are
administered by the Department's Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services.
Over the past several years, GAO has recommended that HHS
and CMS take a variety of actions to enhance agency oversight
of Medicare and Medicaid and foster more prudent spending. We
are pleased that many of our recommendations have been
implemented, saving money for taxpayers and beneficiaries. For
example, CMS saved at least $3.4 billion over 5 years from
implementing multiple recommendations on the oversight of
Medicaid supplemental payments.
However, some of our recommendations remain unaddressed and
so today we want to focus on those key recommendations made
within the last 6 years where HHS has not taken action or only
partially addressed the recommendation. Some of our still open
recommendations would help reduce improper payments and enhance
payment safeguards in traditional fee-for-service Medicare. For
example, we recommended that CMS require its contractors to
identify potentially improper claims when billing reaches
atypical levels. CMS agreed, but has not implemented our
recommendation. We recently noted that CMS could better screen
providers to avoid enrolling those who are intent on committing
fraud.
To enhance payment safeguards, in a 2008 report, we
recommended that CMS adopt front-end approaches such as
considering requiring prior authorization for certain
diagnostic imaging services. Although not implemented, the
President's 2013 budget does call for such an approach.
We also believe that HHS needs to address certain issues
related to the Medicare Advantage program. Approximately one in
four beneficiaries are enrolled in private health plans that
participate in Medicare Advantage. These plans are popular
because relative to traditional Medicare, they typically cover
more services and cost beneficiaries less. However, Medicare's
payments to these plans, specifically, the adjustments for
beneficiaries' health status, could be improved and a billion
or more dollars could be saved annually. We recommended
specific steps that CMS could take to better ensure the
accuracy of its required payment adjustment. CMS commented that
our findings were informative but it did not indicate that it
would implement our recommendation.
We also recommended that HHS cancel its Quality Bonus
Payment Demonstration for MA plans. This demonstration,
estimated to cost more than $8.3 billion, is poorly designed
and unlikely to yield meaningful results. Although intended to
encourage high-quality health care, most of the money will go
towards plans of average quality. Moreover, because of design
shortcomings, it will be nearly impossible to evaluate whether
the $8.3 billion influenced the quality of care provided. We
therefore recommended that HHS cancel the demonstration and
implement instead the quality bonus payments provided for by
PPACA, which pays bonuses only to plans that achieve above-
average quality levels.
Our substantial work on the Medicaid program has also
resulted in numerous recommendations to improve program
management, several of which remain open. For example, gaps
remain in the oversight of State supplemental payments to
hospitals and other providers for uncompensated care. We
recommended that CMS make such payment arrangements transparent
and ensure that the agency has reviewed and approved these
arrangements. CMS has acted on some of these recommendations.
We believe additional action is warranted.
Several times we have reported that HHS had approved State
Medicaid demonstrations that could increase federal costs
despite a policy against such increases. HHS has since reported
taking certain steps such as monitoring the budget neutrality
of ongoing demonstrations. However, no changes are planned in
the methods used to determine budget neutrality and ensure the
federal government's financial liability is not increased.
CMS has been inconsistent in reviewing States' rate setting
for compliance with Medicaid managed care actuarial soundness
requirements. In 2010, we found that one State received
billions of federal dollars that had not been certified by an
actuary, and another State's rates hadn't been fully reviewed
since the requirements went into effect. We recommended that
CMS improve its oversight of State rate setting, and while HHS
agreed with the recommendations and has taken steps to improve
its oversight, it has not yet completed actions that would
ensure the quality of the data or develop guidance for
reviewing the rates.
In conclusion, given the size and scope of the programs for
which it is responsible, HHS must be vigilant in seeking ways
to reduce spending, prevent improper payments and improve the
efficiency of operations. We look forward to working with this
committee to help the Department further advance its
performance and accountability. We are happy to answer any
questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Yocom and Mr. Cosgrove
follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Stearns. Thank you.
And with that, I understand, Ms. Yocom, you are here to
assist if we have any questions. You are sort of a detail
expert?
Ms. Yocom. That is correct.
Mr. Stearns. Let me start by--Mr. Cochran, I think you just
heard Mr. Cosgrove indicate in his opening statement many
things he has recommended you have not done. Isn't it true that
the President has committed to conducting an exhaustive line-
by-line review in the spending budget to reduce unnecessary
waste, fraud and abuse? Isn't that true? Yes or no.
Mr. Cochran. Yes. We go through an exhaustive review each
year.
Mr. Stearns. And the idea was to increase efficiency and to
overall provide ways to do better with less. I think that was
the idea, and in fact, that is what the GAO had indicated to
you, that we want to do more with less. I think we have a hard
realizing--the statistics I gave you this morning in my opening
about the huge number of employee increase and the amount of
money you have got, it doesn't appear that you are actually
doing more with less. And when I hear Mr. Cosgrove talk, he
noted that they have implemented some of the recommendations
but not all the GAO recommendations to conserve HHS funds and
strengthen the oversight of the program. So I guess the
question is, why haven't you implemented many other detailed
recommendations that he mentioned including one that caught my
eye was dealing with bonuses that he brought to bear on your
watch. So I guess the main question is, considering what we see
here, for instance, canceling the MA Quality Bonus Payment
Demonstration program. Why haven't you implemented all the
other things that he suggested?
Mr. Cochran. Well, CMS has leadership for managing Medicare
and Medicaid, and as we heard, has made progress on a number of
the recommendations. We have also incorporated a number of
recommendations and findings in our annual budget request such
as in the area of medical devices. We are finding efficiencies
through identifying discretionary programs----
Mr. Stearns. No. The question is, why haven't you
implemented the other recommendations? You have implemented
some, is what Mr. Cosgrove said, but the ones he outlined, why
haven't you done those?
Mr. Cochran. There are----
Mr. Stearns. You don't have the money?
Mr. Cochran. Well, there are different reasons. Again, this
is managed principally by CMS at the operating division level.
In some cases, it could be an issue of whether or not they have
existing authorities. In other cases CMS continues to work with
and talk to GAO.
Mr. Stearns. OK. So you are working on them? Is that what
you are saying?
Mr. Cochran. In a number of areas.
Mr. Stearns. Now, canceling the MA Quality Bonus Payment
Demonstration, there is an estimate, it could save $8 billion
over 10 years. Are you familiar with that recommendation?
Mr. Cochran. I am familiar with the----
Mr. Stearns. Is there a reason why you didn't implement
that recommendation from the GAO?
Mr. Cochran. The Secretary, as she has testified to the
House, has indicated that HHS has made a policy decision to
continue that demonstration.
Mr. Stearns. Even though the GAO said it should be
canceled, you have agreed to override their recommendation. Is
that true?
Mr. Cochran. The position of the Department as articulated
by the Secretary is to continue----
Mr. Stearns. So you are going to override their
recommendation? I understand. I just want to understand that if
they make a recommendation you don't agree with, you are just
not going to implement it.
I have a slide here that if possible I would like to bring
out. The number of full-time equivalents, or FTEs, at HHS has
been rising over the past several years. Is that true? Yes or
no. I mean, you just confirmed to us that the budget continues
to grow as does the number of full-time equivalent employees.
In fact, the President's request of Congress for HHS funding
from year to year continues to rise. Isn't that true?
Mr. Cochran. The areas where we have had FTE growth are
principally in the Food and Drug Administration, which is
funded both by budget authority provided by the Congress and by
user fees from industry as well as the Indian Health Service,
which provides direct medical care to Indian Country and those
populations.
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Cochran, the HHS was apparently absent
from the list of the 15 agencies that were heeding the
President's April 2009 order to Cabinet secretaries to identify
a combined $100 million in budget cuts by July 2009. Wasn't
that true that you were absent from that?
Mr. Cochran. HHS identified savings in two areas. That
process is managed by OMB. You are correct that it was not
carried in that memo. The two areas at HHS identified
subsequent to the delivery of the memo are in data centers
where we have consolidated data centers in CDC and FDA starting
in fiscal year 2009, and the migration from paper to electronic
filing principally in FDA but as well as CDC and ACF.
Mr. Stearns. Well, I think you can realize from this
standpoint, it just seems odd that given the President has
instructions in April 2009 in his first major attempt to
demonstrate a serious effort to cuts budgets and to streamline
federal spending and at the same time HHS was apparently absent
from the list of the 15 agencies that were heeding the
President's April 2009 order to Cabinet secretaries. So we just
find that a little puzzling.
And my time is expired. I recognize the ranking member, Ms.
Schakowsky.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to ask the witnesses some questions about
Medicare's fraud prevention efforts. Reducing fraud has been an
Obama Administration priority, and we are seeing significant
taxpayer savings as a result of these efforts. The
Administration's antifraud efforts recovered a record $4.1
billion, taxpayer dollars, last year. It is the second year in
a row for a new record. The Administration has recovered a
total of $10.7 billion over the past 3 years. Prosecutions are
way up from 797 in fiscal year 2008 to 1,430 in fiscal year
2011, a more than 75 percent increase. So the Affordable Care
Act gives HHS a broad range of new tools to reduce waste, fraud
and abuse, a national screening program, and I heard Mr.
Cosgrove talk about pre-screening for providers, enhanced
screening for providers in high-risk areas like durable medical
equipment and home health care, required disclosure of prior
association with delinquent providers and suppliers, onsite
visits as part of the enrollment process, new CMS powers to
enact a moratorium on enrolling new providers, and new funding
to fight fraud.
So Mr. Cochran, can you offer some perspective on these new
tools and how will they help CMS cut fraud?
Mr. Cochran. Yes. As you know, this has been a major area
of focus for the Administration. The number of recoveries has
increased dramatically, as you note, in the last 3 years alone
totaling $10.7 billion. Some of the authorities that CMS is now
using that come specifically from the Affordable Care Act
include efforts to create a risk-based screening process for
new and enrolling providers. Also, importantly, CMS now has the
express authority to suspend payments to a provider or supplier
pending an investigation wherever there is a credible
allegation of fraud. In addition, the Act, for example,
requires face-to-face encounters between patients and
practitioners prior to a physician certifying eligibility for
Medicare's home health, and the Act also provides resources
that are available to CMS and our Office of Inspector General
where we partner with the Department of Justice in our health
care fraud and abuse control areas.
Ms. Schakowsky. Mr. Cosgrove, would you agree that these
new authorities under the Affordable Care Act will help HHS
fight fraud?
Mr. Cosgrove. With your permission, I would like to see if
Carolyn Yocom could address the question. Carolyn is an expert
both on the Medicaid program and on the overall program
integrity efforts.
Ms. Yocom. Good morning. We would agree that there is more
work for CMS to do and some elements of PPACA do help provide
aspects of improvement. Our three areas where we would suggest
that CMS continue to work have to do with the provider
enrollment, making sure that those enrollments are strengthened
and that there are core elements for provider compliance in
place.
A second area would be looking at post-payment claims
review and also pre-payment claims review, which prevents the
money from even going out the door until it is certain that it
should. We have ongoing work in those areas.
And then lastly, to look at weaknesses within identifying
known vulnerable areas, and again, we have ongoing work in this
area that we expect to be reporting on.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
The CBO has estimated these changes will save more than $7
billion over the next 10 years, so clearly, and I think that
CMS agrees, more needs to be done, but would you say that what
is happening right now is a step in the right direction?
Ms. Yocom. Yes, it is a step in the right direction. We
have not done work looking at the savings. That is CBO's
jurisdiction.
Ms. Schakowsky. And Mr. Cochran, in your testimony, you
noted something that many of us saw on the news just last week,
107 people were charged in a $450 million Medicare fraud
scheme, the largest Medicare fraud ever. What can you tell us
about the Administration's efforts that resulted in this bust?
Mr. Cochran. Well, one key aspect in this effort is a
collaboration between HHS and the two components, principally
being the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and our
Office of Inspector General, and the Department of Justice.
Another key aspect is that it involves both taking intelligence
from headquarters but also importantly, focusing with agents
and experts on the ground in nine key areas, strike forces,
they are called, in higher risk areas and that has enabled HHS
and DOJ to really step up enforcement by having more direct
involvement where we face the greatest amount of fraud.
Ms. Schakowsky. Mr. Chairman, I know my time is up, but I
went out on a drive-around with the strike force and I would
recommend that it is very worthwhile for members in those areas
to do that. Thank you.
Mr. Stearns. The gentlelady's time is expired.
Mr. Terry from Nebraska is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Continuing with you, Mr. Cochran, so I better understand
our efforts on waste, fraud and abuse, there is nothing that
frustrates our constituents more than abuse of something so
sacrosanct as our Medicare and Medicaid programs. Especially,
seniors really feel cheated when somebody is stealing from the
program. They feel like they have been stolen from. Of course,
there are different levels. There is outright fraud, there is
improper payments, which may not be fraud but still payments
that shouldn't have been made.
So I want to break this up into a couple different areas.
First of all, on page 2 of your statement, Mr. Cochran, when I
was reading it, you mentioned that you seek opportunities or
the agency seeks opportunities to make investments that will
yield greater returns in the future such as the Health Care
Fraud and Abuse Control program that has returned over $20
billion to the Medicare trust fund since 1997 and then has a
return of investment of 7.2 to 1 but yet we are hearing today
from statements that there has been hundreds of billions saved
in the last 2 years and $42 billion saved over the last 2
years. So that begs the question of whether there are more
health care fraud and abuse control programs that weren't
referenced in your statement.
Mr. Cochran. The initial description of recoveries to the
trust funds including the $10 billion over the last 3 years is
in reference to the work that we are doing with DOJ in health
care fraud and abuse. The larger numbers, if I understand your
question, relate to not necessarily fraud and abuse. Some of
the savings in the 2013 budget as well as the Affordable Care
Act relate to fraud and abuse. Others are reductions in
payments again often informed by GAO's analysis as well as
efforts to improve quality.
Mr. Terry. It is reduced payments. Is that an issue of
correcting improper payments? Because reduction just means you
are paying somebody less.
Mr. Cochran. Well, in the area of improper payments, there
can be----
Mr. Terry. No, I am just asking for further clarification
when you said that those further savings came from reductions
of payments. I want to know if those were improper payments
that were pulled back or just simply a reduction like a doctor
was paid $48 instead of $50.
Mr. Cochran. I see. Yes. My reference to reduced payments
relates to areas where CMS, GAO, in some cases OIG, and we also
work closely with the Office of Management and Budget in this
area where we have found that reimbursements are sort of out of
balance or exceed what should arguably be provided for the
level of service. Through legislative changes and budget
proposals, those reimbursements are----
Mr. Terry. Well, let us follow up on that, Mr. Cosgrove.
GAO has designated Medicare and Medicaid as high-risk programs
due to their susceptibility for improper payments estimated to
be about $65 billion in fiscal year 2011.
Mr. Cosgrove or Ms. Yocom, does HHS appear to be doing
everything it can to address the enormity of the improper
payments issue?
Ms. Yocom. There is always more to do. Any improper payment
rate that is as high as it is right now, there is more work to
be done.
Mr. Terry. Specifically then, can you outline what their
efforts have been in the last 2 years?
Ms. Yocom. I can give you a general sense of some places
where CMS has moved forward. They have strengthened some
elements of their provider enrollment. They have designated
risks across the levels of providers so they have a sense of
who to keep the best eye on.
Where they need to do more work has to do with
fingerprinting those providers, making sure that there are
final regulations to ensure disclosure, and then also some core
elements for provider compliance programs. That would allow
them to strengthen more. That is one example.
Mr. Terry. I am just confused. If I could have another 5
seconds? Fingerprint our providers? Our doctors have to be
fingerprinted to be reimbursed?
Ms. Yocom. For criminal background checks.[The reference to
fingerprinting was made in conjunction with the statement
regarding the level of risk associated with different
providers. In 2012, GAO reported on CMS's plans to subject
high-risk providers and suppliers to fingerprint-based
background checks.]
Mr. Stearns. The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Barton, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We have all seen the reports in the last several months
about some of these abuses of public funds, the GSA and their
trips to Las Vegas, the Secret Service and their escapades in
South America. We all hope that those are exceptions and not
the rule, that not everybody in the government behaves that
way.
But I look at HHS, and by the admission of the Inspector
General, he doesn't phrase it quite this way but it is an
agency that is almost not controllable because it is so big. So
this subcommittee hopefully on a bipartisan basis is going to
begin a process to determine what, if anything, can be done if
we need to change statutory authority to regain control. Staff
has indicated to me that at HHS, this is just a small example
but it is big enough to have significance, that not just the
travel budget at HHS but that the international travel budget
is between $56 and $67 million per year, and then it has gone
up 15 percent between fiscal year 2009 and fiscal year 2011.
Why in heaven's name, Mr. Cochran, would international travel
be over $50 million a year and why would it be going up 5 to 10
percent a year? International. This is health domestically,
Health and Human Services domestically.
Mr. Cochran. The travel in 2011, as you noted, is $65
million. It was $57 million in 2010, $67 million in 2009. So
relative to 2009, it is down just a little bit. But more to
your question, the areas within HHS where there is the greatest
amount of international travel are the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, which operates directly funded programs
in HIV/AIDS as well as global immunization areas like polio as
well as executes on behalf of the Department of State major
portions of the President's emergency plan for AIDS relief.
The second primary areas for international travel include
the National Institutes of Health that does scientific work
globally as well and the Food and Drug Administration.
Mr. Barton. Could we invite those people to the United
States and have them pay their dime to come see us since we are
the experts? Do we have to go overseas? I understand there
needs to be some. I am not saying zero. But if the
international travel budget is $50 million a year, it is good
to know that it has gone down a little bit. Do you happen to
know what the Secretary's travel budget is?
Mr. Cochran. I do not. We would be happy to get back to you
on that. The Office of the Secretary overall has a smaller
travel budget, and especially international travel budget.
Within the Office of the Secretary, the main travel costs are
the Office of Global Affairs, which again in partnership with
CDC, NIH and FDA helps implement some of our Congressionally
funded international missions, but I don't know off the top of
my head what----
Ms. Schakowsky. Would the gentleman yield for one sentence?
Mr. Barton. Sure.
Ms. Schakowsky. The CDC and the FDA have both made clear,
their travel budgets are down compared to those of the second
term of the Bush Administration, so the trajectory is correct.
Mr. Barton. Well, that is good information. Let us keep it
going that way. Let us keep the trend going. That is good to
know.
I have got one minute left. This is a standard question
that I ask every agency that comes before us. Mr. Cochran, can
you tell me of the 80,000 employees at HHS, how many of them
have a government credit card?
Mr. Cochran. I do not have that information with me or off
the top of my head, but we would be happy to get back to you.
Mr. Barton. Do you have a government credit card?
Mr. Cochran. Yes, I was issued a credit card. I myself
don't travel, it is not in the nature of my work, so I haven't
used it for quite some time.
Mr. Barton. So you have one but you don't use it?
Mr. Cochran. I don't use it often. That is correct.
Mr. Barton. Well, if you have it, you should be allowed to
use it.
Mr. Cochran. I just----
Mr. Barton. I want the record to show, I have a government
credit card issued to me by the United States Congress for
travel, and I use it to put gasoline in my leased vehicle and I
use it, as he said, on occasion when I travel domestically
outside my district for airfare or hotel. I am not saying it is
illegal or immoral to have one but I am saying that we ought to
have an accountability protocol, and most of the federal
agencies tend to issue them fairly liberally and tend not to
oversee them, if at all. That is a standard question.
My time is expired, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentleman, and the gentlelady from
Tennessee, Ms. Blackburn, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here. I think as
you can hear from the questions that we are asking, it does
appear that HHS is now too big to control, and listening to the
GAO report certainly lends an understanding of that. You can go
look after a couple of programs but you have got all this other
spending that is going on that you can't seem to get your hands
around, as Mr. Barton said, the travel budget, and you have to
say why in this time when our constituents are saying the
federal government takes too much out of our pockets and it
wastes money that we don't have and it spends money on programs
that we don't want. Certainly, there is a disconnect between
what the citizens want and what you all thing you have the
right for whatever reason you feel entitled to spend money, the
taxpayers' money.
Ms. Yocom, I wanted to come to you. In reading the
testimony that you and Mr. Cosgrove had for us today, and in
looking at how you have gone into look at the payments, the
fraudulent payments, etc., in working with the States, have you
all looked at the TennCare payment structure for Tennessee as
you have audited the different states?
Ms. Yocom. We have looked at Tennessee with regard to the
actuarial soundness requirements for Medicaid managed care but
we haven't done an intensive look at the rate-setting
methodology itself.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Thank you. I would be interested at
some point when you all do that to know if you do look at that
methodology, and since it is one of the early waiver programs
and is kind of the test case for what is now Obamacare or
managed care, I would be interested to see what you found. I
know what my experience was as a Tennessee State senator and
how the program failed to live up to what the promises were.
Going back to Mr. Terry's question, you mentioned some of
the core elements that were needed for some fiscal soundness.
Are you looking at implemented new technologies that will help
with the tracking and the payments and the disbursements and
there is a way to put some more transparency into this process?
Either of you.
Ms. Yocom. I want to make sure I understand. In terms of
the review of payments within CMS and HHS?
Mrs. Blackburn. Correct.
Ms. Yocom. There is, I think it is called IDR, and then 1-
PI, one program integrity, which is a set of electronic review
systems that look at claims overall in an attempt to combine
them. This is important with respect to Medicare and Medicaid
to get those claims in one place so they can do reviews and
look for indications that there could be improper payments.
Mrs. Blackburn. Patterns?
Ms. Yocom. Yes, patterns.
Mrs. Blackburn. All right. And is that widely used?
Ms. Yocom. It is being used on the Medicare side. Medicaid
is not yet up and running. We do have recommendations aimed at
CMS putting a plan in place to make this more broadly
available.
Mrs. Blackburn. What kind of timeline is that installation
moving forward on?
Ms. Yocom. I think one of our--I am pretty sure that one of
our recommendations has to do with CMS developing a timeline. I
do not believe at this point they have one.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Thank you for that.
Mr. Cochran, I want to come to you on the co-op program
that was established under PPACA. OMB says they expect that the
taxpayers may lose $370 million in this program from unpaid
loans to nonprofit insurers. The estimate is that as many as 50
percent of the loans issued under this program may not be
repaid. Are you familiar with these estimates?
Mr. Cochran. I am not immediately familiar with the
particular numbers you cite. We have them but I am familiar
with the role and the process that OMB goes through for all
loan programs to estimate a default rate that they use as a way
of scoring the overall cost of the program. That then enables
HHS to determine the number of loans that can be made within
the appropriation that Congress provided.
Mrs. Blackburn. Well, how can you know that you have them
but you are not familiar with them when you are talking about a
program that is expected to lose money? How can you be so
dismissive of that? I mean, does that not concern me?
Mr. Cochran. It was not my intention to be dismissive. I
just don't want to misquote numbers that I don't have in my
head, but I do know OMB plays a key role in setting those
default estimates, which then informs HHS on the number of
grants that can be made within the appropriation that is
provided.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Then let me ask you the question this
way. How does stewardship of the taxpayer dollar figure in to
the decisions, the departmental decisions, on the loans that
you are going to approve or disapprove through this co-op
program?
Mr. Cochran. Well, we work with OMB on the establishment of
that rate to determine what the default rate would be in order
to----
Mrs. Blackburn. So you are accepting of the premise of
default?
Mr. Cochran. In every program, there is some portion that
for, you know, a variety of reasons----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. I am out of time. Can I ask Mr.
Cosgrove to follow up on this?
Do you all have any advice for best practices or due
diligence that would help them? I find it a little bit
perplexing that I have a department with a trillion-dollar
budget. You are flying all over the world. OMB says your loan
program is set up to lose $370 million, and you work with them
to set a default rate and it seems like that that is kind of
standard operating procedure. Are we missing something in this,
Mr. Cosgrove? Do you have any guidance that you would provide
to him for how they could go about not planning to fail? I want
you to succeed when you are dealing with taxpayer money but let
us not plan to fail.
Mr. Cosgrove. I am leery about providing any explicit
guidance. This is something that we haven't looked at before.
We would be happy, but we haven't looked at it, so----
Mr. Stearns. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Christensen, are you ready, or do you want me to take
one more on the right side?
OK. I recognize Dr. Burgess for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Clearly this is one of the most important hearings we will
have all year. All of this information is important. I will
never get to all the questions I have. I am going to submit
some in writing, and Mr. Cochran, I trust that we will get
those answers in a timely fashion. It is extremely important
that we do. We have got some big decisions to make.
In your testimony, you talked about unobligated balances,
and I must tell you, I am concerned about that concept of money
that was not spent for what it was intended and now we are
using it just within the agency. And the reason it concerns me
is, I don't know precisely what the discretionary appropriation
was but for the past 3 years it has been about $60 billion to
$70 billion a year, so we are looking at a figure around $200
billion. You received money in the American Recovery Act? Is
that right? In the stimulus bill?
Mr. Cochran. HHS, yes, received----
Mr. Burgess. How much?
Mr. Cochran [continuing]. Appropriations in the stimulus
bill. The largest----
Mr. Burgess. Well, the aggregate number. It was well over
$100 million, was it not?
Mr. Cochran. Yes. Some of the major portions----
Mr. Burgess. OK, $100 million, and in the Affordable Care
Act, there was pre-program money coming to HHS for
implementation, so is it fair to say another $100 million in
the Affordable Care Act? We are looking at half a trillion
dollars in discretionary appropriations to HHS in the last 3
years. That is to say nothing of the mandatory money that you
get to administer--to pay for the programs at Medicare and
Medicaid.
So this is an enormous amount of money that this agency
has, and again, the concept of reprogramming money just bothers
me. Either that should offset your next year's appropriation or
it should be paid back to the federal Treasury to pay down the
year's deficit. Why doesn't that happen?
Mr. Cochran. That is what we are doing with the balances.
My reference to using balances as a way to reduce the amount of
new resources requested from Congress is specifically in areas
where Congress provided them for a purpose and we are using
those balances for that purpose.
Mr. Burgess. Here is the problem that we have. It was
pretty much in evidence on this travel question that came up.
Look, I get the fact that if the CDC did not go over to Geneva
and literally run the World Health Organization, an outbreak of
a deadly disease could be a serious problem on American soil,
so I get the fact that that is important. But we have no level
of detail. When we ask for your travel, here is this volume of
dollars that is given. We really need the breakdown. How much
travel was for CDC, how much was for HRSA? HRSA has got no
business going other places in the world, so if they have an
international travel item, that may be a red flag that this
committee would want to know. And I am not picking on you
because this has been a historic problem in Health and Human
Services and the EPA, trying to get the level of detail in a
budget, a balance sheet, that any private corporation could
provide us if we were to ask it of them. You guys can't do it,
and I have this discussion with Mr. Larsen at CCIIO. We need a
level of detail when we ask for budgetary information, so I am
going to ask you, I don't expect you to have it today but I am
going to ask you for the budgetary, the line item budgetary
information on these reprogrammed or unobligated funds and
whether they were stimulus monies, PPACA monies or just regular
discretionary appropriation monies because, again, we can't
know how to help you until we really understand where the
problems are.
Now, Ms. Yocom, you made a statement about the improper
payment rate as high as it is now. How many dollars are we
talking about in this improper payment rate?
Ms. Yocom. I am not sure I can give you a specific----
Mr. Burgess. Well, get one for me because I would like to
have it, because this improper payment rate makes a big
difference. We are struggling with what to do with the
Sustainable Growth Rate formula. We would like to be able to
offset that. If there is a 10-year budgetary window that equals
or surpasses the amount of money it would take to place the
Sustainable Growth Rate, we could solve a huge problem in
Medicare, a huge problem for HHS. Why can't we have that
information so we can solve that?
Now, you referenced also the concept of, or I guess, Mr.
Cosgrove, it was you when you talked about a red flag when
billing reaches atypical levels. Did I hear you right when you
said that?
Mr. Cosgrove. That is correct.
Mr. Burgess. So in other words, when the money going out
the door is just clearly a red flag or an outlier, CMS should
be able, or HHS should be able to say, uh-oh, we have got a
problem here. Is that correct?
Mr. Cosgrove. That is correct. We are recommending that
they increase their ability to look for patterns so that----
Mr. Burgess. OK. Here is a pattern for you. More money
spent on cosmetic braces in the State of Texas in Medicaid
dollars than the rest of the country combined. How is that not
a red flag? What are all these great metrics that have been put
in place and you didn't catch this? This was 2 or 3 weeks ago.
These guys are laughing at you. You have got to do a better job
with this.
I know my time is expired, Mr. Chairman. I hope we will
have an opportunity to go to a second round because this
information is so critical, but I know Ms. Christensen just got
here so I will yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn [presiding]. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Christensen, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Christensen. Thank you, Madam Chair.
We all recognize that we are in fiscally challenging times
and the responsibility to ensure that we are making financially
sound decisions is shared by all of us. But when it comes to
health and health care, making financially sound decisions is
more complicated than just slashing budgetary line items based
on a price tag without any consideration really given to the
long- and even the short-term economic consequences of those
decisions.
So Madam Chair, if we want to talk seriously about
decreasing the long-term health care spending, we should talk
about the cost controls in the Affordable Care Act and how we
can build on them. So I would like to ask the witnesses some
questions about just how we do that.
Mr. Cosgrove, with a system that truly rewards doctors, for
example, for quality and which decreases financial incentives
to deliver unnecessary care, would that decrease Medicare
costs?
Mr. Cosgrove. That is definitely the direction that we need
to be moving in. Right now, we have a system that pays for
volume of services, and the more providers do and the more
expensive the services they provide, the more they get paid,
and that is the wrong incentive.
Dr. Christensen. Right. Thank you. And the Affordable Care
Act takes a big step in that direction with a number of
delivery system reforms in order to make Medicare and in time
the broader health care system pay for value. It develops
accountable care organizations so Medicare will pay one
provider to coordinate all of a senior's care rather than
paying many providers, no matter what the cost. It experiments
with bundled payments so that Medicare would pay a lump sum for
quality care rather than separately for each treatment. Also,
within the Affordable Care Act, it implements the Independence
at Home Demonstration Project to bring home-based primary care
to some of Medicare's sickest and most frail seniors who are
unable to make it to a doctor's office.
Mr. Cochran, these delivery systems reforms in the
Affordable Care Act, are they projected to reduce the growth of
Medicare expenditures?
Mr. Cochran. Yes. The----
Dr. Christensen. The accountable care and----
Mr. Cochran. Yes. There are a number of quality provisions
in the Act, there are payment reforms in the Act, there are
program integrity reforms in the Act. That on total I believe
CBO extended the Medicare solvency from 2016 to 2024.
Dr. Christensen. Right. In fact, the Congressional Budget
Office has estimated the Affordable Care Act will reduce the
federal deficit by $210 billion this decade and more than a
trillion in the following 10 years, and these are significant
cost savings. We should be talking about how we can build on
them instead of repealing the Affordable Care Act as the House
Republican budget does.
And Mr. Cochran, can you talk about what CMS is doing to
make Medicare more efficient and save federal dollars?
Mr. Cochran. There are a number of things that CMS is
working on in the area of quality, there is the national
initiative known as Partnership for Patients that is designed
to improve safety and reduce readmissions, which both improves
the quality of health as well as saves costs. There is a value-
based purchasing effort to reward quality and efficiency in
hospitals as well as public transparency efforts to provide
more information about quality for nursing homes and other
providers as well as accountable care organizations that are
just being launched to encourage coordination and preventive
care and bring down costs and improve quality.
Dr. Christensen. Thank you.
These are all important steps, Madam Chair. These reforms
all have one thing in common. They save taxpayer money and
improve the quality of care without shifting costs to seniors
or eroding the core basic benefits of the Medicare program, and
in this way they stand in sharp contrast to the Republican
budget. There is always a right way and a wrong way to cut the
federal budget and reduce health care costs, and the Republican
budget is exactly the wrong way.
Mr. Cochran, I think I have a little more time. I wanted to
ask you another question. The Joint Center for Political and
Economic Studies released a report a couple years ago that
found that eliminating racial and ethnic health disparities
could save the Nation $1.24 trillion in direct and indirect
medical costs over a 3-year period. In your testimony, you
mentioned that one of your many responsibilities was to
investigate a mix of investments that would improve the health
and wellbeing of the Nation in a cost-effective manner. So
given the extremely high costs to absorb every year that racial
and ethnic health disparities are not eliminated, don't you
think that the national strategy that the Department of Health
and Human Services has developed and is implementing right now
is another component that would help to achieve the larger
objective to improve the health and wellbeing of the Nation in
a cost-effective manner?
Mr. Cochran. Yes. The work that the Office of the Assistant
Secretary for Health and some of our key operating divisions
are doing both to develop and implement the strategy is
important as is the investments that the President's budget
proposes in key areas including the Indian Health Service that
I mentioned earlier, the Ryan White HIV/AIDS program including
for drug treatment as well as a number of programs across HRSA
and CDC that target those populations that are most vulnerable.
Dr. Christensen. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Stearns. And I recognize for 5 minutes the gentleman
from Louisiana, Mr. Scalise.
Mr. Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
having this hearing as we have had a number of hearings on the
budgets of the various agencies and things we are trying to do
to control spending in Washington, and unfortunately, we don't
have enough people in Washington that are serious about
controlling spending and that is why we have got over a
trillion-dollar deficit again, and so I think it is important
that we look at the budget and scrutinize it and ask some of
the questions that our members have been asking.
Mr. Cochran, HHS has requested a billion dollars in
additional funding to implement the President's health care
law, and that is in addition to the billion that has already
been appropriated for implementation when it was originally
enacted in March of 2010. First of all, why the need for an
additional billion dollars on top of the billion that was
already in the original bill?
Mr. Cochran. The original bill does include a billion, and
the Congressional Budget Office initially estimated that it
would cost roughly $1 billion per year to implement the Act. We
have to date obligated roughly half of that billion dollars.
The 2013 budget projects using the remainder this fiscal year
in 2012 and the investment in 2013, and the proposed increase
within the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services is to
continue that effort. A major component within that request is
to launch the health insurance exchanges, and there is a need
for investments in 2013 in order to launch the exchanges in
2014 after which time they largely become self-sustainable.
Mr. Scalise. So where did you get this billion dollars
from? Did you just redirect it from other parts of the HHS
budget? You had a billion dollars that was literally just lying
around to go and take and move to to put in the area of the
funding for Obamacare that was under, I guess underanticipated?
Mr. Cochran. The original billion that was in the
Affordable Care Act or the billion----
Mr. Scalise. The additional billion, the additional billion
dollars that has been requested.
Mr. Cochran. So in formulating the annual budget, we go
through each operating division and we work closely with the
Office of Management and Budget to identify savings both to
reduce the deficit overall but also to fund priority areas. We
have identified roughly $2 billion in savings across HHS in our
discretionary budget, which enabled us to invest proposed
investments in the Indian Health Service, biodefense
preparedness as well as CMS.
Mr. Scalise. Have you all ever thought about investing in
reducing the deficit if you have got too much money in your
budget and you have gone through and you have identified areas
where you can savings? You know, because one of the things I am
looking at, the President issued an Executive Order directing
you all to establish a plan to reduce 20 percent below 2012
levels for costs associated with travel, employee information
technology, printing, other things, and from what we are
looking at here, the quote, unquote, savings that you identify
here, it looks like you are using those to spend in other areas
to absorb cost increases. So are you actually saving in terms
of reducing the deficit or just moving money from one area of
your budget to another area of your budget to keep spending at
the same levels?
Mr. Cochran. The 2013 President's budget includes savings
of over $300 billion on the mandatory side by slowing the rate
of growth in----
Mr. Scalise. So not just actual cuts, you are just slowing
the rate of growth? You are not actually reducing from prior
levels?
Mr. Cochran. It is reductions relative to the baseline that
CBO establishes and then----
Mr. Scalise. You know, in Washington, unfortunately, people
use a different set of languages than American people use
across the country. Our small business owners, families, when
they sit at their kitchen table and they say we have to balance
our budget, we have to cut because we have less money this
year, they don't say well, instead of having a 10 percent
increase, we will just spend 5 percent more and call that a
cut. They don't call it a cut. A cut means if you were spending
$50,000 one year and you got $45,000 the next year, that is a
cut. You don't say well, we had $50,000 last year, we are going
to get $55,000 next year and so that is a cut because we wanted
60. I know that is kind of chic to use that around here but,
you know, people back home don't get it when they hear wait a
minute, the agency actually has more money and they are talking
about how they reduced spending and they had less money than
the proposal from the President's request. It is still more
money, and they want to see--again, we are borrowing a trillion
dollars than what we are spending.
I want to ask a couple questions as I am running out of
time. You know, I think some of the other members had asked
some questions about travel and even fleet vehicles. If you can
just get the committee the number of vehicles that you have
that are assigned to employees that they are able to take home.
Can you get the committee that number, how many vehicles HHS
has throughout the agency that are allowed to be taken home by
employees?
Mr. Cochran. I can tell you that across HHS, our Program
Support Center carries these statistics and reports there are
4,900 vehicles across HHS. Those aren't all for the purpose of
executive travel or vehicles that someone would take home
necessarily. They are primarily in the areas for movements of
providers in the Indian Health Service.
Mr. Scalise. I am not asking you to give me the number. If
you have the number here right now, that is great, but if you
don't have the number, can you get the committee that number,
the number of vehicles that are allowed to be taken home by
employees?
Mr. Cochran. Yes. Well, I can tell you that we have----
Mr. Scalise. It is a yes or no question. I am just asking
if you can get me that number.
Mr. Cochran. I will certainly work--I guess my only
hesitation is, I am not sure how we have the data in terms of
whether it is coded as----
Mr. Scalise. You are not sure how many people are taking
home vehicles?
Mr. Cochran. No, we know that there are 4,900 vehicles. We
will do our best to provide the information you are requesting.
Mr. Scalise. And if you can do the same thing on--we have
talked about travel a bit and looked at the numbers on
international travel. Can you give me within the travel budget
how much was spent on first-class travel? Because there have
been some outside reports that have looked at tens of millions
of dollars in cost savings we can achieve just by having
government employees when they are flying on the taxpayer
nickel to fly coach, not economy, not business class or first
class. And so if you can give me the amount of money that is
spent on either first-class or business-class travel? Is that
something you can get to the committee?
Mr. Cochran. We will work toward that. Travel overall, we
are reducing by 17 percent, and the vast majority of travel is
coach now. I don't know that there is much first class or
business class.
Mr. Scalise. We have seen some outside agencies have looked
at, some outside groups have looked at this and seen tens of
millions of cost savings that they could achieve, and I am sure
your agency is one like most agencies that have the ability to
do that. I am just asking if you can get us that information.
Mr. Stearns. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. If you could accommodate him, that would be
helpful.
We are going to do a second round of questioning, and I
will start out. Mr. Cochran, there is a Health and Human
Services Executive order. It is 13589. It proposed just under
$900 million in cuts to administrative expenses. Is that true?
Does that ring a bell?
Mr. Cochran. Yes, sir.
Mr. Stearns. OK.
Mr. Cochran. The HHS target is $876 million.
Mr. Stearns. OK. And it is noted in the budget of fiscal
year 2013 that ``agencies are redirecting some savings to
absorb other cost increases and fund priorities activities.''
Isn't that correct?
Mr. Cochran. In some areas, our budget requests have come
down----
Mr. Stearns. Yes or no to that statement. Is that correct,
that you in fact in your opening statement said, ``We are
seeking opportunity to make investments today that will yield
greater returns in the future such as the health care fraud and
abuse control system has returned''--in other words, what I am
saying is, that you have indicated that your agencies are
redirecting some savings that you find here elsewhere. Isn't
that true?
Mr. Cochran. In some cases, that is correct. In other
cases, we have reduced agency budgets, and that was made
possible by----
Mr. Stearns. OK, but in some cases--you are--OK. So I guess
what we are concerned about that are you taking this Executive
Order 13589 where you have roughly $900 million in savings or
cuts in administrative expenses, are you considering that
savings that you are redirecting elsewhere into other
government programs? Is that true? Is that what is happening?
Mr. Cochran. In some areas, take, for example----
Mr. Stearns. So the answer is yes?
Mr. Cochran [continuing]. Where we are investing that----
Mr. Stearns. So the answer would be yes? Some would be yes,
in some cases you are taking the so-called cuts and you are
funneling them into other areas and you are considering them
savings that you can use elsewhere. I am just trying to show to
the committee here that the impact of these cuts are going to
obviously be significantly less if you take that $876 million
that you are saving in administrative costs and you are
funneling it into another program, there won't be any savings.
Let me move on to the next question. You are aware that
Health and Human Services has the most highly paid civil
servants anywhere in the federal government? Would that be yes?
Would that be true?
Mr. Cochran. Health and Human Services is subject to the
same general schedule rules----
Mr. Stearns. Well, let me just say, the fact is, you have
the most highly paid civil servants anywhere in the federal
government. For example, over 90 of the 100 most highly paid
civil servants anywhere in the federal government work for
Health and Human Services and these 90 are capped at $375,000 a
year. Isn't that true? The cap is $375,000 a year?
Mr. Cochran. That is in reference to a specific, what is
called Title 42 authority.
Mr. Stearns. The answer is yes, they have a $375,000 cap.
That is true. That is correct, isn't it?
Mr. Cochran. Under one specific authority. Most agency
employees are under the----
Mr. Stearns. And over 650 of the federal government's 1,000
highest paid civil servants work at Health and Human Services
and its component agencies. Isn't that true?
Mr. Cochran. The majority of Title 42 employees that are
under a different authority for a different salary level are at
the National Institutes of Health and they are scientific--they
are primarily scientific positions in----
Mr. Stearns. Well, we have them including--these high-paid
salary people are CDC, FDA, the Indian Health Service and NIH.
Isn't that true where most of these highly paid civil servants
are? Isn't that true?
Mr. Cochran. Yes, the largest number are at NIH. You
referenced the Indian Health Service. There are some providers,
medical doctors----
Mr. Stearns. And in 2009, more than 530 NIH employees
appear to have earned salaries of over $200,000 and above, and
that is more than the President's own Cabinet. Isn't that true?
Mr. Cochran. Under this particular authority. The vast
majority of HHS employees are under the same system.
Mr. Stearns. So I think the dichotomy here is that the
Cabinet officials are getting less than 530 of NIH employees,
and then if you look at the salaries of these 90 of the most
highly paid, which have a cap of $375,000, you see that these
people are getting well paid even compared to some of their
colleagues here, not to mention how they are well paid compared
to the private sector.
My last area of concern here is the--let us see. We have
the Health Reform Implementation Fund. The President proposed
an additional $1 billion in discretionary funding for the
implementation of the PPACA through the Center for Consumer
Information and Insurance Oversight at CMS. As of January 31st,
we have some figures here that stop at January 31, 2012. I
guess the question is, can you update this graph to take us up
further beyond January 31st?
Mr. Cochran. Yes, sir.
Mr. Stearns. OK. Mr. Cochran, how has CMS used its
resources from the implementation fund since January? Can you
tell us that? Although we don't have the data, can you just
maybe bring us up to speed on how much of the fund remains?
Mr. Cochran. Of the billion, $471 million has been
obligated as of February 29th. Some of that is for personnel.
More of it is for contractual services and the expenditures
have been for closing the Part D coverage gap, one of the key
provisions in the Act, as well as developing the new value-
based purchasing models for Medicare providers that we talked
about earlier as well as helping plan and prepare for the
establishment of the State and federal exchanges.
Mr. Stearns. All right. My time is expired.
Ms. Schakowsky is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. I wanted to just set the record straight on
a couple of things.
Regarding the salaries under the Title 42 program, Dr.
Harold Varmus, the Director of NIH under the Bush
Administration, who now runs the Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
said, ``If we don't pay enough to keep the best, we condemn
ourselves to mediocrity.'' So my understanding, Mr. Cochran,
is, we are trying to at least keep competitive to hire
scientists that are required to have doctoral degrees in order
to receive those high salaries. Is that not true?
Mr. Cochran. Yes.
Ms. Schakowsky. I also wanted to put into the record, Mr.
Chairman, this is an article from Healthwatch, the Hill's
health care blog, ``House Republicans who say taxpayer funds
went to spay and neuter dogs in Nashville have the story wrong.
There was a spay and neuter clinic but it was funded by a
Touchmark charities grant to the Nashville Humane
Association,'' said Alisa Haushalter, whose job includes
directing a federally funded program in the city known as the
CPPW. That is the one you were referring to here.
So maybe the entire program--it says, ``As a partnering
agency, we would have had staff members that were there
greeting people at the event and so forth but the funding was
not from us.'' So I would like to put that in the record.
Mr. Stearns. By unanimous consent.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Stearns. We will also, if you have no objection, put in
these two flyers that I have given you, the one on the
temporary veterinarian clinic initiative as funded in part by
the Department of Health and Human Services as part of the
Metro Public Health Department's Community Putting Prevention
to Work campaign, which shows and corroborates that, together
with these two web pages, which also corroborate. We will put
both of them in by unanimous consent.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Stearns. So ordered.
Ms. Schakowsky. I wanted to talk about the Republican
budget priorities and women. From Medicare and Medicaid to the
Prevention and Public Health Fund, HHS is responsible for
programs that millions of women rely on for critical health
care needs, and I want to talk about some of the drastic
changes to these programs that my Republican colleagues have
recently endorsed through the budget and appropriations
process.
The House Republican budget would turn Medicaid into a
block grant, repeal the important new benefits under the
Affordable Care Act and cut federal funding for Medicaid by a
staggering $1.7 trillion over the next decade.
Mr. Cochran, am I correct that Medicaid covers more than 40
percent of all births in the United States?
Mr. Cochran. I don't have that statistic with me but that
sounds roughly correct.
Ms. Schakowsky. And so what Medicaid does is, it offers a
solution for low-income pregnant women who can't afford private
insurance by covering maternity and prenatal care. Dramatic
cuts to the program truly would have a disastrous effect on
women and their children.
The Medicare program also provides important benefits for
women. Mr. Cochran, am I correct that 56 percent of all
Medicaid beneficiaries are women?
Mr. Cochran. That sounds correct. Again, I am sorry, I do
not have that data with me.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, the House Republican budget ends the
guarantees we have made to our seniors by turning Medicare
beneficiaries over to private insurers. It shifts costs to
seniors. In fact, CBO has said that by 2030, beneficiaries
could pay up to $2,200 more because of these changes,
disproportionately falling on women because they have longer
life expectancies.
I am looking at you, Mr. Cosgrove. Did you want to say
something in this regard?
Mr. Cosgrove. No, I am simply acknowledging the fact that
women do tend to live longer and so especially on the Medicare
program you do expect to see more women, more older women.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
Mr. Cochran, can you tell us the purpose of the Prevention
and Public Health Fund?
Mr. Cochran. Yes. The Prevention and Public Health Fund,
the primary purpose is to support programs, activities,
interventions at the State and local levels to prevent chronic
disease, to reduce the use of tobacco, prevent obesity, help
communities target health issues in their area. It is also
being used to support childhood immunizations as well as some
activities in the infectious disease area like hepatitis C.
Ms. Schakowsky. And isn't it also true that $140 million of
the fund goes toward breast and cervical cancer screening
services?
Mr. Cochran. As proposed in the 2013 budget, the fund will
support those activities, yes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Which would help pay for 326,000 women to
get breast cancer screening and for 284,000 women to get
cervical cancer screenings and Republicans are voting to take
it away.
And Mr. Chairman, I would just say this is a sad example of
how the Republican budget is dangerous for women, and I yield
back.
Mr. Stearns. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentlelady from Tennessee is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Cochran, I wanted to come back to you, if I could.
In my opening statement, I mentioned that I wanted to hear from
you regarding the steps that you all had taken to comply with
the President's call for agencies to identify $100 million
worth of savings. Are you able to articulate that list or do
you have a list?
Mr. Cochran. Yes--at that time we identified savings in the
area of data centers at CDC and FDA as well as the migration
from paper to electronic filing primarily at FDA as well as at
CDC and ACF. In addition, we have subsequently identified----
Mrs. Blackburn. Hold on just a moment there. So you have
identified CDC, FDA and the paper to electronic filing. So what
portion, how much money from each of those?
Mr. Cochran. Well, for the President's Executive order in
these administrative areas, we are reducing spending by 21
percent.
Mrs. Blackburn. And the budget was increased how much prior
to your making this reduction?
Mr. Cochran. The 2013 budget, it is a decrease of $218
million. It is roughly flat on the discretionary spending.
Mrs. Blackburn. Your 2010 budget and the stimulus funding
was a good percentage. I will get that number for you so that
you have it. I don't have that exact number in front of me. So
if you could submit in writing the answers to those, that list,
that would be very helpful for us. We want to be able to see
what you all have done to actually make these spending
reductions and to live that.
One other question for you along the same line. We are
working through reconciliation looking at the sequestration and
reconciliation, so what are you all at HHS doing to prepare for
reconciliation and the reductions that are going to come?
Mr. Cochran. Well, prepare for reconciliation or for
sequestration? For sequestration, the Administration's position
is that the 2013 budget provides specific savings proposals
that if enacted would enable us to achieve the reductions to
the deficit without relying on sequestration.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. So you feel like you are ahead of the
game?
Mr. Cochran. Well, the President's proposals overall,
including HHS and other departments would enable savings with
specific reductions----
Mrs. Blackburn. Let us do this. Why don't you submit in
writing what you all are doing to make preparations to meet the
sequestration numbers and to meet the reductions that we are
going to continue to bring forward? May I remind you, you are
an agency that as we read your reports and as we hear from your
Inspector General, who should be here with us today and is not,
and as we listen to GAO, it is very evident to us that you all
are too big to manage. You have gotten too unwieldy. You are
into areas where you should not necessarily be. You are
spending money in ways that you should not, ought not to be
spending it, and it is our responsibility to come back and to
exercise some oversight on that. That is what we are doing here
today.
And I know that maybe you weren't provided all of the
information that you needed to have to handle this hearing
today but even if you were not properly given the information,
with all due respect to you, let us just be sure that we submit
all of this writing because it is something that it is
important to us. It is important to our constituents. It is
important to the hospitals and to the providers that serve all
of these individuals that walk through their doors every day
wanting health care and we come up here and we talk to you all
and we see a lot of the money that ought to be going out there
to individuals, to enrollees, to the health care system is spun
up, tied up, wadded up over here in HHS and it is something
that we want to get our hands around and help you all be more
efficient and do a better job for the taxpayers, and I yield
back.
Mr. Stearns. The gentlelady yields back.
Ms. Christensen, I am glad you are here. Thank you. You are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Christensen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Before I ask my questions, Ms. Yocom and Mr. Cosgrove, I
wanted to just highlight on page 5 part of your testimony on
aligning coverage with recommendations of the U.S. Preventative
Services Task Force. I am sure you are aware that there have
been several recent recommendations coming from that task force
that not only I but others consider questionable, and they
don't take into account some of the outlying groups like racial
and ethnic minorities. For example, in the breast cancer
recommendations, black and Jewish women are at risk for breast
cancer at early ages, it didn't seem to take that into account.
And it didn't take into account the high prostate cancer
incidence in African American men with their recent prostate
screening recommendations. So at least think that to tie
reimbursement too tightly to all of their recommendations can
be harmful to some groups in our population and will deny them
access to some needed care because they won't be able to afford
it. So I don't know how you address it but I wanted to call
your attention to that because some of their recommendations
are very questionable and really don't take into account the
entire population in the United States. Go ahead.
Mr. Cosgrove. I just wanted to say that CMS has the
authority to consider the recommendations of the task force
when they are making coverage decisions. We didn't
independently--because of that authority, we didn't
independently go on and have experts that would look behind the
task force recommendations.
Dr. Christensen. But you still recommended CMS provide
coverage for task force recommendation services, you do say as
appropriate.
Mr. Cosgrove. Correct.
Dr. Christensen. OK. Thank you.
But, you know, I listen to my Republican colleagues, and
HHS houses agencies that Americans rely on every day to protect
their health and keep them safe like the FDA, National
Institutes of Health, Centers for Disease Control. The House
Republican budget would result in drastic cuts and undercut the
essential functions of these agencies, and I want to explore
some of those implications of those cuts.
So Mr. Cochran, my understanding is that the Republican
budget would make across-the-board cuts in discretionary
spending. Is that correct?
Mr. Cochran. There are across-the-board cuts associated
with sequestration that CBO estimates roughly 8 percent----
Dr. Christensen. But they are going beyond that.
Mr. Cochran. The House budget resolution does set spending
levels not specific to HHS but government-wide that are below
those established in the Budget Control Act for 2013 and 2014.
Dr. Christensen. And I am correct that this discretionary
spending is what provides a significant amount of budget to the
agencies like the Food and Drug Administration, NIH and our new
Institute of Minority and Health Disparities and CDC?
Mr. Cochran. Yes. The majority of resources for our
discretionary agencies outside of the entitlements is regular
budget authority. Almost all of NIH's budget is provided that
way. FDA is supported by a combination of budget authority and
user fees.
Dr. Christensen. So to single out just one, can we talk
about what FDA's essential functions are? Can you tell us about
what their essential functions are?
Mr. Cochran. Yes. FDA's mission is to protect the public's
health by ensuring the safety, the efficacy, the security of
human as well as veterinary drugs. They work on biologics and
devices. They also work to protect the U.S. food supply. They
are having new responsibility over the regulation of tobacco
products to reduce youth smoking. And they are working to
accelerate the review and approval of medical countermeasures
to protect the public against bioterrorism attacks.
Dr. Christensen. Right, and these cuts would jeopardize the
safety of our drugs, our vaccines and medical services. And
then at NIH, the center of U.S. medical research, one of the
greatest research institutions in the world, but that
Republican budget would mean that NIH would have less money
available for cutting-edge research into breast cancer, HIV,
Alzheimer's and others and health disparities.
So how much funding does NIH currently receive to conduct
scientific research?
Mr. Cochran. NIH's budget is $30.7 billion.
Dr. Christensen. Thank you. And we know that that money is
well spent. As a matter of fact, I believe it is level funded
in 2013 and that does not allow them to really make the kinds
of research investments that they need. Their studies have led
to development of the MRI, how viruses cause cancer, the
mapping of the human genome with all that is going to lead to,
and they boost our economy through medical breakthroughs.
According to one study, for every dollar of public funding for
scientific research, the drug industry gets a $3 return. So
deep cuts to NIH would be an irresponsible fiscal decision.
So I appreciate your helping to explain the impact of the
Republican budget, not just on Medicare and Medicaid but on
other important government programs. So thank you for your
testimony and your answers.
Mr. Stearns. I think to the gentlelady, I would say that we
are trying to control the budget. We will have to do some cost
cutting somewhere if we are going to do that.
The gentleman from Texas, Dr. Burgess, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I do want to go on record as saying there has been no
bigger critic of the Title 42 program than myself, but I
understand the necessity of having a Title 42 program. If we
have the best virologists on the face of the earth, we want to
be able to pay him or her an amount commensurate with their
ability. If we have the person who sequenced the human genome
working at NIH, we want to be able to pay him or her to a
degree commensurate with their ability. But we don't need to be
paying entry-level biologists and chemists, and I won't say
that HHS has been as guilty of that as EPA has been over the
years but it just points out that this committee must have
oversight. If we are willing to spend more money to have top
researchers in their field, we must have oversight into how
those dollars are spent.
Off the editorial statement now. Let me just ask a
question, Mr. Cochran. Dr. Christensen is very critical of the
budgetary process. It is OK within her purview to do that. You
may have heard or read in the papers the Supreme Court heard
oral arguments about the Affordable Care Act at the end of
March. Did you read about that?
Mr. Cochran. Yes, I am aware.
Mr. Burgess. And then there was a lot of chatter afterwards
that maybe something might happen to the Affordable Care Act.
Can't know, won't know for another 6 weeks. But are you doing
anything within your agency to prepare for the Supreme Court
voiding a portion or all of the Affordable Care Act?
Mr. Cochran. The HHS again principally the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services as well as other components are
focused on implementing the Act, which is the law of the
Congress.
Mr. Burgess. Focused? They are going on light speed. I am
sorry. Continue on.
Mr. Cochran. I mean, I will stop there. That is where we
are putting our attention is to carry out----
Mr. Burgess. So there are no contingency plans, what if
this thing gets struck down by the highest court in the land?
Mr. Cochran. The focus is on implementing current law.
Mr. Burgess. So the answer is no, there are no contingency
plans? We are not paying attention to current events
surrounding our agency, and if the world comes crashing down
around our ears on June 30th, so be it. Is that the impression
you wish to give the committee?
Mr. Cochran. I wouldn't phrase it that way. I would say
that we are----
Mr. Burgess. I am trying to help you.
Mr. Cochran. We are focused on implementing--CMS is focused
on implementing the Act that is current law.
Mr. Burgess. So by inference, there are no contingency
plans, and if your world comes to an end, then so be it.
Well, let me just ask you this. We have heard all this
great testimony about all the wonderful tools you have under
the Affordable Care Act for combating fraud and waste. A lot of
this just sound like good management practices, and I suspect a
lot of those were going on and we could study GAO reports from
previous years and find that many of those things have already
been going on. But if there are specific tools that you were
granted under the Affordable Care Act, what happens July 1st if
the Affordable Care Act is no more? Do you stop prosecuting
fraud in the Department of Health and Human Services? Do you
just give up?
Mr. Cochran. CMS, our Office of Inspector General, DOJ,
they have--CMS, for example, has tools that have been enhanced
through the Affordable Care Act but they have been working in
this area for a long period and have funding and authorities
that preceded the Act.
Mr. Burgess. So you wouldn't just throw up your hands and
say we give up, fraudsters win, we are going to just hand the
money over to the crooks, right?
Mr. Cochran. This is one of the highest priorities of the
Department and it is an area of great focus.
Mr. Burgess. The loss of the Affordable Care Act would not
inhibit your abilities to fight fraud. Is that correct? Is that
a fair statement?
Mr. Cochran. The law provides CMS with additional
authorities that have enabled them to--that are enabling them
to do a better job.
Mr. Burgess. If I may, you wouldn't grind to a halt on July
1st or 2nd if the Supreme Court so rules?
Mr. Cochran. There are authorities and funds that precede
the Act, and it is a major area of focus, a major priority for
the Department.
Mr. Burgess. Again, suffice it to say, fraud enforcement is
not going to go away if the Affordable Care Act is struck down
by the Supreme Court. You and I don't know the answer to that
at this point so it is obviously a point of some conjecture.
What is not a point of conjecture is the sequestration that
is going to happen. I have to tell you, I was a little
disturbed by your answer to Representative Blackburn's
questions about sequestration. You are giving us the impression
that the President's budget for 2013 actually included those
sequestration cuts.
Mr. Cochran. I am sorry, no. The President's budget
includes specific targeted reductions that would make
sequestration unnecessary to achieve the same end.
Sequestration is an approach of across-the-board reductions----
Mr. Burgess. Sequestration, you can't just say it is not
necessary. I mean, it is a law. The President signed it. Surely
he remembers that.
Mr. Cochran. And the policy of the Office of Management and
Budget and of the Administration is to work with the Congress
to find specific reductions and avoid an across-the-board
approach to finding savings.
Mr. Burgess. Well, OK. Sequestration starts when? January
1st of 2013? And what are the efforts that are ongoing now in
working with the Congress to identify? You have 8 percent of
your discretionary budget, if I understand things right. Does
that sound right, 8 percent, that you have to cut?
Mr. Cochran. CBO estimates, right, just roughly 8 percent
would be not just--but across discretionary spending.
Mr. Burgess. Well, that is a lot more than the reductions
that are proposed in the President's budget for 2013, correct?
Mr. Cochran. That is correct. The President's budget
proposes a mix of--and not just in HHS but government-wide a
mix of discretionary reductions, mandatory reductions, and
other----
Mr. Burgess. Well, correct me if I am wrong, but the way
the law reads, the law that the President signed is that
sequestration comes from HHS, right?
Mr. Cochran. No, the law created a committee to find
specific savings. Sequestration was a backstop to that. The
Administration's position is to----
Mr. Burgess. That was the Super Committee. They failed. We
all got that. They fell to earth. So January 1st, you have to
come up with 8 percent in cuts in your agency. How are you
proposing to do that?
Mr. Cochran. The way sequestration is modeled is to have a
strict across-the-board reduction as opposed to the targeted
savings that the Administration's budget proposals would----
Mr. Burgess. And are you preparing for those across-the-
board reductions within your agency? You are the Budget
Director, right, or the Assistant Budget Director?
Mr. Cochran. I am, and the focus is on working with
Congress to identify specific reductions as opposed to relying
on across-the-board reductions.
Mr. Burgess. So what specifically have you done to work
with Congress? You have got 6 months before this thing kicks
in.
Mr. Chairman, I beg some indulgence. You have given other
people extra time. This is of critical importance.
Mr. Stearns. The gentleman asks for unanimous consent for
another 30 seconds.
Mr. Burgess. Would the gentleman please answer the
question? What have you done to work with this committee, this
Congress in order to avoid that 8 percent across-the-board
reduction that you are going to see January 1st?
Mr. Cochran. Well, the President submitted a budget in
February that has a number of proposals and seeks to work with
the Congress to have those proposals be enacted.
Mr. Burgess. With all due respect, that budget was pure
fantasy. It did not garner a single vote in the House of
Representatives on either the Republican or Democratic side. I
think we are going to have to do better than that. Would you
not agree with that?
Mr. Cochran. I would agree we have a long way to go and----
Mr. Burgess. So what is your proposal to work with this
committee and Congress to avoid the sequestration across-the-
board cuts to identify those areas of savings and/or cuts that
can occur?
Mr. Stearns. The gentleman's time has expired. You are
welcome to answer the question, and if you can't, perhaps you
could come back and provide us written material.
Mr. Cochran. By the way, our jurisdiction is just within
the Department of Health and Human Services. We have proposed
over $300 billion in specific reductions on the mandatory side
as well as specific discretionary reductions. We briefed the
Appropriations Committee on the discretionary budget.
Mr. Stearns. Would the gentleman from Texas like to go a
third round? Because we could do that.
Mr. Burgess. Yes, I would be happy to.
Mr. Stearns. I am not sure we will all use it, but I think
I will take a third round and perhaps the ranking member and
then we will come back to the gentleman, and he may not need
his full 5 minutes.
I think the point that the gentleman from Texas is making
is pretty important here, and I think as the Subcommittee on
Oversight, we should have an understanding of what is going to
happen with sequestration. The Impoundment Control Act and the
Anti-Deficiency Act are going to complicate the budgeting
process for your department. I think we all agree. The Act
includes two main prohibitions. One, agencies can't spend more
money than they have or spend money before they have it, and
two, agencies cannot accept voluntary services. On the other
hand, the Impoundment Control Act requires that agencies
obligate the amount that Congress has appropriated. So in
anticipation of the sequestration, what is the Department's
plan to prevent violating these two laws?
Mr. Cochran. For our discretionary budget, it has in pretty
recent history often been the case that at the beginning of the
fiscal year we are under a continuing resolution where we don't
yet know what Congress will provide for that full year, and in
those situations, we operate at a lower level with respect to
not releasing all grant funds, and in particular in this case
under a continuing resolution in the fall leading up to January
would take the same approach.
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Cosgrove, do you have any comments that
you might have relative to the sequestration and what Mr.
Cochran has said?
Mr. Cosgrove. I don't specifically. My understanding is
that agencies would need instructions from OMB, and those have
not been provided, but I am not an expert on the sequestration
law.
Mr. Stearns. Ms. Yocom, do you have anything you might add?
Ms. Yocom. I don't.
Mr. Stearns. OK. Mr. Cochran, what percentage reduction
amounts of cuts would hit HHS discretionary budget authority,
for example, on NIH? Do you have any feel for that?
Mr. Cochran. Under sequestration?
Mr. Stearns. Yes.
Mr. Cochran. CBO estimates sequestration would be roughly 8
percent, 7.8 percent.
Mr. Stearns. And that would be true on CDC too?
Mr. Cochran. For the majority of funds, yes.
Mr. Stearns. FDA?
Mr. Cochran. For the majority of funds, yes.
Mr. Stearns. OK. I think that is going to complete my
comments.
Ms. Schakowsky?
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
I wonder if the gentleman and all those so interested in
what HHS is doing to prepare for sequestration are equally as
committed to the requirements for the defense budget under
sequestration, which have been protested from day one on the
Republican side of the aisle and have looked at the Prevention
Fund as a way to help avoid cuts on the military side.
All this focus, which I agree, we want to cut all waste,
fraud and abuse, we want to be absolutely efficient, and that
frankly is why we passed the Affordable Care Act, or as I
fondly call it, Obamacare. Is it not true, Mr. Cosgrove or Ms.
Yocom, that the projection in savings under the Affordable Care
Act is $210 billion over the next 10 years and $1 trillion over
the 10 years after that, that repealing it would in fact raise
the deficit?
Mr. Cosgrove. CBO did estimate savings associated with
passage of the Act. Yes, that is correct.
Ms. Schakowsky. And at the same time, the Republicans added
a $400 billion drug benefit program, unpaid for and with a
prohibition that Medicare could even negotiate with the
pharmaceutical companies for lower prices and have consistently
opposed efforts to reduce the Medicare Advantage overpayments
to insurance companies. So I am more than willing to roll up my
sleeves with you and with HHS to figure out the ways that we
can achieve needed savings in our health care spending but I
just really find offensive the selective criticisms. I want to
repeat that the travel budget is down from the second year of
the Bush Administration, that they see a 17 percent further
cut. I don't object to asking for the details but the affect
here that somehow there is a disregard for saving taxpayer
dollars I think is really misspent. In fact, I think we can
look at how the Republican budget would increase Medicare
fraud, and I want to ask a couple of questions about that.
The Republican budget repealing the Affordable Care Act,
which contains significant new tools for fraud detection and
prevention, new resources to fight Medicare and Medicaid fraud,
and so while Dr. Burgess was saying you are going to still
fight fraud, but doesn't the Affordable Care Act give you new
tools to do that, Mr. Cochran?
Mr. Cochran. It does.
Ms. Schakowsky. And what is the typical return on
investment for every dollar spent on Medicare fraud?
Mr. Cochran. The return on investment for the last 3 years
for our health care fraud and abuse account has been 7 to 1.
Ms. Schakowsky. And would these significant budget cuts and
eliminating the new authorities given to HHS to prevent fraud
before it happens impact your agency's ability to fight fraud?
Mr. Cochran. CMS is finding the new authorities to be
helpful in moving away from what is sometimes called a pay and
chase and toward being able to suspend payments before they are
made whenever there is an investigation of a credible
allegation of fraud. The resources that the Act provides are
important for not only the work of CMS as well as our Office of
Inspector General in our partnership with the Department of
Justice.
Ms. Schakowsky. And the Republicans' budget impact on
preventing fraud in the Medicare program would also be
profound. The Republican proposal to turn Medicaid into a block
grant would result in dramatically decreased federal
contribution to State Medicaid programs, a cut of more than
$810 billion over the next decade.
Mr. Cochran, wouldn't such a dramatic cut on the federal
contribution mean that States' antifraud spending would be
increasingly in competition with their spending on patient
care?
Mr. Cochran. In the context of reduced resources, that
tradeoff is--I think it would be logical to expect that sort of
tradeoff. The emphasis of the Administration on Medicaid is to
find specific reductions and to retain its core function as a
specific benefit for low-income populations.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, I think this is a powerful example of
why the Republican budget is so misguided. It is pennywise and
pound very foolish, making cuts that would result in increased
Medicare and Medicaid fraud and cost taxpayers more in the long
run, and I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. The gentlelady yields back. She is one of the
first Democrats to use ``Obamacare'' in a way that she is proud
of, and I think that is something. I would say to her that the
cost savings that she talks about obviously come from the
reduction in Medicare by $500 billion.
So with that, Dr. Burgess is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cochran, a former Member of Congress, Charles Stenholm,
Democrat from Texas, provided what I think is a very useful
model, and I really do wish that Health and Human Services
would look at this and follow this. He was trying to do with
inappropriate transfers of funds within the crop insurance
program because he was on the ag committee, and I think the
senior Democrat on the ag committee at the time, and it
occurred to him, even within his own district that there were
crop insurance payouts that were far in excess of what would be
expected in the area. So they developed a predictive modeling
program with Dr. Bert Little at Carlton State University in
Texas, a relatively small State university in Texas, and using
this predictive modeling program were able to achieve
significant savings in the crop insurance program, and what
they found much to their surprise was, once they started
looking, the problem diminished, that is, people were willing
to perhaps make embellished reports as long as no one paid any
attention to them. But when there was seen that in fact there
was this increased scrutiny, the numbers dropped.
So I would just suggest that to you. We are all looking at
ways to find additional dollars, and again, the gentleman's
name is Dr. Bert Little down at Carlton State. The crop
insurance program that Mr. Stenholm developed through an
earmark when he was in Congress turned out to be enormously
helpful and protective of the program.
Now, look, we have had a lot of discussion about a lot of
different things. The Supreme Court is going to rule
irrespective of the Republican budget. So forget for just a
minute about any evil associated with the Republican budget.
You have the Supreme Court going to rule. And you are telling
me that you won't have the tools you need if the Supreme Court
strikes down the entirety of the Affordable Care Act?
Mr. Cochran. No, sir. There are important tools that are
included in the Affordable Care Act as well as resources for
CMS and the Office of Inspector General. There are tools that
precede the Act and resources that precede the Act as well.
Mr. Burgess. Very well, and they will continue to be there
and be utilized, and if you need additional authority because
the Affordable Care Act has vaporized overnight, you will be
able to come back to Congress and ask for that authority. Is
that not correct?
Mr. Cochran. Well, the Administration's focus is on using
the tools that are current law to carry that out.
Mr. Burgess. I get it, but there is a court case out there.
You admitted that you had read about it.
Well, what you must be aware of, the law of the land is the
Budget Control Act of last August, dreadful piece of
legislation, but nevertheless, it is there and it proposes an 8
percent across-the-board. You are developing your budget, your
fiscal year 2014 budget now, are you not? You don't want until
the last minute to develop that?
Mr. Cochran. That is correct. We are just now starting to--
--
Mr. Burgess. Are you taking into account that that 8
percent across-the-board hammer is hanging over your head
January 1st?
Mr. Cochran. We formulated our budgets each year under the
guidance that comes from OMB. We typically would get that over
the summer. What we are doing now is looking at our performance
information, looking at priority areas, identifying where we
can find additional savings, and with that, the effort for the
2014 budget formulation will become, you know, more fulsome
once we get the guidance from OMB.
Mr. Burgess. OK. Well, Ms. Schakowsky correctly pointed out
how the Pentagon is actively engaged in what it will have to do
to deal with sequestration and are there ways to avoid it. We
don't hear much out of HHS, and you have got the same sword of
Damocles hanging over your head as the Department of Defense.
Let me just ask you this. Going back to the Affordable Care
Act, and I know you don't want to think about the Supreme
Court, but you have a Medicaid payment rate. In fact, there was
a story out today on Politico Probe about the Medicaid payment
rate which was just finalized, and it is going to pay Medicaid
at the higher rate as authorized by Medicare. Are you prepared
if that goes away July 1st? Are you prepared to step up to the
plate to do something as far as provider payments in Medicaid
or is that just tough luck for the docs?
Mr. Cochran. For Medicaid, you mean with respect to the
State-federal share?
Mr. Burgess. No, I am talking about, there was an enhanced
payment rate in Medicaid up to the level--in primary care up to
the level of as reimbursed by Medicare currently so that there
wasn't that discrepancy in the payment rates between Medicare
and Medicaid. You guys are going to take are of the docs if
this thing goes away?
Mr. Cochran. Well, the emphasis for CMS as well as for the
Department is to implement what is now current law and to carry
out the provisions of the Affordable Care Act.
Mr. Burgess. You have told me that before. You know, your
authority to pay providers under Medicare and Medicaid may
evaporate July 1st, according to some AP reports that were out
last week. You have got to be having some contingency plans on
what do you do to keep the Nation's doctors seeing your
Medicare patients after July 1st in the absence of the
Affordable Care Act. You just have to.
Mr. Cochran. The emphasis of the Department and of CMS is
carrying out current law.
Mr. Burgess. This is the equivalent of taking the Fifth on
this issue. You have to be preparing because, I mean, again, I
didn't make up this AP report. It bothered me when I saw it as
well. I think we should be doing some contingency planning at
the committee level. We, after all, are the committee of
jurisdiction over these programs but I cannot believe that your
agency, that Secretary Sebelius and the Administrator at CMS
are not sitting down and at least looking at some black and
white numbers of what do we do to take care of our docs if they
Affordable Care Act vanishes in the morning dew.
Mr. Stearns. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Burgess. May the gentleman provide us a response? You
have got to be doing some contingency planning.
Mr. Cochran. The focus is on implementing what is current
law, and at CMS, analysis that we are doing related to the Act
has to do with----
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Chairman, I am not going to get an answer
but what I would like to suggest is that this committee request
respectfully from the agency information regarding this,
because it is important. If every doctor doesn't get a paycheck
July 1st, we are going to be in a hell of a shape. Perhaps we
could request meeting notes, emails. There is bound to have
been some discussions that have gone on at CMS about what
happens the day after the Affordable Care Act is--if the
Supreme Court says it is unconstitutional.
Mr. Stearns. I think that the gentleman is correct. I think
the committee can formally request from you what actions your
agency intends to take in the event of deferral of budget money
because of sequestration, the tools you are going to use. I
think that is a reasonable request in the event this occurs. I
think your agency should get back to us, as Dr. Burgess pointed
out, with some chronology of things and tools you are going to
do, because for you to continue to say we are just going to
implement Obamacare, it is like he said, you are taking the
Fifth, and I think there is a point where Congress oversight,
our responsibility under the Constitution, we have a right to
ask this and ask what you are going to do. That is what I am
requesting formally.
We are going to wrap up this hearing. I have the
opportunity to give some closing comments. You mentioned, Mr.
Cochran, under Obamacare that Obamacare provides additional
funding to fight waste, fraud and abuse in Medicare and
Medicaid, I believe, but it is also true that there remains
billions of dollars to be saved immediately only if Health and
Human Services would simply implement all of the GAO's
outstanding recommendations that were in Mr. Cosgrove's opening
statement, that are in his written statement that he gave us.
So I think before Health and Human Services goes around asking
for more money in order to cut waste, fraud, and abuse, we
should start with the savings that the GAO has presented here,
clearly, abundantly as pointed out, and obviously, in our
opinion, and I think it appears to be from the GAO, you have
not implemented and responded to those recommendations and you
in fact pointed out one of them that you are going to totally
disregard in dealing with the bonus program.
So that is the closing statement, and I thank the witnesses
for the hearing. We want to put in by unanimous consent this
little graph that we put on the slide. Without objection?
Ms. Schakowsky. Without objection.
Mr. Stearns. So ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Stearns. And in conclusion, I would like to thank the
witnesses and members that participated in today's hearing. I
remind members that they have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record, and I ask that the witnesses all
agree to respond promptly to these questions.
With that, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:20 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. John D. Dingell

Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this important hearing
today. The Department of Health and Human Services is the
agency that ensures the health and well being of our nation's
citizens. If we do not have a healthy society as our base to
build off of, nothing else really matters. If we have a sickly
workforce, all the jobs bills in the world won't make a
difference. This is why we have and will continue to fund this
agency the best we can.
The Department of Health and Human Services is responsible
for implementing the Affordable Care Act. An Act that, if taken
away, will take away health insurance from 33 million
Americans. I realize these are difficult times and difficult
decisions have to be made, but the propositions my friends on
the other side of the aisle are putting forth are far from
solutions, they are not even options. Mr. Ryan's budget, for
all intents and purposes, gets rid of Medicare and Medicaid as
we know it. I fail to understand how cutting programs that
provide health care for those who need it most will save us
money in the long run. Foresight does not seem to be a gift
that the Republicans who drafted this budget have.
HHS is clearly striving to streamline their budget and save
taxpayer dollars. They are working hard to implement
recommendations from GAO reports that will achieve savings and
reduce Medicare fraud. And HHS is succeeding. Just last week
the Medicare Fraud Strike Force took down over 100 individuals
responsible for $452 million in false billing practices.
Protecting and improving the public's health are vital
goals of HHS and I know they work hard to meet these goals
while using taxpayer dollars wisely. It would not be wise for
Congress to wantonly disregard their important mission by
indiscriminately cutting funding.
----------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


