- THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 4: H.R., THE JOBS AND ENERGY PERMITTING ACT OF 2011

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 4: H.R. ------, THE JOBS AND ENERGY
PERMITTING ACT OF 2011

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

----------

APRIL 13, 2011

----------

Serial No. 112-37

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 4: H.R. ------, THE JOBS AND
ENERGY PERMITTING ACT OF 2011

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 13, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-37

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-886 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ANNA G. ESHOO, California
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
Vice Chair                         GENE GREEN, Texas
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JIM MATHESON, Utah
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              Islands
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JAY INSLEE, Washington
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  JIM MATHESON, Utah
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             GENE GREEN, Texas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   LOIS CAPPS, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio)
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Cory Gardner, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Colorado, opening statement....................................     2
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     4
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     6
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     6
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     7
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................   479
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, prepared statement......................................   480

Witnesses

Lisa Murkowski, a United States Senator from the State of Alaska.     9
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Mark Begich, a United States Senator from the State of Alaska....    11
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Don Young, a Representative in Congress from the State of Alaska.    13
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Dan Sullivan, Commissioner, Department of Natural Resources,
State of Alaska................................................    19
Prepared statement...........................................    22
David Lawrence, Executive Vice President, Exploration and
Commercial Development, Shell..................................    49
Prepared statement...........................................    51
Answers to submitted questions...............................   484
Rosemary Ahtuangaruak, former Mayor, Nuiqsuit, Alaska............    92
Prepared statement...........................................    94
Richard K. Glenn, Executive Vice President, Lands and Natural
Resources, Arctice Slope Regional Corporation..................   172
Prepared statement...........................................   174
Scott Goldsmith, Professor of Economics, Institute for Social and
Economic Research, University of Alaska Anchorage..............   177
Prepared statement...........................................   179
Erik Grafe, Staff Attorney, Earthjustice.........................   386
Prepared statement...........................................   388
Robert J. Meyers, Senior Counsel, Crowell & Moring...............   425
Prepared statement...........................................   427

Submitted Material

Letters, dated April 12, 2011, from the County of Santa Barbara
Board of Supervisors to Mrs. Capps, Mr. Whitfield and Mr. Rush.   454
Letter, dated April 8, 2011, from Thomas J. Barrett, President,
Alyeska Pipeline Service Company, to subcommittee leadership,
submitted by Mr. Scalise.......................................   469
Rule XI letter, dated April 13, 2011, from Minority Members to
Mr. Whitfield..................................................   476
Discussion draft, H.R. --------, a Bill to amend the Clean Air
Act regarding air pollution from Outer Continental Shelf
activities.....................................................   481

THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 4: H.R. ------, THE JOBS AND
ENERGY PERMITTING ACT OF 2011

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 13, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed
Whitfield (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Shimkus,
Walden, Terry, Burgess, Scalise, McMorris Rodgers, Olson,
McKinley, Gardner, Pompeo, Griffith, Barton, Rush, Inslee,
Green, Capps, Gonzalez, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Gary Andres, Staff Director; Charlotte
Baker, Press Secretary; Anita Bradley, Senior Policy Advisor to
Chairman Emeritus; Maryam Brown, Chief Counsel, Energy and
Power; Garrett Golding, Legal Analyst, Energy; Cory Hicks,
Policy Coordinator, Energy and Power; Ben Lieberman, Counsel,
Energy and Power; Katie Novaria, Legislative Clerk; Phil
Barnett, Staff Director; Alison Cassady, Senior Professional
Staff Member; Greg Dotson, Energy and Environment Staff
Director; Caitlin Haberman, Policy Analyst; and Alexandra
Teitz, Senior Counsel, Environment and Energy.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. It is 10 o'clock and I am going to call this
hearing to order. This is our fourth in a series of hearings on
our American Energy Initiative, and that initiative is designed
to explore obstacles to helping America become independent on
its energy needs, both for transportation and also relating to
the production of electricity. Our goal is try to find and
locate and identify obstacles to that independence and then try
to take actions to deal with it.
In addition to identifying obstacles, we are also trying to
be proactive in ways to make it easier for production of
domestic resources. Today, this hearing focuses on one part of
this initiative, and that is the Jobs and Energy Permitting Act
of 2011, which has been released in the form of a discussion
draft by the gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Gardner.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
I would just say that this came about because we identified
a problem off the coast of Alaska in which a company trying to
do exploration has been involved in a process that has taken
over 5 years to obtain a permit. And that was precisely the
purpose of our hearings on American Energy Initiative is to, as
I said, locate those obstacles, identify those obstacles, and
then try to deal with it.
So at this time I would like to yield to the gentleman from
Colorado for a more thorough explanation of his discussion
draft.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

The hearing is called to order. This is our 4th in a series
of hearings on the American Energy Initiative, which seeks to
comprehensively address high gasoline prices and other energy
challenges facing the nation. Today's hearing focuses on one
part of the American Energy Initiative, the ``Jobs and Energy
Permitting Act of 2011,'' which has been released in the form
of a discussion draft by the gentleman from Colorado, Mr.
Gardner.
The overall goal of the American Energy Initiative is to
best utilize all the tools available to us to address our
energy challenges. First and foremost, that means increasing
production of domestic energy, and the subject of the Jobs and
Energy Permitting Act is the state with far and away the
greatest untapped domestic oil potential--Alaska. The estimates
of available oil there are very promising. In fact, it could
replace ALL of our imports from Saudi Arabia.
But the federal red tape preventing that potential from
being realized poses a daunting challenge. The discussion draft
seeks to streamline the red tape and bring that oil online in
the years ahead. That it has taken one energy producer over 5
years to get a Clean Air Permit in the OCS is unprecedented,
even for EPA.
The benefits of accessing Alaskan oil would be substantial.
More Alaskan oil would mean lower future prices at the pump as
well as reduced reliance on imports from unstable and
unfriendly countries. That alone is ample reason to move
forward, but increased Alaskan production would have the added
benefit of creating tens of thousands of well paying energy
industry jobs. It would also provide billions in federal,
state, and local revenues--and do so without raising taxes.
Expanded domestic oil production is strongly supported by
the American people, but as we will learn, it is even more
strongly supported by the Alaskan people, including those who
live in the North Slope closest to where most of the new
production would occur. We ought to listen to the Alaskan
people, rather than lecture to them.
Alaskans care about the environment, and they will insist
that energy production leave as light a footprint on their
state as is possible.
The state of Alaska wants to make a major contribution to
solving the energy problems the nation faces, and the Jobs and
Energy Permitting Act of 2011 ensures that they are not
prevented from doing so.
I yield the balance of my time to Mr. Gardner.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CORY GARDNER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the
hearing today. I look forward to working with you and other
members of the committee. And thank you to the witnesses that
will be testifying today.
I come from an energy-producing State and I have had the
privilege of collaborating with many colleagues from other such
States in a project that are calling the American Energy
Initiative. Of course, there are significant regional
differences. The oil and gas industry in the Rockies faces
different technical, economic, and legal challenges than oil
and gas in the Gulf of Mexico or elsewhere. And coal production
in Colorado and other Western States has both similarities and
differences with our Appalachian counterparts.
But whichever energy-producing State we come from, one
thing that we all having in common is that the Federal
Government is holding us back from meeting our potential to
produce more domestic energy. Changing that is going to be a
big part of the American Energy Initiative.
This is our fourth multi-day hearing on the American Energy
Initiative and today we are going to focus on offshore oil and
gas production and especially streamlining the process of
offshore permitting. These impediments have already delayed
activities in the Beaufort Sea off of Alaska's North Slope
where exploration has yet to even begin on leases that were
signed over 5 years ago. The Jobs and Energy Permitting Act of
2011 discussion draft seeks to address current problems in
EPA's offshore permitting requirements.
Offshore Alaska holds tremendous potential but not if we
allow the status quo to continue. Production in the arctic OCS
could provide a million barrels of oil a day, comparable to
what we currently get from Saudi Arabia. But unlike Saudi
Arabia, this domestic production is blocked by a convoluted
permitting system in place that is difficult, if not
impossible, to navigate. The fact that the owner of the leases
had already secured something like 35 permits but could not
start drilling because it could not get the 36th would be funny
if not for the adverse consequences in lost domestic energy and
lost jobs.
Keep in mind we are not talking about an area the Federal
Government has placed off-limits to energy leasing, of which
there are far too many. We are talking about an area that was
already leased but for which the lease is essentially being
nullified with red tape. That needs to change.
The current anti-domestic-energy philosophy is not what the
American people want. No matter how many times President Obama
insists that America doesn't have enough domestic oil to make
any difference, the public isn't buying it. They want our oil
supplies unlocked and understand full well the benefits of
doing so. They see the impact that production has in their
communities in the jobs it brings. This bill alone has the
potential to create 40,000 to 50,000 jobs annually and $75
billion in payroll. And we are not just talking about jobs and
income in Alaska. Increased oil production in Alaska will
result in jobs across the United States.
One thing I can attest to is that a majority of Coloradans
support increased energy production in the State. Yes, we
expect strong environmental safeguards, but we don't want those
safeguards to be exploited by activists into an excuse to shut
the energy industry down.
Coloradans are proud to live in a State that produces
energy for the rest of the Nation and recognizes the benefits
in terms of high-paying jobs, as well as state and local
revenues. And as we will soon here, that sentiment is true of
native Alaskans as it is of native Coloradans. In fact, there
are very few elected officials from Alaska who support the
existing constraints on energy production there.
We have a great panel, including some who came from very
far away to be here and who booked their flights in the midst
of a potential government shutdown. So we really, truly
appreciate your time to be here today. And I look forward to
learning more about Alaska's energy situation and what we in
Congress can do to improve it. Thank you very much for the
opportunity to hear this bill today and for your work and
testimony today.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Gardner. At this time, Mr.
Rush, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to
thank all of the guests who are going to be with us today.
Mr. Chairman, today we hear testimony regarding the
discussion draft of the so-called Jobs and Energy Permitting
Act of 2011. This will amend Section 328 of the Clean Air Act
that addresses air pollution from Outer Continental Shelf
drilling activities. While I have some reservations about the
bill as written, my biggest concern with today's hearing is
that we will not have the opportunity to hear from
representatives from the Environmental Protection Agency. As I
am told, they were not given sufficient advanced notice in
order to appear before us today. And I find it very troubling
that we are here to discuss amending sections of the Clean Air
Act without the benefit of having EPA's expertise to help guide
and inform our decision.
As you know, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Waxman and I
wrote you a letter and Chairman Upton on Friday asking you to
postpone this hearing until we could have the appropriate
representatives from EPA to testify before us. And I am surely
disappointed that this reasonable request could not be met
since this bill would make significant changes to the Clean Air
Act, rules that EPA is in charge of implementing. I only hope
that as this discussion draft moves through the legislative
process that we will get a chance to hear from EPA directly at
any future hearing scheduled on this bill in order to help
inform the final product.
As far as the discussion draft itself is concerned, one of
my main concerns deals with expediting the permitting process,
which may limit the opportunities for review as well as public
input. While I am not necessarily against streamlining the
permitting process in general, I want to make sure that we are
giving local communities adequate time to comment on proposed
permits before they are enacted.
Another concern deals with shifting the judicial review
away from the Environmental Appeals Board, which has almost 20
years of experience in the highly technical area of preventing
of significant deterioration or PDS permits that moving the
process to D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals, which lacks any of
this technical expertise. Requiring local stakeholders to
travel all the way to Washington, D.C., in order to raise
concerns about local air quality impacts could prove to be
overly costly and also burdensome if not outright impossible
for less well-to-do communities.
Finally, I look forward to hearing more discussion
regarding the application of emissions control requirements
under the new Convention of Significant Deterioration, CSD
program of the Clean Air Act. Other than the proposed
legislation, support vessels such as ice riggers and oil spill
response vessels, which may contribute a majority of the air
pollution associated with drilling activities, would not be
subject to best available control technology emission reduction
requirements or other requirements adopted under the CSD
program. I would like a better understanding of how this would
impact air quality for our local communities.
So I look forward to today's hearing and I look forward to
hearing all of our witnesses today in order to get a better
understanding of how this proposed legislation would impact
local stakeholders, as well as how it would benefit oil and gas
companies conducting the drilling in the Outer Continental
Shelf. Mr. Chairman, I yield the balance of my time to the
ranking member if he wants my time and his time as well. If
anybody else is wanting some time? OK. I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Rush, I would just make one comment. We
did invite EPA representatives to attend today's hearing and
Friday's hearing. They have refused to come. I believe they
have a lot of qualified people over there and maybe just
because Gina McCarthy was unable to come, I know they have
enough qualified people to come and attend these hearings. We,
as you know, have a full schedule of hearings. We intend to
move a lot of legislation, and we are not going to allow EPA to
dictate our schedule.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from----
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, if I may respond?
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Rush. I think that it is reasonable that the EPA should
be given adequate notice. Now, I just don't think that we can
continue just to barrel through this without EPA given adequate
notice and I think that is reasonable.
Mr. Whitfield. I think we did give them adequate notice and
hopefully they will come to our next hearing.
At this time I will recognize the gentleman from Texas for
5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. I thank the gentleman. You know, I don't think
it takes a rocket scientist to understand we are reviewing a
lot of things that the EPA is involved in, with all due respect
to my good friend Mr. Rush. It is a 3-minute cab ride from the
EPA building. It is a 10-second phone call. And if they don't
know that they are going to be called to testify before this
subcommittee and this full committee numerous times in the next
2 years, they need to take an IQ test because they are going to
be called. And if Mr. Waxman and Mr. Rush needs to let them
know that, if they don't understand what Mr. Whitfield and Mr.
Upton are saying, maybe we are not saying it in the right way
or the right tone, but it is no surprise that we are going to
be asking the EPA to come and justify or at least give their
comments on some of the things that we are doing.
Well, I am very glad to see my good friend Mr. Young. We
have a tremendous expert here in Congress and a former chairman
of two committees and we know he is an expert on Alaska. And
after he does whatever he does he will be back.
Mr. Rush. He better hurry up because we have got a lot of
business to take care of.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Barton. This hearing, Mr. Chairman, is going to be a
revelation to the country, I believe, when they find out what
the EPA has not done up in Alaska. We have tremendous oil and
gas potential in the Outer Continental Shelf. And under the
Clean Air Act, the EPA, unlike the Gulf of Mexico, has the
right to give some of these permits. When you hear some of the
representatives from some of the industry testify later in
today, I think panel members are going to be stunned that the
reason these permits haven't been given is because they can't
decide whether it is a stationary source or a mobile source
because it is a drilling ship, not a drilling platform. They
can't decide where to measure air quality, whether they measure
it at the side of the ship, onshore, or someplace in between.
It is the most bureaucratic gobbledygook I have ever
encountered. You know, there is absolutely no question that the
EPA has the authority but just because you have the authority
doesn't give you the opportunity just to sit on your hands and
think of one bureaucratic excuse after another to not make a
decision. And that is, I believe, what we are going to find
today.
We need to have a responsible drilling program. The
President himself with respect to this particular area of our
country stated in his blueprint for secure energy future on
March the 30th that the administration remains committed to
facilitating development in this region, which will require
consideration across the Federal Government. He went on to
state that a cross-agency team would be created to coordinate
and facilitate efficient offshore permitting.
So I am going to yield the balance of my time to Mr.
Shimkus. But this hearing is one that we really need to pay
attention to because of the huge potential we have for domestic
oil and gas production in the OCS off the coast of Alaska.
And with that I yield the balance of my time to Mr.
Shimkus.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Barton.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

America is one of the few countries that sees its natural
resources as a hindrance, not as a national advantage. We have
said this numerous times, and as gas prices go up, we have to
make sure we fully use our natural resources.
I know about Alaska and I know about jobs. My late father-
in-law worked on the Alaskan pipeline. He was a microwave
communication engineer. He flew the pipeline. He was one of
many people who came up from the lower 48 to get good-paying
jobs and raised a family of three. So fossil fuel energy
development is job creation in an economy that needs jobs.
And I will end on this. There are over 17,000 employees in
the Environmental Protection Agency. Seventeen thousand.
Surely, one of them could have come to the hearing, I would
imagine. Maybe one could have come to the hearing and all of
the other hearings we are going to be holding in the future.
Mr. Rush. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Shimkus. I would be happy to yield.
Mr. Rush. I understand that the janitor is available. And
he said----
Mr. Shimkus. Well, for some of us maybe the janitor would
give better testimony than some of the career bureaucrats they
have in the EPA. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman from California, Mr. Waxman,
is recognized for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Mr. Chairman, today's hearing examines
legislation to amend the Clean Air Act provisions that protect
air quality when offshore oil and gas are developed. I hope we
can reach agreement on this legislation but I cannot support it
in its current form.
This legislation is being considered at the behest of a
single company in response to two permit applications in
Alaska, yet would apply broadly to the East and West Coast and
part of the coast of Florida. Here, Shell has identified an
area where the statute is ambiguous. As a result, permits are
delayed while EPA, the stakeholders, and the Environmental
Appeals Board work to resolve these issues. I believe it would
be appropriate for this committee to provide clarity on these
matters. I hope we can work together to develop legislative
language that would resolve those issues in an appropriate and
targeted manner.
But as we provide clarity, we must also realize these are
large industrial facilities located off-coast where people live
and in waters where people fish and whale. Shell's Discover
operation emits more pollution than a 1,000-megawatt natural
gas power plant and almost as much as a new oil refinery. Our
goal should be to resolve this issue without sacrificing air
quality. Shell has also raised concerns about the length of
time of the permitting process. This is also an area where it
is critical to strike the proper balance.
The Clean Air Act has always provided for extensive and
open stakeholder input to EPA's decision making. This is an
essential principle of the law. It ensures that the government
is responsible to citizens who want clean air and to industry,
which wants to conduct activities that emit air pollution.
While Shell has raised legitimate concerns about the permit
process, the language before us goes too far. It eliminates the
opportunity for any administrative review of EPA decisions
except for a narrow exception that would apply only to the
permit application. It moves all judicial appeals from the
regional circuit courts of appeals to the D.C. circuit, and it
requires EPA to issue final permits in 6 months, which will
limit the time for public comment and may preclude the EPA from
developing the record necessary to support its final decisions
in court.
One effect of these changes would be to make it much more
difficult for local citizens who are directly affected by air
pollution from a project to raise concerns requiring Alaskans
to fly to Washington, D.C. To challenge a permit decision is a
real burden. Eliminating administrative reviews creates an
additional hurdle for citizens. Administrative reviews are
faster, less formal, don't impose fees, don't require a lawyer,
and are often conducted by videoconferencing. They also do not
allow participants to recover attorney's fees.
I am also concerned about how this proposal will affect
California and other States. In California, EPA has delegated
the authority to issue permits for offshore oil and gas
activities to local air pollution control agencies. The changes
in this bill would override state and local interpretations,
laws, and regulations that California has adopted to help meet
its severe air pollution problems. It would also remove all
appeals of California's permits from state hearing boards and
state courts to the D.C. circuit. This is a significant
infringement of local control over local air pollution matters.
I want to close with a comment on process. I am
disappointed that EPA is not present to testify today. If we
are going to reach consensus, we are going to need the input of
the Agency experts, as well as witnesses from California and
other affected areas. Chairman Whitfield has today rejected our
request. His position appears to us that it is reasonable to
give the Agency just a few days' notice and expect EPA to be
able to send a witness to the hearing today. I understand Gina
McCarthy is testifying today on a legislative matter before
another committee. That is not fair. That is not how we treated
administration witnesses in prior Congresses. For that reason,
the Democrats on the committee are invoking our rights under
Rule 11 to request a minority day of hearings. I believe
scheduling our requested hearing will help the committee
produce balanced legislation that achieves its stated goal and
has a chance of enactment. I look forward to what the witnesses
have to say. And we will withdraw that petition, Mr. Chairman.
You indicated you will have EPA at other hearings. I didn't
know if you meant other hearings on this bill or other hearings
on other bills. But on this bill we do want EPA, we do want
other witnesses to be able to testify, and we are giving you
that Rule 11.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Waxman. At this time I would
like to introduce the first panel.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, if I might before we hear the first
panel, Mr. Shimkus has just shared with me an email that he
received. The husband of our former member Jane Harman, Sidney,
passed a few moments ago earlier and I was just wanting to
inform all the members of the subcommittee and also inviting
them to keep the Harman family in their prayers.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Rush, and thank you, Mr.
Shimkus, for letting us know about that.
We are delighted to have these elected representatives on
our first panel. They really do not need any introduction but
Representative Don Young from the State of Alaska, Senator Lisa
Murkowski from the State of Alaska, and Senator Mark Begich
from the State of Alaska. We know that that State is certainly
impacted by decisions or lack of decisions made by EPA on air
quality permits.
And at this time, Mr. Young, I would like to recognize you
for 5 minutes for your opening statement.
Mr. Young. Mr. Chairman, if I could, I would like to go
down the seniority rule. I am the senior member but we do have
two Senators here and they have lots of things to do on the
other side. So at this time I would like to recognize Senator
Murkowski, the senior Senator from that side, and I would yield
to her and then I will take my time when she finishes.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, Mr. Young, you are being so kind
today, which we appreciate.
Mr. Young. If you take a look at my eyes, you know I am
being kind.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, Senator Murkowski, I will recognize
you for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI, A UNITED STATES SENATOR FROM
THE STATE OF ALASKA; HON. MARK BEGICH, A UNITED STATES SENATOR
FROM THE STATE OF ALASKA; AND HON. DON YOUNG, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ALASKA

STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI

Ms. Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank my
colleague, Congressman Young. We are not going to suggest how
many fights you get in on behalf of the State of Alaska, but
you are playing the role here today.
Mr. Whitfield. Do you have your microphone on, Senator?
Ms. Murkowski. Maybe I just need it a little bit closer. Is
that better? Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and ladies and gentleman,
thank you for your attention to this issue this morning. The
fact that you have the full Alaska delegation represented here
today, Republicans, Democrats, House and Senate together to
testify on this issue I think speaks to the significance and
the importance of this to those of us in Alaska.
Congressman Young has recognized me as the senior Senator,
but I am also the ranking member of the Senate Committee on
Energy and Natural Resources, as well as the ranking member on
the Appropriations Subcommittee on Interior and the
Environment. So we have been paying, of course, particular
attention to this issue on the Senate side.
You are going to hear some good testimony here today. But I
think one of the most critical pieces that you will hear is the
fact that America's most critical piece of infrastructure, the
Trans-Alaska Pipeline, is now less than 1/3 full. The
tremendous resources that are beneath Alaska's OCS could help
us fill up that pipeline, slash America's dependence on foreign
oil, create new jobs, and generate new government revenues at a
time when we are all seeking those. And yet despite these much-
needed benefits, even exploration has been blocked because of
the EPA's continued inability--or perhaps simple
unwillingness--to issue valid air permits.
You are going to hear the specifics of EPA's failure to
comply with both the intent of the Clean Air Act and with
Congress' directive in the fiscal year 2010 Interior and EPA
Appropriations bills. And I will simply say right at the outset
it doesn't really matter what your opinion is about offshore
oil or gas development, in the Arctic or elsewhere, it is
absolutely indefensible--indefensible--for a permit application
to take 6 years--6 years--when the EPA Administrator has
testified, as she did in my Appropriations subcommittee, that
there is no anticipated human health risk that is at issue. She
has stated full out there is no human health risk here. So it
has been 6 years and counting, Mr. Chairman, despite no
anticipated risk.
I would also suggest to the members of this committee that
it is likewise indefensible to allow the EPA's failure to serve
as a de facto veto over the national energy security interests
of the Outer Continental Shelf. The OCS Lands Act assigns the
Interior Department with the mission of the expeditious
development of energy resources--and those resources belong to
the American people, not to any corporation and certainly not
any federal agency. It cannot be the EPA's decision, nor their
Environmental Appeals Board's decision, that determines whether
Americans benefit from their holdings in the OCS.
The EPA's core competencies are supposed to involve both an
understanding of human health impacts and a command of air
quality permitting regimes so that a regulated operation--be it
a power plant, a factory, a drilling rig--can have a level of
reasonable expectation about the timing of their application,
especially when there is no human health risk at issue.
Instead, we are witnessing core incompetency. The air
permitting process has been confused and really taken advantage
of by those who have found the Clean Air Act to be less of an
air quality statute and more of a hidden, blunt instrument that
can be used to stop energy exploration.
This is no longer a matter of understanding the process
better or taking even greater steps to ensure air quality
concerns are addressed. If the EAB cannot accept a permit that
took this long and this much accommodation to issue, then EAB
has no place in the process. And likewise, if the EPA can't
demonstrate some competency, especially as congressional urging
and intent becomes more clear, then EPA should not expect to
keep its authority for long.
Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, I am grateful for
the opportunity to testify to you, with you this morning. I do
note the discussion going back and forth about the invitation
to EPA to testify. I think it is an important issue and that
EPA should be involved and I think clearly an invitation to
come and sit before you and provide that information is
important. I will remind you, however, that given the very busy
schedule that we have on the other side, Senator Begich and I
were able to clear the decks, but I think just about a day-and-
a-half notice. This is important to us. I would think that the
EPA would think it is important to them as well. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Murkowski follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Lisa Murkowski

Chairman Upton, Ranking Member Waxman, and distinguished
members of the Committee, thank you for the invitation to
testify today about outer Continental Shelf air quality issues.
As the Ranking Member of the Senate Committee on Energy and
Natural Resources, the Ranking Member of the Appropriations
Subcommittee on Interior and the Environment, and above all the
Senior Senator for the State of Alaska, my interest in this
issue could not be greater.
You are all by now aware that one of America's most
critical pieces of infrastructure, the Trans Alaska Pipeline,
is now less than one-third full. The tremendous resources
beneath Alaska's OCS could help refill that pipeline, slash
America's dependence on foreign oil, create new jobs, and
generate new government revenues. Yet despite these much-needed
benefits, even exploration has been blocked because of the
Environmental Protection Agency's continued inability - or
simple unwillingness - to issue valid air permits.
My fellow witnesses will testify to the specifics of EPA's
failure to comply with both the intent of the Clean Air Act and
with Congress' directive in the Fiscal Year 2010 Interior and
EPA Appropriations bill. I will simply say at the outset that
no matter what anyone's opinion is about offshore oil and gas
development, in the Arctic or elsewhere, it is indefensible for
a permit application to take six years when the EPA
Administrator has testified, as she did in my Appropriations
subcommittee, that there is no anticipated human health risk at
issue. That's six years and counting, Mr. Chairman, despite no
anticipated risk.
I would also suggest to the members of this committee that
it is likewise indefensible to allow the EPA's failures to
serve as a de-facto veto over the national energy security
interests of the outer Continental Shelf. The Outer Continental
Shelf Lands Act assigns the Interior Department with the
mission of the expeditious development of energy resources -
and those resources belong to the American people, not any
corporation and certainly not any federal agency. It cannot be
the EPA's decision, nor their Environmental Appeals Board's
decision, that determines whether Americans benefit from their
holdings in the OCS.
The EPA's core competencies are supposed to involve both an
understanding of human health impacts and a command of air
quality permitting regimes so that a regulated operation - be
it a power plant, a factory, or a drilling rig - can have a
level of reasonable expectation about the timing of their
application, especially when there's no human health risk at
issue. Instead, we're witnessing core incompetency. The air
permitting process has been confused and really taken advantage
of by those who have found the Clean Air Act to be less of an
air quality statute and more of a hidden, blunt instrument that
can be used to stop energy exploration.
This is no longer a matter of understanding the process
better or taking even greater steps to ensure air quality
concerns are addressed. If the EAB cannot accept a permit that
took this long and this much accommodation to issue, EAB has no
place in the process. And likewise, if the EPA cannot
demonstrate some competency, especially as Congressional urging
and intent becomes more clear, then EPA should not expect to
keep its authority for long.
Mr. Chairman and members of this committee, I am grateful
for the opportunity to testify before you. Chairman Upton, I
thank you for your engagement on this important issue. This is
an area where Congress can act - and I believe must act - to
considerably improve our nation's energy policy.

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Senator Murkowski. Senator
Begich, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. MARK BEGICH

Mr. Begich. Thank you very much, Chairman Whitfield, and
Ranking Member Rush, and the members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for the opportunity to cross the Capitol to testify today
and congratulations on pursuing the American Energy Initiative.
As our economy regains steam from the worst economic crisis
since the Great Depression, developing America's energy
resources for Americans and by Americans is a vital part of our
recovery. About a month ago, President Obama proposed
essentially that when he called for an increased domestic oil
and gas development and cutting foreign oil imports by a third
by 2025. The President even said his administration was
``looking at potential new developments in Alaska both onshore
and offshore.'' We Alaskans were glad to hear the President use
the word ``Alaska.'' As American's energy storehouse for better
than a quarter of a century, we are anxious to continue
supplying our Nation a stable source of energy, just as we have
done since the oil starting to flow through the Trans-Alaska
Pipeline in 1977.
Simply put, Alaska has enormous untapped oil and gas
reserves, an estimated 40 to 60 billion barrels of oil on state
and federal lands and waters. That is approaching a decade's
worth of U.S. consumption. And we also hold the Nation's
largest conventional natural gas reserves, more than 100
trillion cubic feet of this clean-burning fuel. There is no way
you can do an energy plan without Alaska being a part of it for
our economic security and our national security.
As is always the case, it is the details that matter. While
we welcome the President's interest in increased energy
development in our State, his administration--and those which
preceded him--have enacted roadblocks to this laudable goal. I
know the hearing today focuses on offshore activity, but the
problem is widespread. In the National Petroleum Reserve-
Alaska, ConocoPhillips has been working for years to secure a
permit to build a bridge into a petroleum reserve to develop
oil only to be stalled by the Army Corps of Engineers and EPA.
In the offshore, Shell has been working for 5 years and now
approaching 6 years, invested more than $3 billion for the
opportunity to drill exploratory wells in Alaska's Chukchi Sea.
They have gotten very close last year, but just when it
appeared the development had the green light a few weeks ago,
an internal EPA Environmental Appeals Board sent the air
quality permit back to the drawing board.
Mr. Chairman, I have to confess that I haven't studied your
bill closely. But I do endorse the call for a change. Business
as usual simply isn't working when it comes to increased oil
and gas development in my State. That is why I recently offered
two relevant proposals to change.
First, creation of a federal coordinator for the Arctic
OCS. This would be modeled after legislation the late Senator
Ted Stevens passed establishing a federal gas pipeline
coordinator. This office would have authority to work across
the agencies causing Alaska so much heartburn today--the EPA,
Army Corps of Engineers, and the Interior Department. The
federal OCS coordinator would work with the State of Alaska and
affected local governments to streamline development in the
Chukchi and Beaufort seas, which hold such promise for the
future of oil and gas development for our State and for this
country.
Second, I would suggest, along with my colleague Senator
Murkowski, that legislation to transfer the authority to
regulate air quality in OCS oil and gas development off Alaska
from EPA to the Interior Department, as is done in the Gulf of
Mexico. Your legislation appears to make the EPA process work
more like the Interior Department. Either way, we need to get
to a place where one agency is in charge, where the process is
the same across the country, and where people who invest time
and money get a result on a reasonable time frame.
Thank you for your efforts. As you see today, this is a
combined effort by our delegation that Alaska oil and gas
development is critical to our national energy portfolio, our
national security, and our economic security. So we are just
honored to be here. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Begich follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Mark Begich

Chairman Whitfield, ranking member Rush and members of the
subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to cross the Capitol to
testify today. And congratulations for pursuing the American
Energy Initiative.
As our economy regains steam from the worst economic crisis
since the Great Depression, developing America's energy
resources for Americans and by Americans is a vital part of our
recovery.
About a month ago, President Obama proposed essentially
that when he called for increased domestic oil and gas
development and cutting foreign oil imports by a third by 2025.
The President even said his administration is - quote -
"looking at potential new development in Alaska, both onshore
and offshore."
We Alaskans were glad to hear the President use the "A"
word: Alaska. As America's energy storehouse for better than a
quarter century, we are anxious to continue supplying our
nation a stable source of energy just as we have been doing
since oil starting flowing through the trans-Alaska pipeline in
1977.
Simply put, Alaska has enormous untapped oil and gas
reserves - an estimated 40 to 60 billion barrels of oil on
state and federal lands and waters. That's approaching a
decade's worth of U.S. consumption.
And we also hold the nation's largest conventional natural
gas reserves - more than 100 trillion cubic feet of this clean-
burning fuel.
As is always the case, it's the details that matter. While
we welcome the President's interest in increased energy
development in our state, his administration - and those which
preceded him - have enacted roadblocks to this laudable goal.
I know the hearing today focuses on offshore activity, but
the problem is widespread. In the National Petroleum Reserve-
Alaska, ConocoPhillips has been working for years to secure a
permit to build a bridge into a petroleum reserve to
development oil - only to be stalled by the Army Corps of
Engineers and EPA.
In the offshore, Shell has been working for five years and
invested more than $3 billion for the opportunity to drill
exploratory wells in Alaska's Chukchi Sea.
They got very close last year, but just when it appeared
the development had the green light a few weeks ago, an
internal EPA Environmental Appeals Board sent the air quality
permit back to the drawing board.
Mr. Chairman, I have to confess that I haven't studied your
bill closely. But I do endorse the call for a change.
Business as usual simply isn't working when it comes to
increased oil and gas development in my state.
That's why I recently offered two relevant proposals for
change.
First, creation of a federal coordinator for the Arctic
OCS. This would be modeled after legislation the late Senator
Ted Stevens passed establishing a federal gas pipeline
coordinator.
This office would have authority to work across the
agencies causing Alaska so much heartburn today - the EPA, Army
Corps of Engineers and Interior Department.
The federal OCS coordinator would work with the State of
Alaska and affected local governments to streamline development
in the Chukchi and Beaufort seas, which hold such promise for
future oil and gas development.
Second, I suggested legislation to transfer the authority
to regulate air quality in OCS oil and gas development off
Alaska from EPA to the Interior Department, as is done in the
Gulf of Mexico. Your legislation appears to make the EPA
process work like what Interior does now.
Either way, we need to get to a place where one agency is
in charge, where the process is the same across the country and
where people who invest time and money get a result on a
reasonable time frame.
Thank you for your efforts and as you see today, these are
ideas that almost all of our state can get behind.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this opportunity.

Mr. Whitfield. Senator Begich, thanks so much for your
testimony. Now, Mr. Young.

STATEMENT OF HON. DON YOUNG

Mr. Young. Mr. Chairman, much has been said in my statement
by the two Senators and I won't repeat it. I ask unanimous
consent to submit it for the record. Mr. Chairman, they both
put out the information. 5 years we have been waiting for a
permit. We did get a permit from EPA. Then the Appeals Board
turned it down. In the continuing resolution we passed earlier
on this year, we took away the authority of the Appeals Board
to do so. And I think that is important because we have gone
through this. And really it is all about a ship. And this ship
has put millions of dollars to make sure that they have clean
air. And the EPA finally declared that they did have clean air
and yet the Appeals Board, on an interest group, turned down
the permit, another 5 years.
But I want to go back to the concept of this Nation and
where we are today. I think you may have read the paper today
on the cost of fuel. And it will affect the economy. And by the
way, the people in Chicago is about 4.36 a gallon now. It will
be $5 by the 1st of July. Now, that does stifle this economy.
And some people say we have to get off of fossil fuel economy.
But the meantime I saw my President go down to Brazil and say
we are going to be your partners. We are going to buy your oil.
Now, that doesn't make sense to me. Never has made sense to me
when we spend billions of dollars to send money overseas,
taking jobs away from Americans and making us more dependent
upon foreign countries to run our economy. You can't do that.
We have a big budget battle going on right now. That budget
battle has really been caused by the lack of being able to
develop our fossil fuels. And by the way, don't buy this
concept there is any shortage of fossil fuels. If you read the
science, we have as much fossil fuels as most of the foreign
countries do, and especially in Alaska. We figure there is 27
billion barrels of oil in Chukchi alone, probably 10 billion in
Beaufort Sea. That is a tremendous amount of oil.
Now, I am not talking about Florida. I am not talking about
California, West Virginia, or any other State. I am talking
about Alaska alone with a pipeline right now is 1/3. Fort
Greely got shut down this last winter. It got shut down because
we had a small spill that was controlled by the way the line
was developed. And we were able to take and restart it.
And by the way, you talk about the EPA. That is an Agency
that has run amok. They arrived there in Alaska and tried to
tell the State that they were going to take control, that it
was their responsibility, and we could not start the pipeline
without their oK. If it had been stuck down 2 more days, it
would have frozen that pipeline. The oil would not flow. And
that is 12 percent of our economy today, our oil production
today in the United States. It was at one time 25 percent.
So I am suggesting your legislation is long overdue. You
know, the EPA is an agency right now that thinks that they can
thumb their nose at you--I didn't thumb my nose at you--and not
answer questions. They should be here. Now, I can't quite
understand that. Like you say 17,000 employees and they
couldn't--send a janitor down. I think it would be a good idea.
Because what they say--don't you even touch this. We are now
the authority. We are now the Government of the United States
and don't you even question us. This so-called oilfield is 70
miles offshore and we are really talking about a rig, a drill
ship, one ship which they put all the efforts into it to make
sure that it got clean air. And to have an agency say no,
national security doesn't count. We are worried about the
inhabitants, and by the way, the inhabitants, you are going to
hear testimony later from one of them.
But I communicate and I represent that whole State. There
are two Senators, one Congressman. And you will find out they
worked very hard--Shell has worked very hard with Point Barrow
and the others for committing in those areas and in fact they
have an agreement working together with the local communities.
Now, of course, you are going to have dissent. We know
that. Dissent usually fueled by outside interests. And we know
that, too. We will fight this battle. And by the way, I am the
only person in this room that had the pipeline built in 1973.
We passed that legislation out of Congress. Whatever we have to
do in this Congress, if we want energy independence, we have to
have that one provision I put in that bill, and that is a
provision there shall be no lawsuits by interest groups to stop
a project in the name of national security.
And we did that. We built that pipeline in 3 years. It is
one of the greatest wonders of human construction that has ever
been seen and has worked beautifully through earthquakes and
other activities. It can be done, but we have to get oil back
in that pipeline. And one way we can do it is through your
legislation. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Young follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Don Young

Chairman Whitfield and Ranking Member Rush, thank you for
holding this hearing and giving me this opportunity to testify.
Since 2005, companies have spent $4 billion dollars and
acquired 680 leases off the Arctic coast of Alaska but have
been unable to drill them, not because of safety or
environmental reasons, but due to the federal government's
inability or unwillingness to issue them.
But through all of this, the primary problem has been EPA's
inability to issue an adequate air permit for a drill ship that
would operate for a maximum of 120 days in an offshore area
approximately 70 miles from the closest humans.
The Federal government's inability to issue viable permits
to drill offshore Alaska is keeping resources and domestic jobs
from the American people.
EPA's failure has jeopardized tens of thousands of high-
paying jobs, and threatened the long-term viability of the
Trans Alaska Pipeline System and our Nation's energy security
during a time of high energy prices and unrest in many energy
producing countries.
USGS estimates that the Chukchi alone holds 27 billion
barrels of oil and 132 trillion cubic feet of gas. In
comparison, when Prudhoe Bay was discovered, there was only
expected to be 10 billion barrels. 16 billion barrels later,
Prudhoe Bay is still in development.
However, development opportunities on state lands are
rapidly decreasing, and the Trans Alaska Pipeline is running at
one-third capacity. At much lower throughputs, the pipeline
will not be able to operate safely or economically.
Recently, Alaska's Governor issued a goal of reaching 1
million barrels a day of throughput in TAPS. Without the
federal government's support, this will be hard to meet. The
Jobs and Energy Permitting Act represents a positive step
towards securing an American energy future, reaching the goals
of deficit reduction, and providing well-paying American jobs
here at home.

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Young. And I want to thank
all of you for taking time today. I know that you do have very
busy schedules and we appreciate your testifying on this
important subject matter.
Senator Begich, you made a comment which I certainly agree
with and that is that there should be one agency responsible
for issuing these permits. And I would ask Senator Murkowski,
do you agree with that or not?
Ms. Murkowski. I don't know that I would agree with that if
the agency is the EPA. The EPA has demonstrated a level--the
word that I used in my testimony was incompetency in this. When
you have the administrator of the EPA admit in open record
that, in fact, there is no human health risk and could not
defend the fact that it has taken over 5 years to issue an air
quality permit, then I would suggest to you that we need to
figure out a way that we have a process that works. Look to how
the process works down in the Gulf of Mexico where the
Department of Interior--through MMS or now BOEMRE--has worked
to facilitate it. They have figured it out. It is 45 days on
average to issue a permit there, 5 years plus by the EPA. So it
is not just making sure that there is one agency in charge but
that there is an agency that has a competency to issue these
permits.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, that is a good comment. I certainly
agree with that. And I find it interesting that we are in this
situation where we got Department of Interior issuing these
permits in the Gulf and EPA everywhere else on the Outer
Continental Shelf. And the fact that on the average it has
taken Department of Interior 45 days, we do need an expedite
process and I believe that they can make those decisions
certainly in a quicker way than 6 years.
One of the things that is disturbing me is that President
Obama talks a lot about energy independence and yet I get the
clear impression that his Cabinet officials, particularly the
EPA, are doing the direct opposite of what he is saying. He
talks a lot about green energy and we know that somewhere down
the road green energy is going to play a major role in
producing energy in America, but it is not there yet. And as
Mr. Young said, we have so much fossil fuel in this country
that this administration is doing everything possible to make
it more expensive to burn fossil fuel. Even the Secretary of
Energy made that comment. He said that gasoline prices should
be more like what they are in Europe. So do you get the sense
that EPA, with this administrator, is a serious obstacle to
America becoming independent on fuel issues? Yes, sir?
Mr. Begich. I would like to respond. I think there is a
disconnect from what the President says and what the agencies
are doing. I mean, you know, an example that we just gave on
the 5 years to get a permit, they are halfway through their
lease. So they have less than 5 years to perform on that lease.
So the economics of it now become even more difficult. And if
you think about the whole issue of are we going to become less
dependent on foreign oil of countries that are not our
friends--and there is plenty of them that we are buying from--
the only way you do that is you have to develop domestically.
You know, that is why I made the comments that I heard him say
``Alaska,'' which we are very happy he said it. The question is
will the agencies perform on that directive or that statement?
And so far that has not been the case, at least in my limited 2
years here in the Senate.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, Senator Murkowski?
Ms. Murkowski. Mr. Chairman, you ask a very pertinent, very
important question, and I would agree with my colleague that in
fact the agencies are acting as an impediment to how we truly
gain not only energy independence, but when we talk about
national security interest, it is so integrally tied and
related to energy.
Congressman Young has mentioned the rising price of gas at
the pump and all of our constituents are coming to us and
saying what can you do to decrease that price, to lower the
price? There is not a lot that we can do right here today to
bring it back down below $3 from where we are right now. But
there are some things that this President and this
administration can do to keep the prices from going up. We
might not be able to get them to go down, but let us keep them
from going up.
And what we are seeing right now with this level of agency
kind of pile-on if you will, it is keeping us from doing what
we need to do as a Nation to gain our own energy independence
through increased domestic production. And whether it is the
EPA regulations as they relate to emissions, whether it is the
failure to advance a permit for a bridge so that we can access
oil on the National Petroleum Reserve, these are agency
decisions that are cutting off our ability for energy
independence and raising the prices of energy to Americans all
over the country, not just in Alaska.
Mr. Whitfield. It is my understanding that this platform
out in the Beaufort Sea, if it started production, would be
producing something like 1 million barrels a day, is that
right?
Mr. Young. Beaufort Sea is not quite as much as Chukchi but
would probably be a million barrels a day. We were producing
2.2 million barrels at one time out of Prudhoe Bay.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Young. And that has that capacity.
Ms. Murkowski. And if I might just add, Mr. Chairman, we
have not given up on opening up ANWR, an incredible reservoir
just to the east of Prudhoe Bay. That, too, could yield a
million barrels a day. Now, think about what that means to us
in our economy and our jobs and our revenues into this country,
$153 billion that this country could benefit from.
Mr. Whitfield. Absolutely. Mr. Rush, you are recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I am kind
of bemused at the finger-pointing at the EPA for essentially
coupling the EPA's activities with the activities of the Obama
administration. I recall--and you can correct me if I am wrong
here--I think the current EPA administrator has been in office
for about 2 years. And as the Senators, who I really deeply
respect and Chairman Young who I deeply, deeply respect, they
both have indicated that this permitting process has been
delayed for about 5 years. So it seems as though the EPA under
the Bush Administration was the first one to delay these
permits. Is that true?
Mr. Young. I would suggest one thing. There is no
administration to blame for the EPA but the fact that Richard
Nixon created it. And he created a lot of other problems, too.
But the truth of the matter is is I am not laying this blame on
the President, because I think there is a disconnect with the
President and the EPA, but that is the creation of power that
has been generated over the years. You know, this is not the
first time I have done battle with the EPA. They have been
trying to insist on an arsenic quality in water on the Kenai
Peninsula where we put in a project because of the EPA 20 years
ago to meet the standard. And now they come back and say you
have got to do it again with no science behind it.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I do understand. I just want to
make sure that--you know, it seems as though there are some who
are trying to point their fingers----
Mr. Young. No, I am not.
Mr. Rush [continuing]. At the President and I don't think
that the President at this time is responsible for these
delays.
Now, let me just ask--either of you can answer this or all
of you can answer this--I understand the EPA did issue permits
but they were invalidated by the EAB. Can you tell the
committee the circumstances of why the EAB invalidated the
permits and whether or not you agree with those circumstances?
Or what were the particulars?
Ms. Murkowski. I think you will get some additional
testimony on this this afternoon just looking through the
witness list here. But I think the simple story is is that in
fact a permit was issued. The EAB then came in and determined
that the issuance of that permit was not supported because
there had been subsequent changes to the EPA requirements. So
in other words, you have been working on a process for a period
of years. You get that through the process, the permit is
issued, and then the EAB comes in and says well, in fact we
have changed the rules. We have changed the requirements. In
other words, we have moved the goalposts. And so this permit
that was issued is no longer a valid permit. Again, there are
clearly more details that I think will be spoken to later, but
it was a situation where the rules were changed, I think, in
the middle of the process, again, thwarting the ability to gain
a permit that had been in process for 4 years.
Mr. Begich. If I can respond, too, Congressman, just to
echo those comments, but also the bigger picture here, the
amount of time it takes as compared to the Gulf of Mexico to do
the same kind of operation even, in some cases, deeper water,
clearly, higher pressure, clearly, than what we operate and
hope to operate in the Arctic. And I guess my point--and I
agree 100 percent with Senator Murkowski--that the goalpost was
kind of moved down the line, but put that aside. For us to take
this many years may be the ConocoPhillips development on the
petroleum reserve established by the country----
Mr. Rush. With all due respect, I only have a few more
minutes and I have another point I want to make. And I just
want to say that, you know, I am concerned also about the
length of time that these permits are taking.
But on a matter of Administrator Jackson's statement that
was alluded to earlier. I have looked at her statements about
health impacts and there is a context in which she made this
statement. She did not say that these operations have no
potential for health impacts. She was discussing the permit
that EPA had granted which required Shell to install air
pollution controls. The EAB had asked EPA to provide better
analysis showing that the final permit, in fact, protected
local communities and set aside environmental concerns. In that
context, Administrator Jackson expressed confidence that
further analysis would show that EPA's permit was, in fact,
sufficiently protective. Nothing in her statement supports the
notion that we can shortchange air quality protection because
these sources don't threaten health.
If we had EPA here, we could hear from them directly on
this point, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. It is the practice of this subcommittee that
when we have a panel of witnesses that are in the Senate or in
the House that the chairman and ranking member are the only
ones who will ask questions.
So I want to thank you all very much for taking time to be
here. We look forward to working with all of you as we pursue
this legislation. Thank you very much.
Mr. Young. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, we will call the second panel
of witnesses. On the second panel, we have the Honorable Dan
Sullivan, who is the commissioner of the Alaska Department of
Natural Resources. We have Mr. David Lawrence, who is the
executive vice president of exploration and commercial
development with Shell. We have Ms. Rosemary Ahtuangaruak,
former mayor of Nuiqsut, Alaska. We have Mr. Richard Glenn, who
is the executive vice president, Arctic Slope Regional
Corporation. We have Dr. Scott Goldsmith, who is professor at
the Institute for Social and Economic Studies at the University
of Alaska. We have Mr. Erik Grafe, who is staff attorney for
Earthjustice. And we have Mr. Robert Meyers, who is senior
counsel of Crowell & Moring.
I want to thank all of you for taking time to be with us
this morning as we discuss this discussion draft.
And at this time, Mr. Sullivan, I appreciate your coming
all the way from Alaska, and I will recognize you for 5 minutes
for your opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF THE HONORABLE DAN SULLIVAN, COMMISSIONER, ALASKA
DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES; DAVID LAWRENCE, EXECUTIVE VICE
PRESIDENT, EXPLORATION AND COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT, SHELL;
ROSEMARY AHTUANGARUAK, FORMER MAYOR, NUIQSUT, ALASKA; RICHARD
K. GLENN, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, ARCTIC SLOPE REGIONAL
CORPORATION; SCOTT GOLDSMITH, PROFESSOR, INSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL
AND ECONOMIC STUDIES, UNIVERSITY OF ALASKA, ANCHORAGE; ERIK
GRAFE, STAFF ATTORNEY, EARTHJUSTICE; AND ROBERT J. MEYERS,
SENIOR COUNSEL, CROWELL & MORING

STATEMENT OF DAN SULLIVAN

Mr. Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning.
Representative Rush, good morning, sir. My name is Dan
Sullivan. I am the commissioner of the Alaska Department of
Natural Resources. I am also a former attorney general of
Alaska, former U.S. Assistant Secretary of State with
responsibilities over global energy, finance, and economic
issues, and I am currently a U.S. Marine Corps reserve officer
as well.
Mr. Chairman, I have submitted extensive written testimony
for the record and would like to briefly touch on the main
points.
Our country faces very serious energy security challenges,
and Alaska can and should be able to play a significant role in
partnership with the Federal Government in helping our fellow
citizens address these challenges. Unfortunately, right now
that is not happening. And I would like to explain that in a
little bit more detail.
Alaska is home to one of America's most vital components of
energy security infrastructure, the Trans-Alaska Pipeline
System. As Congressman Young stated, Congress played the
critical role in the creation and rapid construction of TAPS.
You are the godfather of this critical American asset.
Unfortunately, your godson sits two-thirds empty from its peak
of 2.2 million barrels a day down to 640,000 barrels a day and
declining. Working together, we are confident that we can fix
this situation and further promote America's energy security.
First, as was already mentioned, the North Slope of
Alaska--by any measure both on- and offshore--remains one of
the world's most productive hydrocarbon basins with estimates
of convention and unconventional oil in the billions of barrels
and estimates of natural gas in the trillions of cubic feet.
Second, Alaska is one of the most environmentally stringent
places on earth to explore and produce hydrocarbons. We are
also one of the world's top innovators of safer environmental
technologies.
And third, the State of Alaska is doing all it can to
reverse the TAPS throughput decline with a comprehensive set of
reforms that include significant tax and fiscal reform,
permitting overhaul, and the creation and construction of new
infrastructure projects. But we are missing a critical partner,
Mr. Chairman, and that is the Federal Government.
The Federal Government's policies in Alaska have shifted
from helping us protect our environment--which we support
because we care deeply about it--to proactively shutting down
resource development. Now, this is not just rhetoric. As
Senator Begich said, this is a widespread problem in Alaska.
If you look at pages 13 through 18 of my written testimony,
I provide 7 specific examples in less than 2 years where the
Federal Government has made decisions that will stall, kill, or
delay resource development on state and federal lands in
Alaska. This antidevelopment posture by our own Federal
Government is the cause of enormous frustration and anger for a
vast majority of Alaskans. Now, the State has done all it can--
countless meetings, letters, public comments, testimony, and
yes, even suing our own Federal Government--to dissuade the
federal administration from pursuing and continuing locking up
Alaska's resources. Why? Because we believe in doing so,
locking up the resources, it not only hurts Alaskans, it
significantly undermines broader American interests.
Rarely has there been a federal policy that fails on so
many fronts. Jobs and economic growth, energy security, the
national trade deficit, the federal budget deficit, and
national security are all undermined when Americans are
prevented from producing energy for our own citizens from the
largest resource basin in the country. Ironically, this policy
also undermines global environmental protection because it
drives resource development overseas to places like Brazil,
Russia, Saudi Arabia, Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan. Mr. Chairman, I
have been to all these countries. This committee can be sure
that they do not have nearly the stringent environmental
standards that we have in Alaska.
But my main purpose in traveling from Alaska today is not
to complain but to redouble our efforts to achieve the federal
partnership that we believe is so critical for Alaska and
America's success.
So in closing, Mr. Chairman, I believe there are three
important things Congress can do. First, support Alaska's goal
of one million barrels of oil through TAPS within 10 years.
Attached at the end of my written testimony is a recent letter
from Governor Sean Parnell of Alaska to President Obama asking
the President to support this ambitious goal which Governor
Parnell laid out last week. We believe the Congress should make
achieving this goal a national priority, one million barrels of
oil through TAPS within a decade.
Second, continue to work on permitting reform to expedite
and bring certainty to federal permitting decisions. During
World War II, America built the 1,400-mile ALCAN Highway in
less than a year. Today, a project like that would take 5 years
just to fill out the EIS application.
And finally, Mr. Chairman, Congress should continue its
vigilant oversight role of federal agencies that make resource
decisions in Alaska. As a former attorney general, I believe
that some of these decisions are made with little regard to
Congress' declared national policies and federal law, and I
think it is important to recognize that.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sullivan follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Sullivan, thank you very much. Mr.
Lawrence, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID LAWRENCE

Mr. Lawrence. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. I appreciate the opportunity to speak to you today.
I have been asked to talk about Shell's Alaska exploration
program and the regulatory challenges that have blocked it.
Mr. Whitfield. Is your microphone on, Mr. Lawrence?
Mr. Lawrence. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, let me make
three points. Our Nation needs oil and gas. Second, Alaska's
Outer Continental Shelf has world-class resources. Third,
developing these resources has broad and long-term benefits. It
is widely recognized that the world's demand for energy will
double by 2050 and to meet it, we will need all forms of
energy.
Government estimates say Alaska's offshore holds at least
27 billion barrels of oil and it may be much, much more. We
can't know until we can actually explore with the drill bit. We
have been ready to do that since 2007. However, we have been
blocked by regulatory barriers. One of the most frustrating,
the inability to get a usable air permit from the EPA. This is
a concern for Shell, but more importantly, it is a concern for
the Nation.
Put simply, Alaska's OCS is an imperative for energy
supplies, the economy, and national security. Developing
Alaska's resources will contribute substantially to meeting the
energy needs of America's consumers and America's businesses.
It is not unreasonable to assume that production from Alaska's
OCS will ready 700,000 barrels per day for 40 years. That is
equivalent to the 2010 oil imports from Iraq and Russia
combined. In 2030, some have estimated that peak production
could be over 1.4 million barrels per day. And that is more
than our 2010 imports from either Saudi Arabia or Nigeria.
Reducing foreign imports has immediate economic benefits.
The balance of trade will improve. U.S. dollars will remain
here in our own economy. Alaska's OCS development will create
an average of nearly 55,000 jobs per year for generations.
These are long-term, well-paying jobs both in Alaska and the
lower 48. It will generate conservatively $197 billion in
government revenue from royalties and taxes. The oil will move
through the Trans-Alaska Pipeline, which continues to be a
major supply line to the lower 48. Without additional
production in Alaska, this critical infrastructure will
collapse and we cannot stand by and allow this.
Regulatory barriers that undermine the Nation's oil and gas
leasing program should be a concern to policymakers. Consider
the facts. At the government's invitation, Shell participated
in offshore lease sales in Alaska. We paid the government more
than $2 billion for those leases and invested more than $1.5
billion to prepare for an exploration program that meets and
exceeds all regulatory requirements. But despite our most
intense efforts, we have yet to drill a single well. This is
highly unusual. When the Federal Government holds a sale, it is
saying OCS exploration and development is desired. If a company
presents a plan that meets all regulatory requirements, that
plan should be permitted.
Unlike a development and production program, exploration
here is a temporary, short-term operation. Our initial Alaska
wells will each take just 30 days to complete. Data will be
gathered and the well will be permanently plugged and
abandoned. These are not complex wells. The wells in Alaska's
OCS are vastly different from those in deeper water,
specifically in terms of water depth and reservoir pressure.
Much lower pressure means the mechanical barriers in Shell's
well designs will have even greater safety margins and much
lower risk profiles than we see elsewhere in the deepwater
Gulf.
Still, Shell has assembled an unprecedented oil spill
response capability. And there is no question that the bar
should be high in the Arctic. We support high standards and a
robust permitting process. But the process must work. And the
EPA permitting process has failed. The emissions from our
program pose no threat to human health. The EPA administrator
herself stated this during a recent Senate hearing.
No company should endure the delays and waste we have
experienced over the last 5 years. Certainly, this is an area
that Congress should address. First, Congress should clarify
where emissions from an OCS facility should be measured. For
onshore facilities like a manufacturing plant, emissions are
measured generally at what is referred to as ``the fence
line.'' Offshore drilling ships have no fence lines and the
public is many, many miles away.
Second, Congress should provide a clear definition for the
point in time when a drilling vessel becomes regulated by the
Clean Air Act.
And third, Congress should require EPA to take final agency
action on an OCS air permit within 6 months of receiving a
complete application and should centralize any potential
judicial review of final permits in the D.C. Court.
Thank you, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lawrence follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Lawrence. Ms. Ahtuangaruak,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROSEMARY AHTUANGARUAK

Ms. Ahtuangaruak. Chairman, Ranking Member Rush, members of
the committee, thank you for the invitation to participate in
today's hearing.
Mr. Whitfield. Would you move the microphone a little
closer?
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. My name is Rosemary Ahtuangaruak and I
have lived on the coast of the Arctic Ocean for most of my
life. I recently moved to Barrow, Alaska from Nuiqsut, Alaska.
I have served as mayor on numerous councils and organizations
related to tribal leadership and for a long time as a community
health aide. I am testifying on behalf of Alaska Wilderness
League.
I am here to tell you how oil and gas development affects
those of us who live on the Arctic Slope. This bill you are
considering, to allow the oil industry to sidestep regulations
on pollution as set forth by the Clean Air Act, will have a
devastating impact on my people, who have called the Arctic
home for thousands of years. If you allow this bill to move
forward, you are telling me and everyone who lives in the
Arctic that we--proud Inupiats and Americans--are less
important than a few foreign-owned oil companies like Shell
Oil.
Shell's proposed 2010 activities in the Chukchi Sea--much
of which would be exempt under this law--would have released as
much pollution as 825,000 cars driving 12,000 miles in a year
and next year they are looking to more than double their
proposed activities. Emissions from the oceangoing vessels that
Shell is proposing to use include major contributors to global
climate change. It has been well documented that air pollution
travels long distances, and Shell's 2009 application for
drilling permits showed that operations in the Chukchi Sea
could cause significant health impacts to the Arctic Slope
communities. We are rightfully concerned about the
ramifications of these emissions and the overall actions as
proposed.
Currently, the oilfields across the North Slope emit twice
the amount of nitrogen oxide as emitted in Washington, D.C. All
onshore North Slope communities would be additionally impacted
by Shell's offshore proposal, including my former home,
Nuiqsut, just west of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
Nuiqsut is already surrounded by oil pipelines from the Alpine
oil field less than 4 miles away and a yellow haze can be seen
for miles and miles. During winter there are many natural gas
flares. As a result, I spent many busy nights on call
responding to community members' complaints about respiratory
illnesses. Our people have markedly higher rates of pulmonary
disease than the general U.S. population and may have genetic
predispositions to disease that differ from other U.S.
populations. Our people are substantially more vulnerable to
morbidity and mortality from air pollution than are other
Americans.
When I started my career as a health aide in 1986, there
was only one asthmatic patient. Then oil and gas was still many
miles away. When I took my first break in '97, there were 60
people who had to use respiratory medications. Industry got
much closer to my home. For this village of more than 500
people, a 600 percent increase in respiratory patients should
get some type of response. Yet our voices continue to be
ignored. Watching the eyes of babies fighting to breathe tears
into you. Families have to fly sick children out of the village
to Barrow or Anchorage. Knowing that the family has to send a
parent with the child, what does it take from the family and
the community?
Our people depend on a lifestyle and diet that is radically
different from other U.S. populations. I live a very
traditional lifestyle--hunting, fishing, whaling, gathering,
and teaching my family and community members the traditional
and cultural activities as my elders taught me. The land, sea,
and air provide for us through the long, dark winters. Because
of this, the Inupiat culture is intricately tied to the Arctic
Ocean and our exposure to pollution comes from both our time on
the land and on the water. We spend much of our time on the
water fishing, hunting, and otherwise feeding our families. Our
hunters and fisherman are out on the ice in the winter all year
long. In the springtime and summer, we are out hunting for
seals and preparing for the whaling season. In the fall, we are
fishing and whaling. When the water freezes, we are preparing
the whale for storage and preparing for the feasting and
sharing.
Our people have used the Arctic Ocean since time immemorial
for our subsistence practices. We don't just stay on land. Yet,
despite the direct effects on our communities, this bill would
also limit how my people participate in the clean air process
while explicitly preserving the industry's right to appeal
these same decisions. The Federal Government has continually
failed in their responsibility to conduct government-to-
government consultation with my people. This bill would even
more severely limit our voice in the process that directly
affects our wellbeing.
The Arctic Ocean is our garden. For thousands of years, we
have stood watch over this garden and the animals that live in
it. I ask you now, please don't keep us from fulfilling our
sacred duty to protect this place and pass it on to our future
generations.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ahtuangaruak follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. Mr. Glenn, you are recognized for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD K. GLENN

Mr. Glenn. Thank you. Can you hear me?
Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member Rush, and subcommittee
members, my name is Richard Glenn and I live in Barrow, Alaska.
I am executive vice president of Lands and Natural Resources
for the Arctic Slope Regional Corporation.
The Arctic Slope Regional Corporation is one of the 12
land-based Native regional corporations created pursuant to the
Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971. ASRC owns
approximately 5 million acres of land and is owned by the
11,000 Inupiat Eskimo shareholders that mostly reside in 8
villages of Alaska's North Slope.
This discussion is timely. Right now, our region is
preparing to assemble our leadership on this very topic. And we
find that this issue boils down to community survival. Our
villages are small and they are separated by great distance. No
roads connect our villages. Barrow is located 340 miles north
of the Arctic Circle, near the boundaries of the Chukchi and
Beaufort Seas. We might not be able to see Russia from our
front window, but we can sure see the changing Arctic and the
Chukchi and Beaufort Sea.
This is a region of tundra plains. It is devoid of trees.
The average temperature in winter, well below zero. In Barrow
where I live, the ground is frozen down to about 1,000 feet
below surface. In our remote village, fuels can cost more than
$10 a gallon; milk, $11 a gallon; diapers, $22. Despite these
challenges, as my friend Rosemary said, the Inupiat have
endured for centuries. We have a close relationship with both
the land and the sea.
In my lifetime, our communities have gone through great
change. Today, our ``villages'' are really small cities. They
have small city needs: power plants, water and sewer
facilities, health services, fire protection, roads, and
schools. Our people depend on these services which are provided
for by our home rule municipality, the North Slope Burrow. It
is the largest county in the country. It is based on locally-
derived property taxes that they are based on oil and gas
exploration in our region. There is essentially no other
economy in our region.
The volume of oil being produced in Alaska is in steep
decline, as this committee has heard. This threatens the future
of our communities and our culture that we have worked so hard
to sustain. We have asked ourselves, what will our
grandchildren do? Where will they go to school? What will power
their villages?
We understand that current onshore resources are not enough
to stem the decline in production, which directly affects our
communities. It may seem odd to some of you that Eskimos in
Northern Alaska are seeking ways to increase the volume of oil
moving through the Trans-Alaska Pipeline, but here we are. Safe
and responsible oil and gas development is the only industry
that has remained in our region long enough to foster village
improvements. We have coal, natural gas, and oil, and in some
places in our region, we have them in great abundance.
Development of these resources is critical to our survival.
The people of the North Slope also have a heightened
concern for the environmental effects of oil and gas
exploration and development. No one has more at stake than we
do regarding environmental risks. The animals that we depend
upon for our food and our culture migrate over large ranges in
the land and in the ocean. Like most of my fellow community
members, I depend on them. I depend on the sea resources for
sustenance. I have served as a co-captain in my extended
family's whaling crew.
In studying the issues related to offshore development, we
focused on safety and prevention. And we were favorably
impressed by the timing, the technology, and the safeguards
introduced by Alaska's OCS explorers. Our eyes are open on this
issue. We know there are risks and we believe they have been
mitigated appropriately.
Regarding air quality, we note that the exploration areas
in the Arctic are more than 50 miles away from the nearest
community. There are also significantly fewer drilling
operations envisioned for the Alaska OCS than the Gulf of
Mexico. We question why, despite these differences, there are
Clean Air Act requirements that apply to OCS sources in Alaska
that don't apply to those same sources in the Gulf of Mexico.
Thank you for giving this important issue your attention.
Our intent is to remain at the table with both government and
industry. Let me be clear. Without development in our region,
our communities will not survive. Please allow us to meet our
responsibilities to our grandchildren and future generations.
As Congress goes forward and debates this issue, remember the
impacts your decisions will have on our communities, our
culture, and our people.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Glenn follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Glenn. Dr. Goldsmith, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT GOLDSMITH

Mr. Goldsmith. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking
Member Rush, and committee members. My name is Scott Goldsmith.
I have been a professor of economics at the University of
Alaska for 35 years and recently co-authored a study of the
economic effects on the State from development of the oil and
gas resources from the OCS off the North Shore of Alaska.
Funding for the study was provided by Shell Exploration and
Production. I am testifying on my own behalf and not as a
representative either of the university or Shell.
In 2006, the Department of Interior MMS estimated that the
undiscovered, economically recoverable oil in the Beaufort and
Chukchi Seas was 12.5 billion barrels--assuming $60 as a price
of oil--more than the initial estimate of recoverable oil from
Alaska's Prudhoe Bay field, the largest ever discovered in
North America. The economically-recoverable natural gas was
estimated to be 50 trillion cubic feet.
Industry interest in the Alaska OCS is reflected in the 3
recent lease sales. 2 sales in the Beaufort Sea in 2005 and
2007 generated $367 million in bonuses and 1.1 million acres
leased. The Chukchi sale in 2008 generated $2.3 billion in high
bids and 2.8 million acres leased.
Development of these resources could result in production
of more than 1 million barrels of oil a day for more than a
generation. This could reduce foreign imports, currently 10
million barrels per day, by 10 percent and improve our balance
of trade by $36 billion a year, assuming $100 per barrel of
oil.
Of course there are many technical, economic, logistical,
environmental, and other challenges to achieving that
production goal, and under the best of conditions it would take
nearly a decade to reach first production. At the time our
study was done, we projected that production could begin in
2018. Today, first production is still at least 10 years away,
in 2021.
Petroleum has been the most important economic driver for
Alaska since it became a State in 1959. The economy today would
be half as big without petroleum and hard-pressed to support a
basic level of services for its citizens. Without petroleum
about 60 percent of all jobs would be dependent on the Federal
Government.
16 billion barrels of oil has been produced from state
lands on the North Slope over the last 35 years, but the
largest fields--Prudhoe Bay and Kuparuk--have been in decline
for 20 years. Development of nearby small fields, hard-to-reach
reservoirs, and unconventional reserves face economic
challenges, and all projections are for a continued decline in
onshore production. Because of this, the State faces an
uncertain future. Providing industry access to petroleum
reserves on federal lands offers the best path to continued
economic prosperity for the State.
OCS development could add an annual average of 35,000 jobs
to the Alaska economy over the next 50 years, offsetting the
likely job loss from the continued decline of production on
state lands. These would be high-paying year-round jobs with a
combined payroll of $75 billion. These jobs and the sales of
Alaskan businesses providing support activities could be the
foundation for a sustainable economy for the State for a more
than a generation.
Under current law the Federal Government retains
essentially all the public revenues from leases, bonuses, and
royalties from the Alaska OCS. We estimate state revenues of
$17 billion spread over 50 years. Local governments directly
impacted by development would receive $3.5 billion over that
same period. These revenues would be small compared to current
state spending, but large compared to the communities on the
North Slope.
Alaska OCS development could also generate annual average
employment of 28,500 in the rest of the US and substantial
revenues. At an oil price of $100, federal revenues from
royalties, income taxes could be $226 billion over the next 50
years. State income and sales taxes outside Alaska could be $7
billion. Moving forward with the Alaska OCS would enhance the
potential for further development of Alaska's other petroleum
resources.
Alaska OCS development would enhance the viability of a gas
pipeline to supply Alaska natural gas to the lower 48 because
it would increase the amount of gas available to a pipeline.
OCS oil flowing through the Trans-Alaska Pipeline would keep
the cost of transportation low, enhancing the economic
viability of smaller onshore reserves. It would extend the
useful life of the pipeline that some suggest is in danger of
shutting down from technical challenges. It would increase the
options for development of unconventional resources. Delays in
development put these opportunities at risk.
Because of petroleum, the Alaska economy has remained
relatively strong through the recent recession. But oil
production today is only 1/3 the level of 20 years ago and
continuing to fall at 6 percent a year. Looking forward,
Alaskans are asking what will sustain the economy for the next
generation and understandably concerned. Moving forward with
OCS development would be a strong positive signal that
opportunities exist for a strong economic future for the State
and its citizens.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goldsmith follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much. Mr. Grafe, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ERIK GRAFE

Mr. Grafe. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee. Thank you for inviting me to participate in
today's hearing.
My name is Erik Grafe and I am an attorney with
Earthjustice, national public interest conservation law firm. I
work and reside in Anchorage, Alaska.
By way of background, Americans Arctic Ocean has sustained
human communities for thousands of years and is home to some of
the world's most iconic wildlife species. However, fundamental
gaps exist in our basic scientific understanding of the region.
Further, global warming is transforming it dramatically. In
recent years, offshore oil and gas activities have also
increasingly threatened the Arctic Ocean as permitting and
planning decisions have been rushed forward without adequate
baseline data, coordination, public involvement, or oil spill
planning.
The bill under consideration today would add another
threat. It seeks to create a loophole for offshore drilling in
the Arctic Ocean by exempting it from the important protections
of the Clean Air Act, one of the country's bedrock human health
laws. This is no trivial matter. To put it in context, when
Shell Oil Company proposed exploration drilling in the Chukchi
Sea in 2010, its operations alone would have emitted roughly as
much carbon dioxide as the annual household emissions of 21,000
people, or roughly 3 times the----
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Grafe, excuse me. Could you move the
microphone a little bit closer?
Mr. Grafe. Sure. OK. It has got to be very close.
21,000 people or roughly three times the entire population
of Alaska's North Slope borough. And that is just one drilling
company drilling wells in one summer's drilling season.
I will focus on two of the most harmful provisions of this
bill. First, the bill seeks to exempt a great majority of
emissions from Arctic offshore drilling from stringent
pollution controls. In the Arctic, the lion's share of
pollution from offshore drilling is caused by vessels that
accompany the drillship like icebreakers, not from the actual
drillships themselves.
In Shell's proposed 2010 drilling, for example, up to 98
percent of air pollution came from Shell's associated vessels.
This bill seeks to exempt those vessels from the Clean Air
Act's Prevention of Significant Deterioration Program. The
program, as its name suggests, is intended to prevent existing
air quality levels from deteriorating. In 1990, President Bush
signed into law an amendment to the Clean Air Act that applied
the PSD program to offshore oil drilling. The program has two
main tools for reducing air pollution, requiring that industry
not violate quality standards and requiring that it apply best
available control technology to reduce its pollution.
This bill would count emissions from associated vessels and
icebreakers in determining whether drilling operations trigger
the PSD requirements but then it would exempt those vessels
from those requirements. It would apply the requirements only
to the drillship. The icebreakers are the major source of
pollution from offshore drilling.
And these emissions are a health concern. For example, in
Shell's proposed 2010 drilling, icebreakers and support vessels
could have emitted over 1,000 tons of nitrogen dioxide, a toxin
for which even short-term spikes in concentration can prompt
asthma, bronchitis, emphysema, and pneumonia. The bill would
make it law that the oil industry does not have to apply the
best available control technology to these or any other
pollutants coming from its icebreakers. It would seriously
undermine the purposes of the Clean Air Act and the PSD
program.
Weakening health protections in the Arctic is particularly
troubling because communities along the North Slope of Alaska
have markedly higher rates of pulmonary disease and are
substantially more vulnerable to mortality from air pollution.
For example, rates of chronic lung disease on the North Slope
are dramatically higher than in the general U.S. population.
Second, the bill seeks to limit the public's participation
decisions about pollution from offshore that directly affect
their health. For example, it would prevent citizens from
seeking an administrative review of permits but would preserve
that right for oil companies.
And it would limit the amount of time EPA has to grant or
deny an air permit application. Again, the provisions are
particularly troubling in the context of the Arctic because
many of the communities most directly affected by Arctic
offshore drilling decisions are remote and unconnected to the
road system. These communities, moreover, will bear the vastly
disproportionate burden of the pollution from offshore
drilling. If anything, they should be given more time and
opportunity to engage in meaningful public participation about
decisions that disproportionately affect them. Instead, this
bill significantly weakens those rights.
Protecting the Arctic and its people from air pollution
that directly threatens human health and contributes to already
rapidly changing climate in the region should be of the highest
concern. This is what the Clean Air Act and the 1990 amendments
were meant to do. This committee should not weaken these
protections. It should reject this bill. Particularly in light
of last spring's Deepwater Horizon oil spill, Congress should
focus on facilitating a renewable energy future and science-
based protective management of the Arctic Ocean, not on
creating loopholes for offshore oil drilling in the region.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Grafe follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. Mr. Meyers, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT J. MEYERS

Mr. Meyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. I appreciate the opportunity to testify.
As with any sort of matter of this nature, I think it is
first appropriate to look at the legislative history of this
provision. My written testimony contains some of that. I don't
pretend that is comprehensive. But with respect to where 328
came from, there was precursor legislation in the House and the
Senate. These bills seem to basically have been addressing
situations off the coast of California in the 1970s and 1980s.
And we are focused primarily with respect to the onshore impact
of the emissions.
But in any event, when we look at the history here,
Congress settled the issue of how it wanted to regulate OCS
sources through enactment of Section 328 of the Clean Air Act.
Now, you know, in one sense, I think that is what Congress
intended to do in the Clean Air Act, but this testimony you
have received otherwise. I think it is clear that the matter
seems to be very unsettled. Various interpretations with regard
to the Clean Air Act have been offered up to the regional
office. Various interpretations of the Clean Air Act have been
offered up to the EAB, and EAB has issued a very lengthy
opinion on the same. So I would emphasize, too, that under the
process that EPA is following right now, the permit at issue
here for the litigation--or potential litigation I suppose--
would be the Frontier Discoverer. And that is not considered to
be final.
But, you know, I think this situation stands in stark
contrast to what Congress and EPA seemingly intended by
enactment of Section 328 in the first place where if you look
at EPA's OCS regulations, right in the beginning they state,
``In implementing, enforcing, and revising the OCS rule and in
delegating authority hereunder, the Administrator will ensure
that there is a rational relationship to the attainment and
maintenance of federal and state ambient air quality standards
and the requirements, and that the rule is not used for the
purpose of preventing exploration and development of the OCS.''
This is in the EPA regulatory text.
In proposing the OCS regulations in 1991, EPA stated that
it intends that the OCS rule will result in ``a more orderly,
less burdensome system of air quality permitting process for
OCS sources.'' This may certainly speed up the permitting
process, which may reduce costs in some instances, particularly
offsetting the additional cost associated with the rule's more
stringent requirements for controls and offsets. I think the
fact that it has taken years to decide matters concerning the
operation of drilling ships in the Arctic demonstrates that
EPA's intentions at a minimum have not been fulfilled.
My written testimony also recounts the various efforts
under Title II of the Clean Air Act regarding the control of
emissions from marine vessels. As my testimony recounts, EPA
has been aggressively addressing such emissions for over a
decade and will continue to implement standards and new fuel
requirements over the next decade. These regulations did not
exist in 1990 when Congress enacted 328 and represented
significant change to the circumstances from those that
Congress sought to address. These regulations affect all
classes of marine vessels. These regulations affect new vessels
and remanufactured vessels. These regulations affect fuel
sulfur levels that are used. And the U.S. has further--as I
point out in my testimony--entered into international
negotiations with respect to the control of fuel off the
coastline. All these factors are new, all these factors did not
exist in the 1990s, and all these factors will affect vessels.
With regard to the discussion draft, the legislation
essentially has three substantive sections. With regard to air
quality measurement, it adds a specification that the air
quality impact of an OCS source will be measured with respect
to the correspondent onshore area. My interpretation of this is
that it is consistent with the language and legislative history
of the Clean Air Act. Now, I know that has been a matter of
contention in terms of the current permit, but I think it
maintains the proper focus of NAAQS, which has been with regard
to primary NAAQS, a focus on protection of public health with
an adequate margin of safety.
Now, with respect to the OCS source definition, the section
provides that direct emissions of vessels servicing an OCS
source shall be ``counted'' but shall not be basically subject
as a stationary source under the PSD program. I think I would
fundamentally disagree that the Clean Air Act requires that
vessels install BACT. This position does not appear in the
legislation. This position, in fact--in the EAB decision with
regard to the Frontier Discoverer permit--the EAB agreed that
vessels are not within this. This decision is also reflected in
the 1991 regulations.
And then finally, just with regard to the EAB itself, as I
note in a footnote in my testimony, I would point out that the
Agency considers that the existing statutory deadlines in the
Clean Air Act do not apply when the EAB is considering a
permit.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Meyers follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. I want to thank you, Mr. Meyers, and thank
all of you for your testimony.
Mr. Lawrence, what was the date that you all signed for
this lease? What day did you acquire this lease?
Mr. Lawrence. We have had multiple lease sales. The first
one was in 2005. We had a subsequent one in 2007 and then
subsequently in 2008. And that was the big one in the Chukchi.
At that, Mr. Chairman, we bid record amounts, $2 billion, and
we did that because what we saw is the tremendous resource
potential.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, if you had this air permit issued
tomorrow, what would be the time frame for you to start
production of oil?
Mr. Lawrence. At this point in time, we would be looking at
something that would start probably in the middle of the next
decade. And I point that out for the following reasons. If we
had been allowed to begin at the time that we thought we would
start when we received these permits, we had hoped to start at
the early part of the next decade or even in this decade.
Mr. Whitfield. And if you had the air permit tomorrow, how
many additional permits would you have to have before you could
start production?
Mr. Lawrence. We currently worked right now with 35 permits
to be able to work through this, so there is a large amount of
coordination between different agencies to be able to do that.
We have made satisfactory progress on most of those permits,
and we expect that we will be able to work through those.
However, there is always a chance that some of those may not
come through.
Mr. Whitfield. But you need a total of 35 permits?
Mr. Lawrence. Thirty-five permits to be able to drill.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, it is my understanding, Mr. Meyers or
someone on the panel, that this EAB board is not really in the
Clean Air statute but was simply created by one of the
administrators of EPA. Is that correct?
Mr. Lawrence. That is correct. It was created under
regulations issued by EPA. It is, in fact, a part of EPA. And
so it is a regulatory creation.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Now, Mr. Meyers, would you be able to
explain the primary differences between the criteria to issue a
permit by the Department of Interior for OCS production and the
EPA process?
Mr. Meyers. Well, the current regulations that DOI apply to
require under 1334(a)(8) I believe of the regulations that the
DOI apply national ambient air quality standards. With regard
to how EPA addresses it, they are acting under authority under
328. And effectively under 328, what they are doing is applying
other parts of the act.
If I might parenthetically assert here, I don't read the
legislation to exempt the sources from the Clean Air Act. The
legislation effectively interprets certain provisions within
328 but it doesn't exempt the OCS source from PSD BACT review.
That is maintained.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Ms. Ahtuangaruak, you had mentioned in
your testimony that you oppose this legislation. And what
particular part do you object to?
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. The exemptions to industry to allow them
to increase the pollutions in our area is that. And also the
push to allow industry to move forward with their process for
bringing concerns into the right process where we would be
limited as local citizens.
Mr. Whitfield. But the exemptions--and Mr. Meyers, you said
there are no exemptions, is that correct?
Mr. Meyers. No, it doesn't exempt OCS sources from PSD BACT
review.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Grafe. Mr. Chairman, I have an opinion.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, Mr. Grafe?
Mr. Grafe. Thank you very much. As Mr. Meyers said----
Mr. Whitfield. Move your mike.
Mr. Grafe. As Mr. Meyers said, the provision would still
regulate and apply PSD to the OCS source, which you would
define as the drillship which produces maybe 2 percent of the
pollution from Arctic offshore drilling. Most of the pollution
from Arctic offshore drilling comes from the associated
vessels, which this particular piece of legislation seeks to
exempt from the application and best available control
technology and other PSD requirements, as I think----
Mr. Whitfield. Do you agree with that, Mr. Meyers?
Mr. Meyers. They never were included under BACT. They are
mobile sources. Title II of the act regulates mobile sources.
Marine vessels are non-road sources as I point out in my
testimony, I think, this interpretation of the Clean Air Act to
say that BACT applies to a mobile source.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Grafe. Your Honor, may I respond?
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Grafe. The Section 328 when it was passed directed that
the PSD program be applied to OCS sources and has written when
it passed, it said apply PSD and BACT to OCS sources direct
emissions from the associated vessels like icebreakers are
direct emissions from the OCS source. It would seem odd to
determine that, you know, from a policy perspective to look at
those emissions when you are determining, well, does the PSD
program apply?
Mr. Whitfield. My time has expired, but I am assuming you
would disagree with that, Mr. Meyers, but just say yes or no.
Mr. Meyers. Absolutely.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. We will meet afterwards and we will get
you two together and we will talk about it.
Mr. Rush, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I might, if I could, remind the
committee that this is a Shell operation and the matter that
these witnesses are discussing, and it is important that we get
the environmental and public health protection right in this
instance.
And Mr. Chairman, I want to remind you and other members,
especially my Republican friends that might just don't make it
right. This bill is designed to help 1 company commence to
drill but standards set by this committee would apply to all
future offshore projects in the Arctic as well. And Mr.
Chairman, I want to again reiterate my concern that if the EPA
had been here today as a witness to describe how this bill
would affect public health and the environment over the long-
term as more oil companies are attempting to drill in the
delicate Arctic ecosystem, then we might be further along and
we might be able to get this right.
My question is directed to Mr. Grafe. Mr. Grafe, can you
speak to the cumulative health impacts of offshore oil and gas
drilling as more companies enter the Arctic waters?
Mr. Grafe. Yes, thank you. Shell is the first one that
would be out there, and its pollution alone was significant and
taking up very high, up to 70, 80 percent of the allowable
increments that you are allowed to sort of add air pollution
into the air. And that is just one operator, and there are
other operators who have announced plans to attempt to get
drilling permits starting soon. And so it is a big problem
because one operator is taking up all the space and polluting a
whole lot, and as more come, there will be much more pollution.
Mr. Rush. Ms. Ahtuangaruak, can you talk about some of the
impacts that you have seen regarding climate change and air
pollution on the ground in the Arctic region?
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. We are definitely seeing some changes to
the Arctic. For us one of the important concerns is whether or
not the caribou are going to cross the rivers to get to the
calving grounds, whether or not there is going to be
appropriate growth of vegetation for the calves that are going
to help with their survival rates and their health, whether or
not there is enough insects that are produced for the birds
when they migrate up for their new growth of their young ones,
whether or not there is adequate ice for us to go out and do
our traditional cultural activities, under-ice fishing. If we
don't have the ice forming the way it is supposed to, we may
not get the fish when we want to get them when they are
available to us when we can get like before the eggs hatch,
those kinds of things; whether or not we are going to have the
platforms to bring the whale up onto the ice. Those are all
very important concerns. Whether or not we are going to have
ice on the shore during the fall storms, those things effect
erosion rates along the coast tremendously and it has already
caused tremendous problems.
The increased rains are affecting us. We are having
tremendous amounts of erosion, especially on the Colville
River. There are areas that I have seen over 500 feet eroded in
just a few years. It affects the air in general, they way that
the particles are in the air, how it affects us and our health.
Some of these things have not been well studied. The
particulates in our environment are most of the studies are at
70 degrees. We don't have many days at that temperature.
There is a lot of effects that go there. For health
concerns, as a health aide when I started, I was taught by our
people what is normal. I didn't used to hear a lot of wheezing
in patients. I had one person who used an inhaler, but as I
continued to work and further my education, I started counting
these things. When I came back from PA school, there were 35
people that were having to use medications.
Mr. Rush. Thank you so very much. We are getting the
picture. I want to move on because my time is winding down.
Mr. Grafe, the question is are you opposed to any drilling
in the Arctic region and is there any satisfactory level of
controls and protection that will satisfy you in terms of
drilling in the Arctic region at all?
Mr. Grafe. We are not against drilling in the Arctic
region. We are for the application of environmental laws to
that drilling to protect human health and to protect the
natural wildlife resources of the region.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Shimkus, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Press reports
indicate that Administrator Jackson is coming to the Hill to
speak to Rob Andrews, a Democrat from New Jersey. We sure would
have loved to have her at this hearing. She is also meeting
with Southern Company CEO today in the D.C. area, so I think it
just goes back to the debate that I think EPA is dodging the
hearing and not coming. And let us just put that back on the
table as we talk about why EPA is not here.
Does anyone believe that shutting down TAPS is a good idea?
Mr. Sullivan, yes or no?
Mr. Sullivan. Absolutely not, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Mr. Lawrence?
Mr. Lawrence. No.
Mr. Shimkus. Ms. Ahtuangaruak?
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. No.
Mr. Shimkus. So you don't think shutting down TAPS would be
a good idea?
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. There is a lot of people that require
these jobs.
Mr. Shimkus. OK, great. Thank you. Mr. Glenn?
Mr. Glenn. No.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Goldsmith?
Mr. Goldsmith. No, it would be devastating for the economy.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Grafe?
Mr. Grafe. No, it would be bad for the economy for Alaska--
--
Mr. Shimkus. Great.
Mr. Grafe [continuing]. But we need to----
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Meyers?
Mr. Meyers. No.
Mr. Shimkus. So everyone agrees that TAPS is a very
important--and if you all were here for the opening statements
I have a brief connection because my father-in-law--who is
deceased--worked on it. So one of the great migration up there
for benefit of a better life.
But TAPS is challenged, is it not, Mr. Sullivan?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, sir, principally because of the lower
throughput.
Mr. Shimkus. And what happens? What happens if you continue
to have lower throughput?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, at lower rates of throughput, the
velocity is slower, the temperature of the oil is slower, and
what it does, it creates more technical problems.
Mr. Shimkus. Like what?
Mr. Sullivan. Like the possibility of leaks but also the
possibility of, as we experienced this winter, we had a
shutdown that, to be honest, was quite a dicey situation. It
was shut down for 5 days in the middle of a very cold Alaska
winter.
Mr. Shimkus. What does that mean? We don't really
understand cold until you talk about Alaskan cold.
Mr. Sullivan. Oh, there were spots on the pipeline route
that were down to 35, 40 below 0.
Mr. Shimkus. So you need the flow to keep it warm enough so
that it doesn't crack?
Mr. Sullivan. So it doesn't crack, so you don't have
technological challenges, and when it is lower throughput, you
have water that drops out, you have wax buildup. So there is a
number of things that the State is doing that the private
sector is doing to address those, but the number one way to
address the technical challenge and environmental risks that
come with lower throughput is to actually increase throughput.
Mr. Shimkus. Increase throughput.
Mr. Sullivan. Which is what we are focused on.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, Mr. Goldsmith, can you talk about--being
from the University of Alaska--the economic impact of shutdown
of TAPS?
Mr. Goldsmith. It would be devastating because it would in
one swoop knock out about 1/3 of the total jobs for the
economy, those jobs associated with activity on the North Slope
production----
Mr. Shimkus. So we need more supply to keep TAPS operating?
Mr. Goldsmith. Exactly.
Mr. Shimkus. It is critical.
Mr. Goldsmith. And it would also devastate Alaska's revenue
picture because we get about 90 percent of our revenues from--
--
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Glenn, and of course we are also
challenged at understanding this great area that you represent
and have a title of executive vice--what is your----
Mr. Glenn. Vice President of Lands and Natural Resources--
--
Mr. Shimkus. So what does that mean? I mean in common
terminology when we have governors and we have councilmen and
we have counties, what is it? Is that a hired position? Is it
an elected position?
Mr. Glenn. We were created by Congress. We were created to
resolve the issues of claims of aboriginal title and to avoid
the mistakes, perhaps, of the lower 48 Native Americans. So
they created these 12 land-based corporations. So we are not a
fact of Congress but we have imbued our regional corporation
with the values of our people. We are owned by the Inupiat
Eskimos who live in Northern Alaska.
Mr. Shimkus. So is it safe to say that your being present
here today is representing those tribal areas----
Mr. Glenn. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. And the unity of the----
Mr. Glenn. I am speaking for the residents of the North
Slope and I am speaking as someone who is currently employed by
this regional corporation but who also has been employed and
worked with our local home-rule municipality, which depends on
industry in its region for its tax base.
Mr. Shimkus. Do citizens in Alaska still get a check based
upon oil production in Alaska across the board?
Mr. Glenn. You get a permanent fund distribution annually.
Mr. Shimkus. Every year?
Mr. Glenn. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. An annual check? And has that amount gone up
or gone down? Anyone know?
Mr. Glenn. It fluctuates but I bet Dr.----
Mr. Goldsmith. Yes, last year it was $1,281 and it
fluctuates between 1,000 and 1,500.
Mr. Shimkus. And what happens if TAPS shuts down?
Mr. Goldsmith. That wouldn't go away immediately, but it
would disappear pretty quickly because the permanent fund would
be needed for----
Mr. Shimkus. And I only have 26 seconds left. I really
appreciate the testimony. It is really great.
Mr. Meyers, I want to ask about this Environmental Appeals
Board. Did we ever authorize it in this statute?
Mr. Meyers. In the Clean Air Act, no.
Mr. Shimkus. So the EPA did a permit and so a regulatory
appeals board really denied it. That is the process, right?
Mr. Meyers. No----
Mr. Shimkus. It is really the stationary debate and I will
end on this because my time is up. Mr. Grafe, my point would be
if you have refineries, a stationary source, we don't regulate
and include the emissions of trucks that go in and out of the
refinery. And that is the debate of your position that tugboats
going to and from the stationary source should be part of that
calculation, and I would reject that.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman from California is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Under the Clean Air Act, EPA's decision-making is deeply
informed by the views of stakeholders. This is one of the Clean
Air Act's great strengths. We need to be very careful about
changes in the act that may have the effect of reducing
stakeholders' ability to weigh in on Agency decisions. We often
hear from industry as well as the public that they want EPA to
consider their views and no one wants to go to court except as
a last resort.
In the case of Shell's plan to drill offshore, many groups,
including the Inupiat community in Alaska had serious concerns
about the impact of Shell's proposed operations on public
health and the environment. They were able to petition the
Environmental Appeals Board to review EPA's decision to grant
Shell an air permit. This bill that is before us would
eliminate the right of concerned citizens as well as industry
to petition the board for review.
Mr. Grafe, can you describe the role of the Environmental
Appeals Board plays in allowing Alaskans to participate in the
permitting process?
Mr. Grafe. Yes. The Environmental Appeals Board allows
participation by Alaska citizens without having to file filing
fees. They don't need a lawyer. They can participate by phone.
It accesses for them an ability to challenge permits if they
have been participating in the administrative process.
Mr. Waxman. Well, I think that there is a lot to be said
for allowing issues to be resolved administratively rather than
forcing everybody to the court. The Environmental Appeals Board
also has tremendous expertise because it considers all permit
appeals.
Mr. Meyers, you described the bill's approach of requiring
all appeals to go the D.C. circuit as ``centralized for
consistency.'' Doesn't the Environmental Appeals Board already
provide such centralization and consistency?
Mr. Meyers. I would agree it probably centralizes. I am not
sure in terms of consistency. It does referencing other
decisions. I think they have only been involved in this one
decision.
Mr. Waxman. In fact, under the bill, onshore drilling
preconstruction permits would be reviewed by the Environmental
Appeals Board while offshore drilling preconstruction permits
would be reviewed by the D.C. circuit. The result is greater
fragmentation, not centralization.
I want to point out about this appeals board, it was set up
administratively under President Bush and it is consistent with
the law that says the EPA can act administratively and the
administrator doesn't have to be personally involved in every
decision, so she can delegate it to this board.
The bill does allow permit applicants, the oil companies,
to file an administrative petition for reconsideration if they
oppose an EPA permit decision.
Mr. Lawrence, do you think it is fair to allow only oil
companies and no one else to request administrative
reconsideration of a permit?
Mr. Lawrence. We actually welcome and comply and more than
comply with the regulatory requirements that we have. We
welcome input to those decisions. The primary concern that we
have is with the timing and the timeliness of those decisions.
Mr. Waxman. Right. I think fairness means we provide the
same procedural rights to all stakeholders, rather than
providing special access only to favored parties, and it sounds
like you don't disagree with that point of view.
Mr. Lawrence. When I look at what we have done through out
consultative processes, we have consulted with more than 450 at
more than 450 different times across----
Mr. Waxman. I am not talking about who you consult with. I
am talking about who we----
Mr. Lawrence. And we would certainly support comments into
an EPA process.
Mr. Waxman. Ms. Ahtuangaruak, I am interested in your view
about whether it makes sense to have Alaskans come to
Washington, D.C., to resolve local clean air issues. How long
did it take you to travel here for today's hearing?
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. I started flying on Sunday night and I
got here Monday afternoon about 4 o'clock.
Mr. Waxman. Do you think it is appropriate to require
Alaskans to come to Washington, D.C.----
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. It would be a great taxing effort for
those that have respiratory difficulties to try to take that
trip. Many of them would not be able to come down and provide
testimony on their concerns.
Mr. Waxman. The bill would also exempt vessel servicing a
drillship such as icebreakers and oil spill response vessels
from having to install pollution controls.
Mr. Grafe, what percentage of the pollution would this
exempt from pollution controls and are there controls that
could reasonably be applied to these vessels?
Mr. Grafe. It would exempt up to 98 percent of the
pollution from Arctic offshore drilling from those controls.
And although I am not an expert in the technology of air
pollution control, I believe there are controls like catalytic
converters, et cetera, that could be put on those ships.
Mr. Waxman. OK, thank you. I see my time has expired. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Walden, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meyers, where is the EAB located?
Mr. Meyers. It is within EPA.
Mr. Walden. Physically, is it here in Washington?
Mr. Meyers. Yes.
Mr. Walden. And so if somebody wants to come appear before
or protest something, have a hearing, where do they have to
come?
Mr. Meyers. Well, I have not practiced before the EAB
myself.
Mr. Walden. But it is here in Washington, right?
Mr. Meyers. It is here in Washington, D.C. There was a
reference to allowing testimony by videoconferencing. I
couldn't testify to----
Mr. Walden. Which would make sense.
Mr. Grafe. I can speak to that if you would like.
Mr. Walden. Briefly.
Mr. Grafe. You can call in. You don't have to come.
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Mr. Grafe. You don't need a lawyer and there are no filing
fees so it is an easier access system for regular citizens.
Mr. Walden. You don't need a lawyer?
Mr. Grafe. No, you don't.
Mr. Walden. What a wonderful place.
Mr. Sullivan, first of all, thank you for your varied
service to the country and to the State of Alaska. I spent my
first year in college at Fairbanks in 1973, '74, and traveled
around Alaska. I have relatives up there.
I want to ask you, you mentioned in your testimony lack of
transparency, the administration's federal lands policy,
something my constituents in Eastern Oregon are very concerned
about. Can you just very briefly talk to this new Wild Lands
policy that has come out and the impact you see in Alaska?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, sir. That is just another good example.
It is mentioned in the testimony but it is Department of
Interior, as far as we can tell, internal guidance on possibly
having federal lands take on the use of a wilderness
designation without actually (a), being oKed by Congress, and
even going through a regulatory process. And I will just very
quickly mention one of the things that we have been trying to
do is get input as a State----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Sullivan. --with the Federal Government. We have been
asking for input. We have been asking for a heads-up on all
these different changes, these lists that I have put----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Sullivan. In that particular instance, I had a meeting
with a fairly senior Department of Interior official all about
State of Alaska wants input on any major decisions, notice, oh
yes, we are going to provide that. Within 12 hours after that
meeting, they announced the Wild Lands policy, which given that
we are the largest holder of BLM lands is going to affect
Alaska and possibly overturn what the NPRA is focused on, which
is a congressional focus on resource development. And we think
they could try and change that through administrative FEA.
Mr. Walden. We are already experiencing problems in the
Northwest with power line sidings that now are having to be
stopped and reviewed under this new Wild Lands policy to see if
it really has to be treated as wilderness.
Mr. Lawrence, what are your global competitors' experiences
with governments such as Norway, Russia, Greenland and Canada
regarding how they allow drilling in the Arctic and how do your
spill response capabilities compare to other companies in the
Arctic region?
Mr. Lawrence. Yes. Thanks very much. And it is not only our
global competitors but ourselves. We are active in those areas
also. If we look at our global competitors, there has just been
significant discovery made offshore Norway. That was just
announced last week in the Barents. There is significant
activity offshore Russia in the Sakhalin area. We are part of
that. There is significant activity offshore Greenland in a
major lease sales and we are also part of that but the----
Mr. Walden. So what is your timing process going through
their regulations and all?
Mr. Lawrence. The timing processes are much expedited in
places as diverse as Norway and Russia.
Mr. Walden. So you are 5 years here. What are you running
there?
Mr. Lawrence. Years versus 5 years.
Mr. Walden. How long?
Mr. Lawrence. Years versus 5 years.
Mr. Walden. All right. Dr. Goldsmith, I was actually on the
Fairbanks campus, not the Anchorage campus.
What effect would market certainty on Alaska OCS coming to
full scale have on oil prices in the short- and long-term? See,
we are back in kind of a speculation mode here I realize in the
market. But there are projections long-term of oil being $120 a
barrel. We will try it anyway. But $120 a barrel, I mean part
of it is supply and demand, right? And that affects market
price?
Mr. Goldsmith. I think the major impacts would be on
national security, on the balance of trade. I don't think that
it would have a significant effect on the price of oil because
of the way the world market works. Saudi Arabia could just cut
back by a million barrels a day.
Mr. Walden. You referenced in your testimony 35,000 jobs
long-term. I think it was Mr. Lawrence said 50,000 jobs. I will
take either of those numbers right now. But it is significant,
right?
Mr. Goldsmith. It is significant in the Alaska perspective,
certainly, yes. We are a small state and there are a large
number of jobs and they are all very high-paying jobs. So they
are important jobs.
Mr. Walden. I thank all of you for your testimony. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. Mrs. Capps, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to begin
by, unfortunately, expressing my frustration with this process.
While I appreciate that this committee has invited witnesses
from Alaska to testify, the potential effects of this
legislation go well beyond that State. It is important for this
subcommittee, I believe, to hear from EPA as well as other
states affected, particularly California, about this
legislation prior to marking it up. For that reason and others,
I have to say that in its current form, I cannot support this
draft bill. If enacted, it would result in significant
increases in air pollution in Santa Barbara County, which I
represent. At this point I would ask unanimous consent to enter
a letter addressed to you from the County of Santa Barbara into
the record.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

Mrs. Capps. The letter expresses concerns with provisions
contained in the discussion draft that would weaken California
State regulations limiting air pollution. Thank you.
Mr. Grafe, I want to thank you for your testimony. I thank
all the witnesses for your testimony today.
I represent California's central coast in Congress. We are
home to an active offshore oil and gas industry. Right now as I
speak over 20 platforms are drilling in the Santa Barbara
channel just a few miles off our coast. Those facilities emit
air pollutants that are known carcinogens and cause respiratory
problems. The facilities are also serviced and supported by
marine vessels that release large amounts of air pollution.
You write in your testimony that from 75 to 96 percent of
the total of each regulated pollutant is emitted by support
vessels in the Arctic. Are there no ways for the industry to
control these emissions or are there, Mr. Grafe?
Mr. Grafe. I think the technology exists that would be able
to control those emissions if EPA applied them.
Mrs. Capps. Is this technology readily available?
Mr. Grafe. I believe it is, although I am not an expert on
the technology. But I believe it is.
Mrs. Capps. Would you agree with me that the draft bill
would bar a permitting authority from requiring a company to
apply those technologies in order to reduce pollution from
these vessels?
Mr. Grafe. I agree.
Mrs. Capps. I am also concerned that the draft bill would
bar the application of other clean air rules. For example, the
California Air Resources Board has promulgated a harbor craft
rule designed to help coastal areas come into attainment with
ozone and particulate matter air quality standards. It appears
that the proposed bill would exempt service and support vessels
for OCS drilling operations from the current harbor draft
requirements. Would you agree with me that the proposed bill
would help companies escape regulation of the harbor craft rule
recently adopted by the California Air Resources Board?
Mr. Grafe. Yes, I think it would.
Mrs. Capps. Mr. Chairman, I think that speaks to the need,
at least from this perspective, for an additional hearing on
this draft bill so that we can get some other folks to enter
into the discussion. I think we need to have use of officials
from California on the record. I know that there are many that
have already expressed their concern to me about what is being
designed.
You list in your testimony a variety of health problems
associated with the potential emissions from proposed offshore
drilling. Santa Barbara County expects to realize significant
air pollution reductions from service and support boats that
serve the OCS drilling facilities as a result of the California
Air Resources Board harbor craft regulation--VOCs, 40 tons per
year; particulate matter, 8 tons per year; reactive organic
compounds, 5 tons per year.
So I am wondering if you would share with the committee
some of the public health benefits that people living in my
county or some similar folks that make their living in Santa
Barbara Channel like fisherman, which I am sure is going to be
the same in Alaska as well to see as a result of these
reductions?
Mr. Grafe. Lower rates of asthma, lower emergency room
visits, et cetera.
Mrs. Capps. Those are pretty big cost savings. It is
important for a responsible regulation to occur, don't you
agree, for our service and support vessels associated with OCS
development?
Mr. Grafe. I agree and that is true of Santa Barbara. It is
true in the Arctic even more so perhaps.
Mrs. Capps. Emissions from marine vessels represent the
single largest source of smog-forming air pollution in Santa
Barbara County. They account for over 40 percent of the air
pollution emissions. I think it is important to the attainment
and maintenance of the air quality health standards that all
marine vessels applying anywhere in my opinion but at least in
the areas that I represent, Santa Barbara Channel, are subject
to air quality regulations.
And whatever time I have left, Ms. Ahtuangaruak, I thank
you so much for your testimony, for traveling to Washington. I
think it is important for the committee to know the personal
stories of people, a person that you know who would be impacted
by this draft bill on your community, because you are the ones
who will bear the results of the regulations.
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. We have many people that have developed
respiratory distress. I have grandchildren that have asthma.
One of them is living with me right now. Anything that affects
the air for this child would be devastating. For us, having to
send a child out of the community to receive care when we are
in the villages, it takes the parent with them. It takes all
the hats that they wear with them. So it takes not just the
patient but the hats that the family wears with them. It costs
a lot for us to leave the village. We don't have many resources
to help us while we are out there. We have minimal resources to
obtain----
Mr. Whitfield. You can go on but just summarize quickly.
Ms. Ahtuangaruak [continuing]. Assistance for our efforts
to receive healthcare. And it is very difficult. And it costs a
lot.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you very much.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Barton, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you. My good friend from California just
talked about 20 active drilling platforms off the coast of
California I assume near her district or in her district. Mr.
Sullivan, how many platforms would be drilling today in Alaska
if you had gotten the permits that you asked for?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, Representative Barton, I know that--and
maybe Mr. Lawrence can speak to this more specifically, but I
know that last summer there were at least 5 exploration wells
that were going to be drilled by Shell. That would have been
hundreds of jobs for Alaskans and----
Mr. Barton. Five for 4 months. Mr. Lawrence, is that a good
number?
Mr. Lawrence. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Barton. I think 5 is, what, 20 percent of 25 or 25
percent. Mr. Sullivan, in your opinion is there a true public
health concern for the people of Alaska if five platforms drill
4 months a year?
Mr. Sullivan. Mr. Barton, I am not a health expert, but I
think that the answer in general is it would be minimal and I
also think that it is important to recognize--and maybe Mr.
Glenn can speak to this--that on the North Slope, including
leaders such as the mayor of the North Slope Borough who is the
senior elected official up there, there is support for this
exploration drilling.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Lawrence, can you tell me if California is
self-sufficient in oil production in terms of do they produce
enough oil in California that is turned into gasoline to take
care of all the cars and trucks that are in California?
Mr. Lawrence. No.
Mr. Barton. And to the extent they import oil, isn't most
of the oil they import, if it is domestically, isn't it from
Alaska?
Mr. Lawrence. Much of the oil that comes to California is
coming from Alaska and much of that is dependent on TAPS.
Mr. Barton. Could you, Mr. Lawrence, compare your
interaction with the EPA in Alaska to your interaction around
the world with other national environmental agencies?
Mr. Lawrence. I have had the privilege to be able to look
for oil and gas around the world in my role as leading Shell's
exploration effort. This is perhaps the most difficult region I
have ever been in in any country, in any location for working
through the permitting process in Alaska.
Mr. Barton. And how many billions of dollars has your
company invested so far in these leases?
Mr. Lawrence. We have spent over $2 billion on the leases.
We have spent over $1.5 billion on exploratory activities,
including science programs, including seismic programs, and
including what we can do to develop this safety.
Mr. Barton. And you had to be given the final permit to
drill one well, right?
Mr. Lawrence. In the time that I have waited to drill this
one well in Alaska, I have drilled more than 400 wells,
exploratory wells, worldwide.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Meyers, you were general counsel for the
minority of this committee when we passed the Clean Air Act
amendments back in 1990, isn't that correct?
Mr. Meyers. No, I was not general counsel at that point in
time.
Mr. Barton. You were on the Republican committee staff?
Mr. Meyers. I was chief of staff to a member on the
Conference Committee for the 1990 Clean Air Act amendments.
Mr. Barton. So you were part of this, right?
Mr. Meyers. I was a part of the discussions, yes.
Mr. Barton. Do you have any recollection on this specific
issue and those discussions?
Mr. Meyers. Yes.
Mr. Barton. Was it the intent, then, of those that--I was a
junior member so I was not a conferee but I was a member of the
committee. I certainly don't have a recollection that the way
EPA is acting today was our intent. Can you enlighten us if you
have a recollection when we put these things into the law?
Mr. Meyers. Well, I think my personal recollection is not,
obviously, part of the legislative history. When I looked at
the legislative history of this, it seemed to be centered
primarily on the experience of California, primarily on the
experience of trying to address onshore air pollution, and
trying to make sure that if somebody onshore, a factory had
installed something that was a stationary source offshore would
have to do something similar. That seems to be clearly what was
intended.
Mr. Barton. And my final question, Mr. Lawrence, can you
have your staff compare the emissions of one of your drilling
platforms to the emissions of a 747 airplane?
Mr. Lawrence. Yes, we would be happy to provide that
comparison.
Mr. Barton. Because my guess is that a 747 is going to have
more emissions flying in and out of LAX than one drilling
platform operating 4 months off the coast of Alaska. That is my
guess but I could be wrong.
With that I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Barton. Mr. Green, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Like my colleagues, I
would like to express that we give EPA as much of advanced
notice for these hearings simply because they need to be at the
table and I would hope we would keep that reserve place that my
colleague from Texas, Barton, mentioned that for the EPA
administrator.
Mr. Lawrence, first, congratulations. I have a district in
Houston and I know Shell got one of the first actual drilling
permits in the Gulf of Mexico, deepwater, and having a lot of
Shell employees and refinery and chemical plant in our
district, I was proud of that. I am glad the Agency is actually
releasing more permits, not near as much as we need.
But let me talk to you about Alaska because I have had the
opportunity to be in Alaska. I was actually on a drilling rig
in the Cook Inlet Kenai Peninsula in the North Slope both as a
state legislator and as a Member of Congress back in the '90s.
Let me ask you about this Environmental Appeals Board. EPA has
twice issued permits and the Environmental Appeals Board has
twice remanded the permits citing inadequate analysis at the
port. Critics of the bill say that the language transfers any
authority of the permit decisions from the EAB to federal
courts, which I have a local shareholder involvement. However,
as far as I know--and it was made earlier--that the same
location is here in Washington and so would be the federal
court. And I know that may have been under a Republican
administration that the EAB was created, but there seems to be
a problem. Can you elaborate on the EPA does not issue a final
order in bringing an issue to judicial review is extremely
difficult compared to what has been happening?
Mr. Lawrence. Yes, I think the greatest challenge that we
face is one of time. And to be clear, the drilling season in
Alaska is at the most 4 months, from July 1 and it goes to at
the latest October 30. The permitting process and the reviews
of that permitting process and that challenge typically can
take longer than the time that that drilling window is open.
And what that does is effectively every time it goes through
one of these review processes that extends beyond the time for
the drilling window and causes delays for another year. It
takes more than a year to plan the logistics to be able to
drill a well in Alaska, to be able to do it safely, and that is
what we are trying to do is to get out in front with enough
clarity, certainty to move forward in a timely manner and to
have our investments follow that path.
Mr. Green. OK. And I understand over 6 years and 1.5
billion and you cite Shell's work multiple years, the 3-D
seismograph collection, first of its kind, baseline science
shallow hazard surveys, geotechnical programs, numerous social
investment initiatives and hundreds of meetings with North
Slope residents. Additionally, you have utilized unmanned
aircraft and seabed listening devices and unmanned submarines
to name a few. And I know I read Mr. Grafe's grievances with
the process, but all those things that Shell did, is that
required in Norway or Denmark who has control of Greenland, or
even Canada?
Mr. Lawrence. We have done one of the most intensive
preparations for this program that we have done in any theater
around the world.
Mr. Green. OK. In my time left I want to get back to the
international issue because when we ran into the moratorium in
the Gulf of Mexico, is said why don't we just apply Norway
standards because I have been to Norway. I know all our majors
are there in Statoil, at least the last time we had a lease in
the Gulf actually was the highest bidder for leases. And if
Norway can drill in the Gulf and we can drill off Norway and
they have, I understand, the gold standard, Norway, Russia,
Greenland, and Canada are exploring the same thing. Can you
talk in detail about how far they are along in developing new
resources and the successes or failures you have had.
Mr. Lawrence. Yes, I would just like to be clear. I think
we have the gold standard here in the U.S. also and I think we
operate to that gold standard and we----
Mr. Green. Is there anything different between our standard
and what you would do in the high north and Norway?
Mr. Lawrence. No, we have taken most of the best practices
that we have had from both places looking at what we would do
in Norway and what we would do in Alaska and compared those.
Let me just say the development of those standards, we have
been operating in places like the North Sea for many years.
There are things such as a safety case, which describes
identification of the hazards, ways to mitigate and put
barriers to those hazards, clear roles and accountabilities for
that. We support that. We implement those in all of the
operations that we have.
If we look at such things as how we would handle mitigants
to stakeholders in communities, we have the same kind of
practices in dealing in Norway as we would here. We have looked
at discharge in Norway. How does that compare to discharge in
Alaska? We have tried to take the best practices from both. So
Norway has standards. We have strong standards here that
protect the environment and we comply with and exceed those
standards. In Russia, we are drilling wells, producing wells in
Russia right now. Russia has similarly elevated their standards
and we have complied with those. The difference is the
uncertainty in the timeline with which you are able to move
through those. And they provide clarity so you can get to the
point in Russia where you are able to drill a well.
And I would just say finally in Greenland we have now just
applied for a permitting, but as you know, another oil company
actually drilled wells off of Greenland after a much shorter
time in accessing their permits.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, it is amazing that we are much
slower than Russia. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. That is a sad state of affairs. Mr. Gardner,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you again
for your time and testimony and traveling so far to be here to
many of you.
But as I have noticed on this committee throughout the
short 99 days that I have been in Congress, there seems to be a
lot of things that get said that aren't the truth in terms of
how they affect or impact the bill. And so I think there is a
lot of miscommunication and confusion that is out there and the
various testimony has presented. And so I want to clarify a
little bit of this.
The fact is these ships that people talked about will be
and are regulated. They are regulated under Title II of the
Clean Air Act. Is that correct, Mr. Meyers?
Mr. Meyers. Yes. And as my written testimony points out,
EPA has been very active in this area over the last 10 years.
Mr. Gardner. So to say that they are completely exempted,
gutted, is untrue.
Mr. Meyers. Right.
Mr. Gardner. And when somebody has a refinery, is the
delivery truck to that refinery counted as the refinery's
emissions?
Mr. Meyers. That does not apply. Basically, the Clean Air
Act contains a definition in 302(z) of a stationary source
which excludes those emissions resulting directly from an
internal combustion engine for transportation purposes or from
a non-road engine--which is what a marine vessel is--or a non-
rotor vehicle.
Mr. Gardner. So the train that delivers coal to the
factory, the UPS truck delivers parts to the dealership, those
aren't counted as part of that store's source.
Mr. Meyers. I think the issue is--and as this legislation
would still count those emissions. Those emissions will be
counted and effectively attributed to the source for other
purposes. The issue here is whether you are going to regulate a
ship as a stationary source. And the act doesn't require that.
That is the interpretation. The interpretation difference
between myself and Mr. Grafe's interpretation of the act is he
reads Section 165 differently than I do in terms of just the
statutory construction. So we have fundamental disagreement on
how PSD applies.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Meyers. And then I have also
heard that this takes away people's ability to address their
grievances, to comment. Can you please tell me a little bit
about how the notice-and-comment period would work under this?
Mr. Meyers. Well, it doesn't affect any other procedures.
It says basically that you have 6 months from the time you have
a complete permit application and then it becomes a final
agency decision. The issue here that we have been talking about
with respect to EAB is that EPA is effectively taken a position
in filings in the court case that the Clean Air Act statutory
limits do not apply the EAB review.
Mr. Gardner. So the assertion that the bill will prevent
grievances from being heard is untrue?
Mr. Meyers. Yes, basically it will be a shortened process
but the public process provisions are not amended by the
legislation and everybody has recourse to file a judicial
petition.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you. Do they need a lawyer to do that?
Mr. Meyers. Pardon?
Mr. Gardner. Do they need a lawyer to do that?
Mr. Meyers. Well, as a lawyer I would say it is advisable
but----
Mr. Gardner. It is not the lawyer job creation act.
Mr. Meyers. I believe it would be possible for somebody to
appear on their own behalf but----
Mr. Gardner. Thank you. And Mr. Sullivan, what certainty
would the Jobs and Energy Permitting Act provide for businesses
and job creators in Alaska?
Mr. Sullivan. Representative Gardner, I think that is the
key question because what I try to lay out in the written
testimony is that across the board in terms of exploration and
production of hydrocarbons on both state and especially federal
lands, there is immense uncertainty across the board throughout
the State of Alaska. That is why I provided all those different
examples. And what we see, it is chilling investment companies.
They don't know how to make decisions right now.
Mr. Gardner. This would provide certainty?
Mr. Sullivan. This would provide significant certainty in
that----
Mr. Gardner. Thank you. Mr. Lawrence, would the millions of
acres leased in offshore Alaska where companies like yours have
not been permitted by the government to drill be included in
what President Obama refers to as ``idled leases'' when he
talks about the use-it-or-lose-it issue?
Mr. Lawrence. It is particularly painful to me to look at
the use-it-or-lose-it issue as it would apply to Alaska since I
have been trying to use it for the last 5-1/2 years.
Mr. Gardner. You have been trying to use this--and thank
you. That is good enough.
Before Alaska, what was the longest amount of time you have
witnessed between a lease being purchased and drilling
operations commencing for permitting reasons?
Mr. Lawrence. This is the longest that I have seen for
permitting reasons.
Mr. Gardner. For permitting reasons, thank you. Mr. Meyers,
in your testimony, you mentioned that EPA's regulations
promulgating the relevant Clean Air section, Section 328,
should not be used for the purpose of preventing exploration
and development of the OCS. However, after over 5 years, that
appears to be exactly what is happening here. Would you agree?
Mr. Meyers. Yes, I have not been involved in a lot of this
but I think that the process has been excessive.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Sullivan?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Lawrence?
Mr. Lawrence. Yes.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Glenn?
Mr. Glenn. Yes.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you. Thank you for your time today. I
yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Gardner. The gentleman from
Kansas, Mr. Pompeo, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think we have gotten
to most of the things that I wanted to talk about this morning,
but I have just a couple of things that I would like to follow
up on.
Now, you may not all see this, but this is not the only
place that EPA is working against American energy production.
It is not just offshore. In fact, if you come to Kansas, you
will see the same thing. You will see the same thing with
respect to folks that are trying to grow live stock guise. EPA
in my judgment has truly entered a realm that we have not seen
in an awfully long time. And so when you see them taking rules
and contorting them into places which do incredible harm to
American job creation, I think what we are doing here today is
just a tiny step along the task that I am glad Chairman
Whitfield and Chairman Upton are leading us down.
I wanted to ask you, Mr. Lawrence, or perhaps Mr. Sullivan,
too, so you have been at this since 2006. There was a change in
administrations then. Have you seen any significant change in
the way EPA has been responsive to you as the administration
changed?
Mr. Lawrence. I would agree with the comment that was made
earlier that with the EPA I don't see this as an administration
issue. I think it is an issue that sits within the EPA.
Mr. Pompeo. So it is internal to either the culture or the
people----
Mr. Lawrence. Yes, and again I am not an expert on the
internal culture.
Mr. Pompeo. Yes, I understand that. I am becoming one.
Mr. Lawrence. Yes.
Mr. Sullivan. If I may, I think what we try to do is lay
out examples beyond the EPA with regard to resource development
in Alaska and I do think that there has been a shift with
regard to resource development and very proactively focused
shutdown resource development mindset among a lot of federal
agencies, not just the EPA. And that is what we try to do on
our written testimony.
Mr. Pompeo. I appreciate that. I guess my last question or
perhaps a couple questions, Mr. Grafe, tell me a little bit
about your practice and who are the funding sources for your
practice?
Mr. Grafe. Well, I don't have the exact funding sources,
but we are a nonprofit law firm that represents at no cost
communities, environmental groups, individuals, so we don't
charge our clients. We get money from members who are members
of our organization, just regular people. We have got some
foundation money and if you would like I can provide--it is all
publicly available.
Mr. Pompeo. I would appreciate that. Is there any
government money that comes to you either directly or through
grants to foundations that in turn provide that capital to you?
Mr. Grafe. No, I don't think we get----
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Pompeo, would you yield for just 1
minute?
Mr. Pompeo. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. What about being awarded legal fees after a
case has been filed against the EPA?
Mr. Grafe. Well, against--the Clean Air Act has provisions.
Mr. Whitfield. But I mean does your law firm receive
revenue from that?
Mr. Grafe. Yes, we do receive revenue from----
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Pompeo.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that. I
was heading that direction but thanks for getting us there more
quickly. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. I am sorry.
Mr. Pompeo. No, don't be sorry. I am thrilled.
Mr. Whitfield. I recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me ask this of
Mr. Sullivan. What has Canada's experience in Arctic drilling
proven thus far? And I am looking at the geology climate, you
know, and are there differences? What has Canada's experience
been?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, right now they have a very active
program with regard to the oil sands and I think that has been
an area where, although there is environmental concerns there,
they have been addressed in many ways and they have very active
production and investment in that part of Canada that is really
creating thousands if not tens of thousands of jobs.
Mr. Griffith. How does their regulatory framework compare
to ours?
Mr. Sullivan. I don't know the specifics but we could get
back to you on----
Mr. Griffith. That would be great but you are under the
impression that it doesn't take 5, 6 years to get moving on a
project?
Mr. Sullivan. Absolutely. It doesn't.
Mr. Griffith. All right. And then you listed off in your
comments--and they may have been in your written statement but
I couldn't find them--the various places that you had visited
and that you had concerns that the EPA might actually be
inadvertently harming the environment because they were
allowing all of this production and activity to be pushed into
other countries where they had no regulation or did not have
regulations close to the regulations that we have in the United
States. Could you expand on that for me, please?
Mr. Sullivan. Sure. I think it is a point that is often
overlooked because----
Mr. Griffith. Me, too.
Mr. Sullivan. --ostensibly this very anti-development
policy that we are seeing in Alaska is supposedly undertaken to
protect the global environment. We actually think it has the
opposite effect because if you drive development and production
from countries or places like Alaska that have world-class
environmental standards to places overseas that don't. And as I
mentioned, every one of those countries I mentioned I have been
to, then you from a global environmental perspective, you are
actually degrading the global environment because production is
taking place in areas where it is not nearly as stringent as it
would be in Alaska.
Mr. Griffith. Could you tell me what those countries were
again because----
Mr. Sullivan. I mentioned Brazil, Russia, Azerbaijan,
Kazakhstan, Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Griffith. OK. And as a result of not using the energy,
would you think that it might also be that we are also pushing
some jobs in a similar vein over there that could be here that
would also be regulated more here than they would be there?
Mr. Sullivan. Absolutely. There is no doubt about that.
Mr. Griffith. And when you talk about the global
environment, you are talking about climate change and air
quality issues, are you not?
Mr. Sullivan. I am talking about degradation to the global
environment, yes.
Mr. Griffith. And wouldn't it be true that the nations that
you mentioned, with the exception of maybe Saudi Arabia, all of
that air is the same air that we are breathing a few days
later?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, not being a scientist, I think it is
eventually all air that we are all breathing.
Mr. Griffith. If I told you that there was a NASA study
that said the air from the Gobi Desert got to the eastern shore
of Virginia in 10 days, you wouldn't disagree with that?
Mr. Sullivan. No.
Mr. Griffith. And if it is going from Gobi to the eastern
shore of Virginia, it is probably going from Russia and
Kazakhstan to Alaska, would you not agree with that?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, sir.
Mr. Griffith. Let me switch to my friend whose name I can't
pronounce. Can you pronounce it for me again, ma'am?
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. Ahtuangaruak.
Mr. Griffith. It may take me a while to get that down. I
have some genuine curiosity. I get global warming, rains,
floods, caribou crossing the rivers. I didn't get the lack of
growth in the plants that the caribou would eat once they cross
the rivers and the insect production for the birds. Can you
explain those to me and how that plays into this?
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. The early growth of the plants are very
important for the calves. And if the calves aren't able to get
across the rivers before they break up, they may not get to the
important----
Mr. Griffith. So it is more the river than the plant
production?
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. All of it is related.
Mr. Griffith. OK. I guess my concern was is that if the
global warming theory has it that the rivers are flooded, it
would seem to me that there would be more plant production.
Now, I understand getting across the river. I got that part. Do
you see where I am going?
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. Do you agree or disagree with me that there
ought to be more plants if it is warmer.
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. We need the animals to be there.
Mr. Griffith. I understand that. I got that. I followed
that part of it. I just didn't follow the other. How about the
insects?
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. With the insects it is related to the
environment, the water, the growth of the plants, all of those
are associated. If we are having changes in our environment and
less of those things that are occurring naturally, it affects
the amount of the insects that are available for the birds to
eat.
Mr. Griffith. I know this sounds like a crazy question, but
it is the kind of stuff I actually like. Do you know how many
insect species you have in that area?
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. Not----
Mr. Griffith. I don't know mine either. I am just curious.
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. Not specifically. I know there was 114
bees at one time studied in Alaska, but that is all I know for
sure.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I appreciate it very much. I yield
back my time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Scalise,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
holding this hearing and bringing this legislation. Clearly, I
think we have seen a pattern for over a year now with this
administration, a broader sense with EPA, the inability to
allow American people to go to work, creating American jobs and
creating American energy. And it has been a big frustration of
mine. In south Louisiana, we are experiencing--I appreciate the
comments that we had on the first panel from Senator Murkowski
and Senator Begich and our colleague Representative Young in
the battles that are being fought in Alaska.
And you know, it is very frustrating hearing some of the
same stories, you know, in the case here, EPA, 6 years trying
to get a permit for one company to go to explore to create jobs
for American energy. And you know, we are seeing that in south
Louisiana where so many of our people are still trying to get
back to work drilling safely there. And over 12,000 jobs we
have lost in the last 11 months in many cases because the
administration is not allowing our people to go back to work
who didn't do anything wrong, who had absolutely nothing to do
with the mistakes of BP. These were companies who were drilling
safely and producing energy for this country.
And you know, it is interesting when you hear the President
going to Rio and saying we are going to drill in Brazil and
then he comes back to America and says oh, and we are going to
reduce American reliance on foreign energy by 1/3. Well, you
know, if you are shutting down production in America, you are
going and bragging to the people of Brazil that you are going
to drill there, and then you come back here and say oh, by the
way, we are going to reduce our imports by 1/3, those numbers
don't add up. And the American people, I think, get that. When
you see the skyrocketing price of gasoline, I mean maybe their
approach is if they let the gas prices get so high, then there
would be a reduction in demand but it is because our economy
would be crippled. And that is not a position we can allow
ourselves to be in.
And so I have got a few questions for the panel here. I
will start with Mr. Sullivan. You know, we have heard
statements from the administration that, you know, America
doesn't have the resources and we need to get it from other
places because we have got less than 2 percent of the world's
reserves, but yet I hear that there are a lot of--especially
with the new technology that is out there--there is a lot more
reserves that we have in this country that are prohibited by
the Federal Government from even being explored.
So Mr. Sullivan, from your experience in Alaska, what would
you respond to in relation to those claims by the
administration that less than 2 percent of the world's reserves
are in America?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, I think first of all, the U.S.
Geological Survey in 2008 showed that the North Slope of Alaska
has estimates of 40 billion barrels of convention oil, 236
trillion cubic feet of gas, and it noted that that is probably
the largest area of oil in the Arctic of all the other
countries. And that is just conventional. When we are talking
about heavy and viscous and shale oil, you are going into
several billions more barrels.
So I think one of the important things we wanted to make
sure the committee was aware that Alaska remains a world-class
hydrocarbon basin compared to any other place in the world. It
could supply America for decades.
Mr. Scalise. And I appreciate that because I have heard
similar numbers. I think Senator Begich said 40 to 60 billion
barrels that they want to go and be able to explore for in
Alaska, you know, of course, in the Outer Continental Shelf. In
south Louisiana, there are many areas of the shelf that are
closed off from exploration that have vast amounts of reserves
as well. And of course, with the new technologies, the ability
to go and explore and extract and of course the jobs that go
with it.
I want to ask Dr. Goldsmith, in terms of jobs lost,
opportunity lost, energy security lost, by putting these delays
in place, by having administrative bureaucracies shutting off
our ability to go and access these 40 billion or more barrels,
what does that mean in terms of jobs lost in America and energy
security lost in America?
Mr. Goldsmith. Well, I think the biggest risk is
postponement so that the pipeline shuts down. And that would
have the most dramatic effect on jobs both in Alaska and
nationally. You would be talking about 100,000 jobs in Alaska
and probably the same amount in the rest of the U.S. for sure.
Mr. Scalise. So 200,000 jobs just on the effect--if I
could, Mr. Chairman, I want to submit for the record--this is a
letter from the Alyeska Pipeline Company, a company that
operates the pipeline. And they do detail the importance of the
pipeline and how----
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Scalise. Less than 2 years ago I got to go to Alaska
and we went to Prudhoe Bay. We went to Section 1002 of ANWR,
which is talked about a lot. As Senator Murkowski said, you
know, this is something we still ought to pursue as well. You
know, and these are areas that Section 1002 of ANWR is not the
visuals that a lot of people see with, you know, fields and
caribou running around. Section 1002 looks just like Prudhoe
Bay and yet it is closed off from production and a vast amount
of reserves there.
And we went to the pipeline where, you know, the threats
from some of the same radicals who shut down exploration in
Alaska for oil were saying don't build the pipeline. You will
eliminate the caribou population. And we saw caribou everywhere
around the pipeline. And they said I think the population has
tripled because the caribou actually thrive in the environment
because of the warmth of the pipeline. You know, you don't hear
them revising those false statements. And you know, and yet
they come out and just try to shut off more things.
So I don't know if, Dr. Goldsmith, if you want to address,
you know, not only what they said but the lifespan--what
happens if no new areas are opened up and the pipeline does in
fact dry up? What kind of resource would our country be losing?
Mr. Goldsmith. Everybody has a different estimate of what
the ultimate resources are on the North Slope but whoever
estimates you accept, they are huge. And without the pipeline
or some alternative means of getting that resource to market,
we are losing a tremendous opportunity for the Nation.
Mr. Scalise. Thanks. And final question, Mr. Lawrence. I
know you talked about the use-it-or-lose-it provisions. We are
experiencing that, too, in the Gulf where companies are not
able to go and explore their leases because the Federal
Government is not allowing them to, yet the clock keeps
ticking. So it is like the referee is holding the ball and the
clock is running and you are down by one, you just want the
ball to take your shot and the ref is letting the clock run
out. So I guess that is what you are experiencing with the 6-
year delay you have had?
Mr. Lawrence. Certainly in Alaska, but remember, we are
also very active in the Gulf of Mexico. We had just made 5
discoveries in a row and we would very much like to appraise
those discoveries and bring those online and we are delayed in
that. It is a very difficult challenge requiring the best of
our technologies to be able to go from a lease to finding the
prospect, to finding the drill site. And if you look at some of
the major developments in the Gulf of Mexico that have had--it
takes that lease period to be able to apply that technology
appropriately to be able to develop the lease and produce the
oil and gas.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you for your comments. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Olson, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair. I thank the witnesses for
coming today for your testimony and your expertise. Home
stretch. Last Member of Congress asking questions. My focus is
going to be on three issues here. First of all, Shell's
experience up there in the Chukchi Seas, lessons learned from
the Gulf of Mexico spill, and the impact on Alaska of the oil
and gas industry on the economy.
And first of all, my question again for you, Mr. Lawrence,
and Shell, I have many Shell employees in the district I
represent and according to the testimony that many of you have
put forth today and by the Alaska Delegation, Shell Oil Company
again talks with EPA in February of 2006, so over 5 years ago,
the start of a process that has yet to conclude. The EPA has
twice issued permits and the EAB has twice remanded the permits
citing inadequate analysis and support. My question for you,
Mr. Lawrence, what specifically do you recommend that this
Congress does to make EPA do its job?
Mr. Lawrence. I think what we are looking for is first, the
EPA should provide clear, thorough, robust recommendations in a
timely fashion such that we can make the requisite business
decisions that we need to make to invest for oil and gas in
this country. Now, very specifically what we are recommending
is three things. The first is we need simple clarity on where
we will measure these emissions relative to the major source.
And we would recommend, again, that that would be placed as a
definition at where the fence line is. And we could say that
the most logical place for that would be where the communities
are. So that would be number one.
The second thing that we would like to do is to say when we
look at this clear definition of when it becomes a source. And
that should not be very complicated. I would submit that
something becomes a stationary source either when you start
drilling--that would be the simplest way to do it--or you might
say when you set anchors. Choose the simplest. Tell us what
that is. That is what we will comply with and that is what we
will move forward.
And the third is that provide a time frame when those
decisions must be taken because as I say, when the time frame
for the process is significantly longer than when the drilling
window is open, that simply precludes you from being able to
make progress. And we would recommend a 6-month time frame.
Mr. Olson. How does this unpredictable regulatory
environment impact the investment up in Alaska? To put it
another way, based on your experience up in the Chukchi Sea,
why would any investment company go up there and invest in oil
and gas?
Mr. Lawrence. As the company that is responsible for having
invested the $2.1 billion there, I think it is a great
question. Every day, every month that goes by you have that
money sitting there not being invested in other places that you
could have invested those dollars. What that does, it really
applies increased risk to where you are going to make those
investments. And as we all know, in an environment of increased
fiscal risk and increased uncertainty, that tends to drive
investments elsewhere.
Mr. Olson. Thank you for the answer. I will use the
microphone this time. But I am going to have to cut this a
little bit short so I just want to talk about the impact of
these regulations on the Alaskan economy. And we have had
testimony here from many of you. I heard as I was walking down,
90 percent of the revenue that Alaska generates comes from the
oil and gas industry? And so I mean what are the impacts of
these regulations on Alaska's budget? Without it, I mean, how
can you maintain the quality of life for the Alaskan people?
And I would like to ask that question, Mr. Sullivan, Mr. Glenn,
and Ms.--let me make sure I get this right, the pronunciation,
I want to apologize--Ms. Ahtuangaruak. All right.
Mr. Sullivan. Well, I will begin. We are very concerned
about the TAPS throughput issue. We don't think that that needs
to be the destiny of Alaska or the country to have continued
throughput decline. And that was another reason I mentioned our
governor, we have set out a goal for a million barrels through
the TAPS in a decade, and we think it would be great if the
Congress could support and make that a national priority. But
if that continues or, as we had this winter, a shutdown, it
would be devastating not only to the government funding, which
is where we get the majority of our government funding, but
also to the broader economy, as Dr. Goldsmith mentioned.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Glenn?
Mr. Glenn. For the continued operation of the pipeline is
the lifeblood of our State, and most immediately, it is the
single factor that has improved the quality of life for the
people in our region. We are talking about where it is a huge
technical problem just to flush a toilet or have safe running
water. It is these quality-of-life improvements that have come
to these far-flung communities has only been due to the
presence of a stable oil and gas industry in our region.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Goldsmith, I would ask you to be quick here.
Mr. Goldsmith. I would just agree with what Mr. Sullivan
and Mr. Glenn had said. Oil revenues are 90 percent of the
total and without them I don't know how we would pay for
education, health, other basic services throughout the State.
Mr. Olson. Thank you, sir. And finally, last but certainly
not least, Mayor Ahtuangaruak.
Ms. Ahtuangaruak. Thank you. Shutting down the TAPS would
definitely hurt many people but it should not be at the cost of
the health of the people that are around the areas of oil and
gas development.
Mr. Olson. Thank you, ma'am. I thank the witnesses and
thank the chair.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, I also want to thank the witnesses. We
appreciate you being here. I know many of you came from very
long distances and your testimony was really important as we
consider this discussion draft introduced by Mr. Gardner. And
with that this----
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit for the
record a Rule 2 letter signed by all the minority members of
the subcommittee which requests----
Mr. Whitfield. Is it Rule 2?
Mr. Rush. Rule 11. Sorry, Rule 11 letter signed by all the
members of the minority that requests an additional
subcommittee hearing with the EPA representatives before the
subcommittee markup on this bill.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, I think the letter has been given to
staff, but thank you very much. We will certainly take it into
consideration.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. And I would say once again that we did
invite EPA, and the EPA administrator was on the Hill today.
But we have got the letter and we are taking it under
consideration and we will be back in touch with you quickly.
With that, the hearing is concluded, and there will be 10
days for additional materials to be entered into the record.
Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:47 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]


