- REVIEW OF THE PROPOSED GENERIC DRUG AND BIOSIMILARS USER FEES AND FURTHER EXAMINATION OF DRUG SHORTAGES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REVIEW OF THE PROPOSED GENERIC DRUG AND BIOSIMILARS USER FEES AND
FURTHER EXAMINATION OF DRUG SHORTAGES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 9, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-114

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

81-517 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JIM MATHESON, Utah
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  officio)
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Tim Murphy, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     4
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     4
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    16
Hon. John D. Dingell, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Michigan, opening statement.................................    17
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................   170
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, prepared statement.........................   171
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of West Virginia, prepared statement.................   172

Witnesses

Janet Woodcock, Director, Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research, Food and Drug Administration.........................    18
Prepared statement...........................................    20
Answers to submitted questions...............................   173
Theresa Mullin, Director, Office of Planning and Informatics,
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research \1\....................
Peter Beckerman, Senior Advisor, Office of Policy, Food and Drug
Administration \1\.............................................
Valerie Jensen, Associate Director, Center for Drug Evaluation
and Research, Drug Shortage Program, Food and Drug
Administration \1\.............................................
Heather Bresch, Chief Executive Officer, Mylan, Inc..............    97
Prepared statement...........................................   100
Answers to submitted questions...............................   189
David Gaugh, Vice President, Regulatory Sciences, Generic
Pharmaceutical Association.....................................   120
Prepared statement...........................................   122
Answers to submitted questions...............................   191
Bill Greene, Chief Pharmaceutical Officer, Pharmaceutical
Services, Member, Pharmaceutical Sciences, St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital..............................................   141
Prepared statement...........................................   144
Answers to submitted questions...............................   193

Submitted Material

Executive Summary of Society of Gynecologic Oncology's Drug
Shortage Survey, dated September 2011, submitted by Mr. Burgess     8
Letter, dated January 6, 2012, from Dale P. Conner, Director,
Division of Bioequivalence I, Office of Generic Drugs, Center
for Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration,
Department of Health & Human Services, to Michael Dwyer, Azaya
Therapeutics, submitted by Mr. Burgess.........................    14
Analysis, undated, of H.R. 1483, the Drug Safety Enhancement Act
of 2011, submitted by Mr. Dingell..............................    46
Statement, dated February 9, 2012, of American Academy of
Pediatrics, submitted by Mr. Pitts.............................    63
Statement, dated February 9, 2012, of American Society of Health-
System Pharmacists, submitted by Mr. Pitts.....................    69
Statement, dated February 9, 2012, of National Community
Pharmacists Association, submitted by Mr. Pitts................    73
Statement, dated February 7, 2012, of the Biotechnology Industry
Organization, submitted by Mr. Pitts...........................    91

----------
\1\ Ms. Mullin, Mr. Beckerman, and Ms. Jensen did not present
statements for the record.

REVIEW OF THE PROPOSED GENERIC DRUG AND BIOSIMILARS USER FEES AND
FURTHER EXAMINATION OF DRUG SHORTAGES

----------

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 9, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joe Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Burgess, Shimkus,
Murphy, Gingrey, Latta, Lance, Cassidy, Pallone, Dingell,
Towns, Engel, Capps, DeGette, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Clay Alspach, Counsel, Health; Michael
Beckerman, Deputy Staff Director; Nancy Dunlap, Health Fellow;
Paul Edattel, Professional Staff Member, Health; Debbee Keller,
Press Secretary; Ryan Long, Chief Counsel, Health; Carly
McWilliams, Legislative Clerk; John O'Shea, Senior Health
Policy Advisor; Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator, Environment
and Economy; Heidi Stirrup, Health Policy Coordinator; Phil
Barnett, Democratic Staff Director; Alli Corr, Democratic
Policy Analyst; Eric Flamm, FDA Detailee; Karen Nelson,
Democratic Deputy Committee Staff Director for Health; Rachel
Sher, Democratic Senior Counsel; and Elizabeth Letter,
Democratic Assistant Press Secretary.
Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The Chair
recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Today, we will discuss two new user fee authorizations, one
for generics and one for biosimilars, and also examine the
worsening drug shortage problem facing our country. Under the
terms of the Generic Drug User Fee agreement that industry and
FDA have negotiated, industry will pay approximately $1.5
billion over the next 5 years in exchange for more efficient
and predictable review of generic drug applications and
increased inspections of drug facilities.
Currently, there are approximately 3,000 generic drug
applications sitting in a backlog at FDA. One of the goals of
the agreement is to eliminate this backlog within 5 years,
speeding generic drugs to the patients who need them without
sacrificing quality or safety. Another goal of the agreement is
to have FDA inspect all drug facilities at an increased
frequency and to bring parity between inspections of foreign
and domestic facilities.
Industry and FDA have also negotiated a second user fee
agreement for biosimilars--those products approved under the
abbreviated approval pathway for biological products shown to
be highly similar to an FDA-licensed biological product. This
subcommittee has spent a great deal of time in the last few
years trying to achieve a pathway to approval for biosimilars.
This agreement authorizes four types of fees: application,
product, establishment, and biosimilars product development, to
make this a reality.
Finally, every day we are hearing from providers in our
districts about increased difficulties in acquiring the drugs
necessary to treat their patients. As this subcommittee looks
to develop a package of ways to alleviate drug shortages, I
look forward to hearing from our witnesses and learning their
views on the matter.
Again, thank you to all of our witnesses on both panels and
I will yield the balance of my time to Mr. Murphy from
Pennsylvania for an opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TIM MURPHY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Brand name and generic medicines are simultaneously
necessary and essential components of quality and cost-
effective healthcare, but approximately 78 percent of
prescriptions dispensed in the United States in 2010 were
filled with generic drugs. It is estimated that over the last
10 years, the use of generic medications has saved our
healthcare system nearly $1 trillion. However, in recent years,
the backlog of generic drug applications at the Food and Drug
Administration has dramatically increased. Today, there are
over 2,500 applications awaiting review with an average review
time of almost 31 months. At the same time, events like the
2007 contamination of heparin manufactured in China have raised
serious concerns about the security of the U.S. pharmaceutical
supply chain.
Today, 40 percent of all drugs sold in the U.S. are
manufactured overseas and as much as 80 percent of the active
pharmaceutical ingredients--called API--in those drugs come
from foreign sources. According to the Government
Accountability Office, FDA inspects U.S. pharmaceutical
factories every 2 to 3 years but inspects overseas facilities
on average only once every 9 years.
In the face of these challenges, the FDA and the generic
pharmaceutical industry have come together with other
stakeholders to negotiate a historic 5-year agreement that will
bring less expensive therapies to market faster. Less expensive
drugs mean better access to care for patients; that means fewer
costly complications from untreated chronic diseases, fewer
hospitalizations. Industry has agreed to do their part by
paying $1.5 billion in user fees to FDA over 5 years and in
return FDA has pledged to review 90 percent of new applications
within 10 months by year 5 of the agreement. The FDA has also
agreed to work to address supply chain safety concerns while
ensuring level playing fields for domestic and foreign
manufacturers by achieving parity between domestic and foreign
facility inspections.
Yesterday, I introduced the Generic Drug and Biosimilar
User Fee Act of 2012 based on this agreement with
Representatives Pallone, Pitts, and Waxman. I look forward to
working with my colleagues on this committee as we review to
enact this critical piece of legislation.
Finally, let me thank and commend Representative Dingell
for his many years of leadership and work on the issue of drug
safety. When we enact this legislation, it will be to a large
extent because of his dedication and long-term efforts.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now yields to
the ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Waxman, for 5
minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Today, we begin the process of establishing two critically
important programs at FDA that will help speed low-cost generic
drugs and biosimilars to the market. Because these are new user
fee programs that will now join the other long-existing
programs, just yesterday, Representative Murphy, Pallone,
Pitts, and I introduced the Generic Drug and Biosimilars User
Fee Act which will give FDA the authority and resources it
needs to review generic applications in a timely and effective
manner. I am proud that we were able to work together in such a
strong bipartisan fashion on this legislation. It reflects our
shared commitment to ensuring that American patients have
access to these life-saving medicines early and at a price they
can afford.
I also want to commend FDA and the biotech and generic drug
industries for the hard work they put into negotiating these
thoughtful and thorough proposals. These programs are long
overdue. We have had a long history of success with the other
user fee programs for brand name drugs and medical devices. In
contrast, for some time now, FDA's generic drug review program
has been starved for resources, which resulted in a dramatic
backlog of applications. That, of course, has meant fewer
generic drugs on the market and consequently higher medication
prices for American patients. At long last, this legislation
will help us turn this untenable situation around.
Likewise, FDA will also now have the resources it needs to
review applications for biosimilar drugs. By most accounts,
biotech drugs are the most promising medicines on the horizon.
This law will permit FDA to fully implement the newly
established biosimilars pathway and we will all begin to see
its benefits.
On a different note, I am encouraged that the subcommittee
is taking another look at the very dire situation surrounding
drug shortages. This is the kind of issue that can and should
be tackled on a bipartisan basis. It is a complex and
multifaceted problem but I feel confident that we will work
together to find workable solutions.
Thank you for holding this hearing today and I look forward
to the testimony of our witnesses. I yield back my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and at this point
recognizes the vice chairman of the Health Subcommittee, Dr.
Burgess, for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the recognition.
Dr. Woodcock, welcome to our committee. Certainly, you have
always been very receptive to our questions and we appreciate
the efforts that you provided to me and my staff on our visit
to the FDA a few months ago.
We are discussing two of the pending user fee agreements
before the committee, but also today, I think many of us are
interested in the issue of the drug shortages. When doctors
lack the essential tools, they are extremely restricted as to
what they can do for patients. It is a complex issue. You have
stated that before. Your agency has stated that before. But
make no mistake; the FDA has a role in helping us find a
solution.
In calendar year 2010, over 240 drugs were identified as
being in short supply or unavailable and more than 400 generic
equivalents were backordered. Many generic lines operate at
margins that are so tight that when production becomes
difficult, they can't afford to make the changes to revamp
their machinery and make those compounds available. In an ideal
free market, competitors would then move in and assume this
market share, but now we are in a situation where some
competitors cannot afford to ramp up to meet the resulting
demand. We have to ask ourselves is this the result of hyper-
competition? And if so, is that ultimately a good thing? So is
approval of multiple competitors in a limited space leading to
market forces that actually end up driving patients back to
branded products at higher prices and increased spending? Is
that good in the long run?
And inevitably, we have to face the over 3,000 number of
backlogs of generic applications and I am very interested in
tracking the goals in this user fee agreement in regard to the
one-time fee the industry has agreed to in order to clear that
backlog.
Finally, we have to look at the issue of bioequivalence and
when the Food and Drug Administration chooses to exercise the
flexibility they have in the approval process. In some
instances, I believe this authority has been used questionably.
In others, I question why it hasn't been used at all. On
January 6, in response to a request for flexibility on
bioequivalent studies for a substitute for Doxil, a
chemotherapeutic agent used in treating gynecologic cancer, Mr.
Conner, the Director of Bioequivalence of the Office of Generic
Drugs wrote, ``the Food and Drug Administration may take steps
to expedite regulatory reviews. However, the Agency has
determined that it is necessary that bioequivalence or
bioavailability study in patients be conducted.''
Now, I don't have any other information on the quality of
this submission, but I do know this: Doxil is gone now to treat
patients. The line is shut down. Any stockpile that was there
went to treat the ill, and that is appropriate, but how do you
conduct a bioequivalent study if you don't have the product
against which to test? When you are doing a randomized clinical
trial, it requires that you have the product to test. You can't
do that, and yet the Food and Drug Administration just simply
wants to say, ``Well, you have got to do the bioequivalence
study.'' They are not telling us what we should do in this
event where we have no product left against which to test.
These are tools on which physicians rely every day, and what do
we do when they are not there?
Here are some other observations: ``A 51-year-old patient
with platinum-resistant ovarian cancer had already been treated
with another chemotherapeutic agent. She has few choices for
therapy and would likely die before the drug shortage is
corrected. I have three promising clinical trials which are now
on hold because of shortages. Please help us.'' Another quote:
``I cannot obtain Doxil for patients stabilized on therapy. I
have switched to alternate drugs with more side effects.''
Another quote: ``We have encountered regimen changes,
difficulties with patient insurance approval, and an increase
in hospitalization due to side effects of older regimens.'' I
have 35 such testimonials as part of a survey conducted by the
Society of Gynecologic Oncology and the FDA letter, and I would
ask that those be submitted for the record.
Look, no physician wants to tell a patient that they cannot
receive the care they need because there is no treatment but
because the product is simply not available and we won't
provide alternatives is no solution at all.
I will be glad to yield the remaining time to anyone one
on my side who would request it. If not, I yield back to the
chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, those will be entered into
the record.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. And the Chair now recognizes the ranking member
of the Subcommittee on Health, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes for
an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Pitts.
This hearing is the second in a series of important
hearings that this subcommittee will hold in relation to the
FDA User Fee Agreements, and I welcome everyone for joining us.
And as I noted last week, I am encouraged by the bipartisan
nature of these efforts, and I look forward to working with my
colleagues.
Today's topics will cover two brand new user fee programs
that the subcommittee will authorize. The first is a Generic
Drug User Fee Agreement, also known as GDUFA. That will create
a program at the FDA in order to help expedite review of their
applications similar to the way brand name drug manufacturers
pay user fees. Primarily, the agreement will help address the
significant backlog of generic applications currently at the
FDA. Unfortunately, over the last several years, this backlog
has continued to grow at an alarming rate. In fact, the median
time for a generic drug approval has doubled to 32 months, and
that means all these generic drug products are kept off the
market and out of the hands of consumers, which is a waste and
simply too long.
Generic drugs, as we know, have proven to help lower
healthcare costs. In the last decade alone, generic drugs have
provided more than $824 billion in savings to the Nation's
healthcare system. Clearly, bringing generic drugs to market
faster should be a priority, and luckily, the generic industry
was able to recognize that we must provide the Office of
Generic Drugs with adequate resources to do their job
effectively. As much as I advocate for increased government
funding for the FDA, that simply has become too difficult a
battle to overcome, and so I appreciate the industry's ability
to work with the FDA and move forward on a strong agreement and
I commend your efforts.
The second user fee program is the Biosimilars User Fee
Agreement, also known as BsUFA, which is the product of the
Biologics Price Competition Innovation Act, the law that
created a pathway for biogeneric medicine onto the marketplace.
This agreement came together through a collection of brand and
generic companies and FDA. Now, I know it is difficult for many
to comment on the strength and robustness of the agreement
because of the law's infancy, but it is a step forward in
providing FDA the necessary resources to bring promising
medicines to patients at a lower cost and I am supportive of
its passage. I think that both Mr. Waxman and Mr. Murphy
mentioned that last night, the two of us, as well as Chairman
Pitts--the four of us I should say--introduced a standalone
measure that covers both these agreements and shows that they
have bipartisan support and that we are going to move forward
with them.
Another issue under discussion today is the current drug
shortage of vital medications that are impacting clinicians,
hospitals, and patients who have depended upon these
medications for years. It is alarming the drugs that have been
around for so long would suddenly be the most difficult to keep
hospitals, pharmacies, and doctors' offices supplied with. I
strongly believe this committee has the responsibility to
address this sudden increase in drug shortages. We had a
hearing last September that brought light to some important
inadequacies of the system and I know there is a strong
bipartisan appetite to work out a solution and I hope that we
can get there. It is not a simple task but there are strong
ideas that we have to consider and flesh out.
Lastly, Ms. DeGette has a bill that focuses on industry
reporting as a worthy objective. I am also aware the generic
industry has a proposal that we will be discussing today about
a voluntary self-regulatory system. While I welcome their
advocacy on addressing the problem, self-regulation always
raises some critical questions. So I look forward to hearing
more about that and I trust the FDA and our other witnesses can
give specific insight into some of these proposals.
I wanted now to yield what time I have left to the chairman
emeritus, Mr. Dingell.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN D. DINGELL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, as I have brought to the
committee's attention in the past, drug supply chain safety is
critical to the issue of health and safety to the American
people. This hearing is going to reinforce how imperative it is
to provide FDA with appropriate authorities and resources to
secure our medicines. This committee has a long bipartisan
history of working on this issue and looking into drug safety.
It is now time for us to act. Our friends in the Senate have
put together a bipartisan working group on this matter and we
in the House should follow suit. Time is short. If we don't
work together in good faith on this issue, we will not be
finding a solution and the situation will continue
deteriorating with death and hurt occurring throughout the
American population by reason of our failure to address the
difficulty. The American public deserves a solution.
As we proceed today, I am asking my colleagues to join me
in working on this vital issue and to demonstrate to the
American people that Congress does indeed work for them and
that we follow on the steps that we took in the last Congress
to see to it that we made foods much safer than they were by
following on and addressing now questions relative to the
safety of pharmaceuticals, appliances, and devices, and
ultimately, cosmetics.
And I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
the opening statements for the members. We are now voting on
the floor. So we have two votes. We will take a recess until
the end of the second vote at which time we will reconvene.
The subcommittee stands in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order.
Our first panel will have just one witness, Dr. Janet
Woodcock, the Director of the Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research at FDA. We are happy to have you with us today, Dr.
Woodcock, and your written testimony will be made part of the
record and you are recognized for 5 minutes to summarize.

STATEMENT OF JANET WOODCOCK, DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR DRUG
EVALUATION AND RESEARCH, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION;
ACCOMPANIED BY THERESA MULLIN, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF PLANNING AND
INFORMATICS, CENTER FOR DRUG EVALUATION AND RESEARCH; PETER
BECKERMAN, SENIOR ADVISOR, OFFICE OF POLICY, FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION; AND VALERIE JENSEN, ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR, CENTER
FOR DRUG EVALUATION AND RESEARCH, DRUG SHORTAGE PROGRAM, FOOD
AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION

Ms. Woodcock. Thank you very much and good morning.
Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, I would
really like to thank you for the opportunity to testify about
three important issues: the United States Generic Drug Program
and user fees that would support it, the new Biosimilars
Program and proposed user fee, and the ongoing crisis of
shortage of essential drugs in the United States.
I am joined today by Dr. Theresa Mullin on my right, who is
the director of the Office of Planning and Informatics at the
Center for Drugs. Dr. Mullin was the lead negotiator on
Prescription Drug User Fee Program and on the Biosimilars
Program. And to my left is Mr. Peter Beckerman, who is the
senior advisor for policy in the Office of Policy at FDA. And
he was one of the lead negotiators on the Generic Drug User Fee
Program.
Since enacted by Congress in 1984, the current generic drug
program has been a stunning success by most accounts. Today,
over 3/4 of prescriptions dispensed are for high quality,
affordable generics, as the members have said, saving Americans
billions of dollars literally. But this program has been the
victim of its unprecedented success. Applications to the
program have skyrocketed and the program has not been able to
keep up. Times to approval have lengthened and are prolonged,
and over 2,000 applications are in a so-called backlog at the
Office of Generic Drugs.
At the same time, globalization of the industry has
challenged FDA to assure the same level of inspectional
coverage that is carried out domestically for the foreign
facilities. The new user fee program proposed to Congress
addresses both these problems head on. The program would bring
timelines and predictability to the review process, eliminate
the backlogs. It would also provide a level playing field for
inspections to ensure that the same quality standards are
maintained wherever in the world the generic drug is made.
These changes will ensure that U.S. consumers continue to have
access to safe, effective, high quality, and affordable generic
drugs.
The proposed Biosimilar User Fee Program is intended to
support a new emerging industry. Biologics drugs developed over
the past 20 years have provided new and effective treatment
options for patients with serious diseases such as rheumatoid
arthritis and cancer, but the generic drug program that existed
did not apply to and was not really appropriate for these
complex biological molecules. In 2007, Congress created a new
pathway for biosimilar biologics and instructed FDA to develop
a user fee proposal, which we have done. This program is
intended to support an emerging industry and I will be very
pleased to be able to discuss it.
I would like to thank the members--Mr. Murphy and Mr. Pitts
and the additional members--for introducing legislation. We are
really happy to hear that there is bipartisan support and we
look forward to working with you.
I am also pleased to announce that, later today, FDA will
introduce three draft guidances for industry on biosimilars.
These contain technical information that will help the industry
as they develop these new products for the U.S. market.
The third topic, drug shortages, is a very important issue.
Millions of Americans rely on medicines to support or sustain
their health, as we heard from Dr. Burgess. The recent
shortages of sterile injectable drugs, many of which are
essential in cancer treatment or in seriously ill patients,
have brought a spotlight on this problem. The causes of drug
shortage are multi-factorial, but in this case, a perfect storm
came together to create the current situation of shortages. FDA
does everything possible to both prevent and ameliorate
shortages, including stimulating the production of other
manufacturers, allowing risk mitigation strategies for products
that have manufacturing difficulties, moving up the queue of
applications so we could get additional products onto the
market to alleviate shortages, and even arranging for temporary
importation of similar products from other countries. For the
current shortages, this has not been enough and hospitals and
clinicians are facing and have been facing significant
shortages.
We look forward to working with you to ensure that
Americans have continued, uninterrupted access to effective,
safe, high quality, and affordable drugs to sustain their
health. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Woodcock follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady and now begins
the questioning and I will recognize myself for 5 minutes for
that purpose.
Dr. Woodcock, how many applications are in the generic
backlog at FDA?
Ms. Woodcock. We count what you might consider a backlog to
have about 2,000 applications.
Mr. Pitts. Two thousand.
Ms. Woodcock. That includes some drugs that couldn't be
approved now because the patents haven't expired on the
innovators. You can send in your application beforehand and
then you have to wait. But there are many in that backlog that
could be approved if we had time to get to them or had the
inspectional resources to do the inspection.
Mr. Pitts. And how will the Generic Drug User Agreement
help clear out this backlog?
Ms. Woodcock. The agreement has several parts and one is
specifically directed at the backlog. What we have recommended
to Congress is that there be a one-time backlog fee paid at the
start of the program of $50 million. That would go toward us
beginning to work on the backlog. One of the goals of the
program that we would be held to is clearing up the backlog by
the end of the 5-year user fee program. So by that time, we
would be in steady state--applications in the door,
applications out the door with predictability in that process
and timelines. So we would expect with the backlog fee and our
commitments and timelines that the backlog would be eliminated.
Mr. Pitts. Can you be a little more specific on what kind
of generic drug applications are in this backlog and how will
clearing this backlog save patients in our healthcare system
money?
Ms. Woodcock. Most of the drugs in the backlog are
additional copies of a drug where there is already a generic
because we expedite the first generic out the door to try and
get patients that initial savings so that additional copies of
a generic have been shown to further lower the cost of the
drug, the price due to competition. So this is important for
lower cost drugs and also to have a robust supply. I think we
are learning and we know from the shortage situation it is
important to have multiple manufacturers of important drugs.
Mr. Pitts. Now, in your testimony you talk about FDA's
efforts to expedite review of manufacturer submissions to help
alleviate drug shortages, and currently, it takes FDA 31 months
to review these submissions. Can you give us more background on
what expedite means? On average, how long does it take to
expedite those submissions that can help alleviate drug
shortages?
Ms. Woodcock. I can't give you an exact number but we have
a queue, and so everything is waiting and usually generic drugs
are reviewed first in and they are reviewed first. So if you
are the third in, you are reviewed third and so forth for
fairness purposes. What we do if there is a shortage drug where
that application might help ameliorate the shortage, we pull it
out of the queue and review it as quickly as possible. So much
of that 30 months can be gone. If the application is good, we
can review that rapidly and get that drug on the market. So we
have very few drugs waiting in the queue that actually would
address shortages. We have identified any of those drugs and we
have expedited review of the applications.
Mr. Pitts. Now, how will the Biosimilars User Fee Program
provide predictability and consistency regarding the review of
biosimilars applications, and how will the Biosimilars User Fee
Program help this burgeoning industry?
Ms. Woodcock. The Biosimilars User Fee Program will provide
predictability of timelines and review and process to this
industry similar to what the Prescription Drug User Fee does
for innovator products. To some extent, the biosimilars program
was modeled on the GDUFA program. However, it has a development
piece in it to recognize the emerging nature of this industry
and that development piece, they pay fees and they get a series
of development meetings so we can give them extensive advice on
how to develop their products. And then when the final
application comes in, there are timelines and goals associated
with those timelines. So FDA, in exchange for having this user
fee program, will be expected to meet those timeliness goals on
review.
Mr. Pitts. All right, thank you.
My time has expired. I will recognize the ranking member of
the subcommittee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Woodcock, we have heard these statistics about the drug
production overseas that 40 percent of drugs and 80 percent of
the active pharmaceutical ingredients come from abroad. That is
my concern. As you know, Mr. Dingell, Ms. DeGette, myself, and
Mr. Waxman have introduced the Drug Safety Enhancement Act that
gives the FDA authorities and resource to address the problem
of these ingredients and drugs from overseas. You mention in
your testimony the challenge represented by foreign
inspections, but my understanding is that current law requires
FDA to inspect domestic drug facilities every 2 years but is
silent with respect to foreign facilities. That seems to be an
uneven playing field obviously, and I know resources are always
going to be an issue, but I still think that the bifurcation
doesn't make sense.
You know, so assuming you have unlimited resources, which
of course is absurd, but assuming you have unlimited resources,
do you agree that inspecting foreign and domestic facilities at
the same frequency would make sense?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes, I believe that what we need to do is a
risk-based approach, and some facilities in the United States
and some facilities overseas may need very close FDA
supervision because of the problems they are having. Other
facilities may be on a different schedule based on the risks
that they pose but I don't believe----
Mr. Pallone. They are not based on whether they are
domestic versus overseas?
Ms. Woodcock. That is exactly right.
Mr. Pallone. Now, would you need new authority to permit
you to do that, which, you know, to make sure that it is not
different foreign versus domestic and to do the risk
assessment? Would you need new authority for that?
Ms. Woodcock. We primarily lack the resources to perform
this inspectional program and one of the principal goals of the
new Generic Drug User Fee Program is to level that playing
field of inspection. And one of the proposals there is that we
conduct risk-based surveillance inspections around the world
and achieve parity or a level playing field on----
Mr. Pallone. So it is more a question of the resources than
new authority then?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes, I believe that. Of course the law sort
of sends a message that you are supposed to do the domestic
every 2 years and is silent on the foreign, but from what we
are doing, we are trying to ensure the quality of drugs for our
patients, and where the drug is produced should not be taken
into account.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Now, would it be helpful to have
additional resources to conduct more foreign inspections of
brand facilities? I mean this isn't confined to just generic,
correct?
Ms. Woodcock. We need to inspect all facilities producing
drugs of any kind, including over-the-counter drugs and so on
at the appropriate intensity for the risk that they bear.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Now, what about the responsibility of U.S.
companies? You know, for example, you know, we have the heparin
situation illustrated the importance of raising expectations of
pharmaceutical companies to be familiar with their own
suppliers, you know, coming from abroad. Do you think that U.S.
companies should have to be able to ensure that the products
they sell meet U.S. requirements even though those ingredients
are coming from abroad? Are there any new authorities that
would help the FDA in making sure that companies meet those
responsibilities?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes. As we have said repeatedly, we feel that
our authorities at the border in particular are somewhat
limited and there are additional authorities that have been
discussed that would aid in keeping foreign products that don't
meet our standards out of this country.
Mr. Pallone. All right, let me just ask--I have a minute
left--with regard to BsUFA and the BsUFA negotiations. Both you
and the FDA Commissioner Hamburg gave assurances to the generic
industry that the Biosimilar User Fee Program would receive 20
million in funding. Now, I understand we are talking about, you
know, money that would be shifted around within the Agency.
What steps are being taken to make sure that that happens?
Ms. Woodcock. Well, we have made a commitment. Dr. Mullin,
who is here, we have been just discussing our time reporting
and other tracking mechanisms. We keep very close track of how
we spend both our BA money and our user fee money.
Mr. Pallone. But is this something that you are going to
move around within the Agency, is it going to be in the budget,
or is it a new $20 million that we have to come up with? I
assumed it was within the Agency. That is what I am trying to
find out.
Ms. Woodcock. Of course we would appreciate, you know,
having resources to conduct this program. However, we do have
$1.8 million right now in appropriated dollars for the
biosimilars program and we would make up the money. If we don't
receive appropriated money, we would use BA funds that are
existing within the Center for Drugs.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you so much.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Dr. Murphy, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, doctor,
for being here, appreciate your candid and informed comments on
this.
Let me start off by asking--I want to make sure I
understand FDA rules with regard to these medications. The
Federal Food and Drug Cosmetic Act assumes that a drug is
adulterated unless the methods used for manufacture of drug
products conform to good manufacturing practice. Am I right
that it works under that assumption?
Ms. Woodcock. That is correct.
Mr. Murphy. Can you explain the role and importance of
these good manufacturing practices in terms of helping to
ensure the safety and integrity of FDA-approved products? Can
you explain how that works?
Ms. Woodcock. Certainly. When drugs are produced in mass
production in a factory, all right, there are many procedures.
The modern term would be quality management, oK, to make sure
that each time the drug is produced adequately and of adequate
quality and that no errors have occurred. And it would be
amazing if you go in a factory as we do all the time to see how
many times something can go wrong. And so you must check and
you must observe and you must test and you must improve and do
all that. And those are embodied in regulations called the
current good manufacturing practices regulations. And we also
have international agreements on a lot of this, how it should
look, that we have worked out through the International
Conference on Harmonization.
Mr. Murphy. So the assumption is unless you have actually
seen what they do and given your seal of approval to that, we
are assuming it has not met that standard. Is that a fair
statement?
Ms. Woodcock. Well, we have set standards for what the
quality management should be like, and also we review the drug,
make sure the testing and so forth will control the drug
adequately, but until we go in there, we don't know if they are
actually following those procedures. And they may follow them
at one time and then later slip from that and get into problems
and not produce a quality drug.
Mr. Murphy. Hence the importance of inspecting plants on a
regular or a tighter basis and you sometimes do a surprise
visit and they occur in a short period and show up again.
I know we have had hearings in the past where there is no
such thing as a surprise visit to a foreign country and they
know you are coming----
Ms. Woodcock. That is correct.
Mr. Murphy [continuing]. And when you are going. So do
these practices differ in the United States versus other
countries then in terms of how medications are manufactured?
Ms. Woodcock. You mean by the manufacturers themselves?
Mr. Murphy. Yes, by the manufacturers themselves.
Ms. Woodcock. Well, there is a wide range of capacity and
functionality in different countries, all right. In the United
States there has been a long history of FDA inspections and
understanding of what the standards are. Nevertheless, I will
point out over the past year or so we have had multiple recalls
and some of the drug shortage problems are due to U.S.
manufacturers who are not being able to manufacture their
product. So it requires vigilance and continued attention to be
able to manufacture these products right. That said, in other
parts of the world, it is much more uneven. They may have
extremely modern factories and be right on top of their game,
and there may be many factories that may be substandard in many
areas.
Mr. Murphy. So given all that, what is preventing the FDA
from updating good manufacturing practices right now that
require companies to verify their suppliers are complying? And
associated with that, do you think the bills before us here
sufficiently address your concerns, and either way, will you be
able to offer the recommendations or cleaning up these bills if
you feel that is necessary?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes, well, we would be happy to work with
you. I believe that the user fee bills are not about policy or
regulation. They are about providing extra resources to perform
activities. The regulations or law around drug safety and
quality have not been really modified for a long time and are
probably not totally congruent with modern understanding. So
there has been discussion by this committee and others about
are there additional standards that could be put into place
that bolster and bring these up to modern understanding of what
is needed.
For example, I am always surprised and I am sure most
Americans would be to hear that we can't really--there is a
presumption that anything that is being imported to our
country, a drug, is OK. And we have to prove that there is
something wrong with it rather than the opposite. Most other
countries that is not the case.
Mr. Murphy. I want to make sure I hear what you are saying.
You are saying you have to prove something is wrong with the
imported drug? So what you told me before is with companies
here there, there is an assumption that it is adulterated
unless they can prove they have gone through inspection. But
you are saying when a foreign drug comes over, the assumption
is everything is fine unless you prove otherwise?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes, that----
Mr. Murphy. It is two different standards.
Ms. Woodcock. Now, I am not a lawyer, all right, but that
is how I understand the legal framework is set up. So we have
to look at that and prove some way that it is not adequate for
entry into the United States.
Mr. Murphy. I appreciate it. I think that would come as a
shock to most Americans to understand that that is how things
are going. Thank you so much.
Ms. Woodcock. And I would tell you that is not the case in
other countries where they can hold things at the border if
they even feel that they may not meet the standards.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Dingell, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy.
Welcome, Dr. Woodcock. I am sponsor of H.R. 1483, which I
hope this committee will give some strong consideration to. My
questions today are going to require only yes or no answers due
to the fact that I have so many. Starting, over 70 percent of
prescriptions filled today are for generic drugs. Considering
the fact that 40 percent of all drugs come from overseas and 80
percent of pharmaceutical ingredients are also from overseas,
it is critical that we be able to protect American consumers by
ensuring the safety of the drug supply chain. In order to do
this, FDA must clearly have the proper authorities in place.
Dr. Woodcock, yes or no if you please. Does the Federal
Food and Drug Cosmetic Act require FDA to complete GMP
inspections of domestic drug manufacturers every 2 years? Yes
or no?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Does the Federal Food Drug and Cosmetic Act
require FDA to complete GMP inspections of foreign drug
manufacturers on a comparable basis? Yes or no?
Ms. Woodcock. No.
Mr. Dingell. Would you have the resources to do it if they
did?
Ms. Woodcock. Not currently.
Mr. Dingell. Is it accurate to say that current law is
silent on the frequency with which FDA must inspect foreign
facilities? Yes or no?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Does FDA generally meet the biennial
inspection requirement for domestic drug facilities currently?
Yes or no?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Is it true that FDA does not inspect foreign
facilities at the same frequency as domestic facilities? Yes or
no?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Is it true that a lack of financial and
personnel resources are contributing to factors not for
inspecting foreign drug facilities more frequently? Yes or no?
Ms. Woodcock. I am sorry. Could you repeat that a little
more slowly?
Mr. Dingell. I will give it again. Is it true that a lack
of financial and personnel resources are contributing factors
to not inspecting foreign drug facilities more frequently? Yes
or no?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Do you agree that conducting inspections of
domestic and foreign drug facilities at comparable frequency is
as important to ensuring a level playing field for drug
manufacturers? Yes or no?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Sometime the playing field gets slanted
against United States manufacturers because of our inability to
inspect foreign manufacturers and suppliers of different kinds,
isn't that so?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Can our goal be achieved by using risk-based
inspection systems? Yes or no?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Yes or no?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Do you agree that a risk-based inspection
schedule for domestic and foreign drug facilities based, for
example, on the compliance history, time since last inspection,
volume and type of product would allow FDA to better target
their resources? Yes or no?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Do you agree that conducting comparable
inspections of domestic and foreign facilities is important to
public health? Yes or no?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Do you agree that FDA needs adequate
resources, both financial and personnel, to conduct comparable
inspections of domestic and foreign drug manufacturers? Yes or
no?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Does the Prescription Drug User Fee Agreement
currently provide resources for preapproval inspection? Yes or
no?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Does the Prescription Drug User Fee Agreement
currently provide resources for any inspections beyond
preapproval inspection? Yes or no?
Ms. Woodcock. No.
Mr. Dingell. As you know, the Generic Drug User Fee
Agreement provides additional resources for FDA to conduct GMP
inspections of both domestic and foreign drug facilities. Now,
does FDA need similar resources for inspections of facilities
manufacturing innovator drugs? Yes or no?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes, we need similar resources.
Mr. Dingell. Now, one obstacle for ensuring comparable
inspections of domestic and foreign facilities is a lack of
complete and accurate information that FDA has on generic drug
manufacturing establishments. Will the Generic Drug User Fee
Act help FDA to identify all domestic and foreign drug and
active pharmaceutical ingredient facilities involved in the
making of generic drugs through registration? Yes or no?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes, as proposed.
Mr. Dingell. And I am assuming that that is a very badly
needed authority at Food and Drug. Is that yes or no?
Ms. Woodcock. Absolutely.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I have completed my business and
with 9 seconds to spare. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Burgess. [Presiding] The Chair thanks the gentleman for
his gracious----
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent that the
record will include an analysis of H.R. 1483, the Drug Safety
Enforcement Act of 2011, of which I am a sponsor. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for
questions.
And again, Dr. Woodcock, welcome to our humble little
hearing room here at the Energy and Commerce Committee. We
welcome you back. Let me ask you a couple of questions that
deal with the issue of conflicts and the exclusion of people
from the FDA advisory panels because of conflicts of interest.
Have there been instances where experts have been disqualified
from serving on advisory committees because they served as an
investigator for the product under consideration?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. Have there ever been instances where someone
is disqualified because they have been in a clinical trial as
an investigator for an unrelated product?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. So I think I have an accurate quote from you
where you say it is difficult finding highly experienced people
who do not have conflicts?
Ms. Woodcock. That is correct.
Mr. Burgess. And we have delays in the panels because of
this policy. And in fact your commissioner, Margaret Hamburg,
Dr. Hamburg has said some meetings require expertise that is
limited to a handful of experts who can often have conflicts of
interest. So tell us what the real world consequences of this
are. Most of us have never been in an FDA advisory panel
meeting so what are the implications of having people that have
to exclude themselves or be excluded because they either have
knowledge of the product under consideration or they have been
involved in an unrelated investigation?
Ms. Woodcock. We are asking the committee for advice on
very complicated scientific questions. Our scientists are very
well versed on the topic and will have gone over all the
information in the application and any related literature. So
they really want people at the table who can help them grapple
with these complex questions and they would really like
experts, trialists or disease experts who can shed additional
light on the problem they are trying to deal with.
Mr. Burgess. Just as someone from the outside, is the
converse of that universe also true that the people who are
involved may not have the knowledge set or skills to make some
of the decisions they are required to make and in some cases
maybe even lack the basic fund of knowledge to deal with the
clinical question at hand?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you for that succinct and concise
answer. Let me ask you this since you have given me the benefit
of some time. I have been in a ping pong match for the past
couple of weeks, couple of months, since the first of January
when the EPA banned the sale of over-the-counter asthma
inhalers. I am an asthma patient myself and I will just tell
you all across this country people are going to be going to the
CVS pharmacy at midnight because they have had an asthma attack
and they are out of all of their other options and they are
used to being able to buy for $16 Primatene inhaler and now
they cannot. And we as Members of Congress are going to start
hearing about that. It is not going to happen all at once but
it is slowly going to start rolling out into the American
landscape such that by the time of the August recess, I suspect
there will be a number of people who show up in each Member's
town halls complaining about this policy.
Now, we have heard from the EPA and the EPA says it is your
fault, and Commissioner Hamburg said no, it is the EPA. Can you
help us? Primatene has been on the market for a long time and
the only thing that has changed is the propellant, CFC changed
to HFA. I would argue that HFA is not as efficient a dispersant
at CFC but that being aside, there really is no difference in
the active pharmaceutical ingredient in the over-the-counter
inhaler Primatene, but for whatever reason, it is held up
somewhere. Can you help us get that done?
Ms. Woodcock. The switching of all the asthma inhalers was
triggered by the Montreal Protocol that was agreed to by the
United States to eliminate CFCs to help with the problem of the
ozone layer. And FDA has gone through a very long process to
inform the manufacturers, work with the community, prepare
them, and then execute the switches. For the prescription
albuterol inhalers, which are really a preferred standard of
care, as you know, for asthma----
Mr. Burgess. Yes, but I always don't plan ahead.
Ms. Woodcock. Right.
Mr. Burgess. You know, I am the world's worst asthma
patient and I will forget----
Ms. Woodcock. Right.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. And then something happens that
triggers an attack at two o'clock in the morning and now the
only option is to go to the emergency room and get a treatment
and that is $1,500.
Ms. Woodcock. I understand.
Mr. Burgess. It was $16, $16.00 before, and this is what we
have visited upon people. I do want to enlist your aid in
getting this problem solved. I have asked the EPA to allow the
sale of existing Primatene inhalers with CFC until those
markets are exhausted, but we really do have to--that is why we
have an approval rating of 8 percent because people look at
this and say well, this is a simple problem. The stuff was for
sale before, it has got a different propellant, sell it again.
Or did you really think that asthma patients were blowing a
hole in the ozone layer. I don't think so and you will never
convince me otherwise. But my time has expired and I am going
to yield to--who am I going to yield to? No one on your side. I
will yield to Dr. Gingrey. Oh, I beg your pardon. OK, Dr.
Gingrey, you are recognized for 5 minutes for questions, sir.
Ms. DeGette. I just want to welcome Dr. Woodcock.
Ms. Woodcock. Thank you.
Ms. DeGette. Thanks.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Dr. Woodcock, much has been made over the past months and
years about drug and medical production moving overseas to
countries like China and many reasons for this migration have
been put forward. In a study that ran in Health Affairs--this
is November 2011--entitled ``Evolving Brand Name and Generic
Drug Competition'' may warrant a revision of the Hatch-Waxman
Act. The authors state that ``the Hatch-Waxman Act in 1984
raises questions about whether the Act's intended balance of
incentives for cost savings and continued innovation has been
achieved. Generic drug usage and challenges to brand name
drugs' patents have increased markedly, resulting in greatly
increased cost savings but also potentially reduced incentives
for innovators, new drug application, brand name. Congress
should review whether Hatch-Waxman is achieving its intended
purpose of balancing incentives of generics and innovation. It
also should consider whether the law should be amended so that
some of its provisions are brought more in line with recently
enacted legislation governing approval of so-called
biosimilars.''
Dr. Woodcock, do you believe that Congress should review
the current Hatch-Waxman paradigm to ensure that the intended
balance of incentives for cost savings and innovation continues
to have been achieved?
Ms. Woodcock. I would say that deciding on those tradeoffs
between innovation and cost saving for the American public is
one of the jobs of Congress, and FDA will execute the
provisions as they are laid out by the Congress. It is clear
that there have been tremendous cost savings as many of the
Members have indicated from the generics program. We also know
that the innovator industry is struggling right now, and that
again is multi-factorial and would have to be the subject of a
different discussion. But the innovator industry overall is in
a crisis.
Despite that, they have put forth many innovative drugs
which we have been able to approve over the past year. We
approved 30 new entities last year, many of them very
innovative drugs. So whether that is the correct balance I
think is a very complicated economic issue that I am not able
to opine on, and it involves many societal tradeoffs to
decide----
Mr. Gingrey. Well, I thank you and I know you can't state
exactly, but your answer certainly suggests that you have some
concerns that maybe the balance that we are trying to achieve
is not there. Is that a fair statement or----
Ms. Woodcock. I think many of us are concerned about the
health of the innovator industry which is what brings new
products and treatments and cures to people who lack therapies
right now. However, whether or not Hatch-Waxman is the way to
deal with that is beyond my purview.
Mr. Gingrey. Yes. Thank you, Dr. Woodcock. I want to
commend the FDA on its concern for U.S. patients in light of
our current drug shortage crisis. As you know, this is an issue
that is important to this committee and this Congress and I
want to commend my colleague, Representative DeGette, for her
leadership in this area. As a medical provider, I believe that
proper notification can play a critical role in ensuring
patients get the best care possible, especially those with
life-threatening conditions such as cancer. In your testimony,
you state that ``although many of the root causes of drug
shortages are beyond our control, we are committed to
addressing this important issue and look forward to working
with the subcommittee on this issue. Tell me, Dr. Woodcock,
what are the root causes of drug shortages and which ones are
beyond our control?
Ms. Woodcock. Well, I would refer you to the excellent
document that was written at HHS, the Assistant Secretary for
Planning and Evaluation, I believe, at HHS, that discussed this
because many of them are economic issues. What we saw with the
sterile injectables, which are the drugs that are in great
shortage right now, was a surge in capacity over the past 10
years but with a very limited number of manufacturers, most of
whom are in the United States. And with that capacity surge,
they took on a large inventory of sterile injectables that they
were producing, each of these manufacturers, and then when they
developed problems in their manufacturing ability where they
were getting particulates or endotoxin or other potential
bacterial contamination, so forth, which I will add these
things are hard to avoid and they take a lot of diligence to
keep sterile manufacturing, you know, at a high quality level.
But when they encountered these problems, then we lapsed into a
shortage situation with a few alternatives or maybe no
alternatives.
Mr. Gingrey. I see my time has expired and as I yield back,
would you be sure and get that report to me? I would appreciate
it.
Ms. Woodcock. Happy to do so.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the gentleman for yielding. The Chair
now recognizes Mr. Towns of New York for 5 minutes for the
purpose of questioning the witness.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
having this hearing.
Dr. Woodcock, I am concerned about the large backlog of
generic drug applications. What can be done about that?
Ms. Woodcock. Well, I am concerned about it, too, and the
proposal that we have given to Congress for the Generic Drug
User Fee Program has a specific provision to eliminate the
backlog over the first course of that program.
Mr. Towns. Right. Is there cooperation across the board,
you know, in terms of the pharmaceutical companies and all
that? Everybody is on board with this agreement?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes, I think it is in everyone's best
interest to eliminate this backlog and to have a predictable
and efficient generic drug process.
Mr. Towns. Right. Once this goes into place, what will the
turnaround time be approximately?
Ms. Woodcock. The goal time for any generic drug
application is a first review, a complete response within 10
months of the submission of the application.
Mr. Towns. All right.
Ms. Woodcock. So the goal would be every generic drug
applicant would get an answer back in 10 months and we would
then look at how many of those could get right on the market or
what were the problems that would keep them going into another
cycle.
Mr. Towns. Right. Mr. Chairman, I am going to do something
we don't do around here. I am going to yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair recognizes the gentleman's
generosity and recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta,
for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Latta. I thank the chairman.
And Dr. Woodcock, thanks very much for being with us today.
I would like to kind of go back to what Dr. Gingrey was talking
about at the very end in regards to drug shortages, and I have
been working with several other members in the past few months
on this issue. And first of all, you said in your opening
statement that, especially on drug shortages, that we had a
perfect storm. Could you describe what that perfect storm is or
was?
Ms. Woodcock. Well, it was the enhanced utilization of the
older sterile injectable drugs, OK, so the demand went up for
them. At the same time, new sterile injectable drugs went
generic, and so then firms took those on as well so then the
demand on their lines--they have a limited number of
manufacturing lines that can make sterile injectables, all
right, because it is very hard to do that. So the demand went
up, both for the existing drugs and the new generic drugs that
were sterile injectables. At the same time, it takes a while to
expand the capacity and bring up new facilities. So that did
not happen.
And then manufacturing problems occurred within many of
those lines, thus making them have to perhaps shut down the
line and precipitate a sudden shortage. The other manufacturers
who might take up the slack were also having capacity problems
of their own and/or having manufacturing problems. So all these
factors came together to create really an unprecedented amount
of shortages that we are trying to deal with and shortages of
drugs that Americans cannot do without.
Mr. Latta. Let me ask, then, over the past year, what have
you all done to alleviate that problem?
Ms. Woodcock. In 2011, 175 drug shortages were alleviated
by our actions. Now, 86 of those I think were from one firm
where we were able to do interventions, but we have multiple
interventions as I describe but we can alleviate those.
Nevertheless, there are several hundred shortages that are
ongoing.
Mr. Latta. Are there additional items that you can do then?
Ms. Woodcock. Pardon me?
Mr. Latta. Are there additional items that you could work
on to help on that issue?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes. Well, since the executive order by the
President that asked firms to notify us of any kind of shortage
and we have also put in a database that we are tracking these
very carefully. We have added staff to the drug shortage
program that we have at FDA. But we do feel that if there were
legislation that requested companies or required companies to
notify us, that would help us in perhaps averting more
shortages.
Mr. Latta. And also is there a disease area where there are
more significant drug shortages than others?
Ms. Woodcock. Right now, we are hearing from the cancer
community and that is because many of the cancer drugs are
injectables. But the injectable drug shortage affects many
other kinds of disease areas and over the years, historically,
you couldn't predict where the shortages would arise. They have
been in all sorts of disease areas.
Mr. Latta. And also, will the generic drug user fee help
with the drug shortage issue do you believe?
Ms. Woodcock. I believe that having a robust industry that
has predictable timelines for its applications and can get
applications through and also having an inspectional force that
we can get out there quickly and do the inspections in the
appropriate time will help with shortages because one of the
things we need for shortages is we need more than one
manufacturer that is able to make that drug. So if something
happens at one plant, then there is somebody else who can ramp
up production.
Mr. Latta. OK. And some of the committee hearings and the
press have suggested the key characteristic of the drugs in
shortage older physician-administered drugs underscore failure
in the older generic market and that incentives in this market
are critical in solving the crisis. Do you agree with that
assessment?
Ms. Woodcock. I am sorry. Could you repeat that?
Mr. Latta. Yes. There has been in some of the committee
hearings and also out in the press have suggested that the key
characteristics of drugs in shortage older physician-
administered drugs underscore a failure in the older generic
market and that incentives in this market are critical to
solving that crisis. And do you agree with that assessment?
Ms. Woodcock. I am not qualified to make a judgment on that
being a physician and not an economist. The HHS report felt
that it was a multiple number of factors and it wasn't simply
an incentives problem. Theresa, do you have----
Ms. Mullin. Yes, I think that that report would probably
have the best description of all the kinds of factors. A number
of them are economic and factors that are not within our
ability to control and there may be other ways to address those
but we have limited ability to address those factors.
Mr. Latta. OK.
Ms. Mullin. No ability in some cases.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I see my time has expired and I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentlelady from California, Mrs. Capps, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Chairman, for recognizing me.
And Dr. Woodcock, thank you for your testimony today. I am
actually going to just make a statement to add onto the list of
reasons why the topic at hand, the drug shortages, is a very
real issue. I would ask a question following but it has already
been asked and you supplied the answer that I know you would
answer to me. But it is such a prevalent problem plaguing
manufacturers, hospitals, doctors, and patients alike. So this
is a story of one of my constituents who reached out to our
office. She is a pharmacy buyer at a nonprofit organization in
my district which works with cancer patients. So right now, her
organization is not able to purchase life-saving critical care
drugs, and for some of them, they have been waiting more than 4
months. I know this isn't a new story to you either, but it is
one more story. And the only route available for this
organization because they are nonprofit is to get these drugs
from the black market, who is essentially auctioning them off,
often charging three times more than what they ought to cost.
As a nonprofit, you can imagine they never are successful in
their bids, and instead, the treatments for their patients they
are representing are delayed. This is hard to believe in this
country at this moment.
So let me turn to something a little different----
Ms. Woodcock. May I say something?
Mrs. Capps. Of course, please.
Ms. Woodcock. We are accepting reports from outside parties
where they have encountered excessive pricing behavior and
other behaviors that we can refer to the Department of Justice.
Mrs. Capps. I appreciate that and actually will take that
back to this constituent and to others who will let our
district offices know when they hear these stories there is a
path that can be followed. You don't just have to say I am so
sorry. We can say, well, there is a path and there could be
some recompense that is made in that area.
Another mechanism for helping to address drug shortages is
notifying the FDA of impending shortages. I know that in the
next panel, you are going to hear testimony discussing the
Accelerated Recovery Initiative that the industry is putting
forward to help address and prevent shortage, anticipating that
might come up in their discussion. What do you think of this
proposal, and in particular, do you think it should be
implemented, in what ways would it obviate the need for
legislation, and how is this going to help us so we can focus
on things that would make a difference for you and that are
going to come up with a solution?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes, we haven't had the opportunity to
examine the proposal in detail and we look forward to working
with the industry on the proposal as well as with Congress.
Mrs. Capps. OK. So you are going to be listening carefully
to the next panel as well.
And then finally, with the rest of my time, we have heard a
lot of discussion today about the increasingly globalized drug
supply chain and the challenges it poses. I want to ask you
about a couple of problems I have heard about in particular.
First, I understand the FDA has had problems conducting or
completing inspections of facilities overseas or abroad. Would
you be willing to describe some of these problems such as if a
foreign manufacturer doesn't allow you in to inspect its plant
or unduly delays you for an inspection, what recourse do you
now have and what additional authority would be helpful?
Ms. Woodcock. Mr. Beckerman will address that.
Mrs. Capps. Yes.
Mr. Beckerman. Sure. Currently, FDA has to show that a drug
appears to be adulterated or misbranded to keep it out of the
country, and if FDA inspectors are delayed, limited, or denied
in the inspection, there is no immediate recourse that the
Agency can take. And so having an explicit authority to allow
us to exclude a drug if our inspectors have been impeded would
be extremely helpful.
Mrs. Capps. So these companies know very well that if they
delay or deny that nothing is going to happen anyway?
Mr. Beckerman. There are very different incentives
depending on the type of inspections being done. Firms have an
obvious incentive to let FDA investigators in for a preapproval
inspection because that is a condition precedent to getting
their drug on the market. Once a drug is on the market, that
incentive no longer exists and it would be helpful for FDA to
have a tool.
Mrs. Capps. So having a tool would be useful to you to
have?
Mr. Beckerman. That is right.
Mrs. Capps. I also understand that information sharing with
foreign regulatory partners has posed some challenges. Could
you describe a couple of these challenges--there are a few more
seconds left--and also the role of importers in the supply
chain that has become a more prominent one in recent years?
Mr. Beckerman. On the information sharing question, in
particular the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act has a provision
that prevents FDA from sharing what is called trade secret
information, and this is not typically the sort of thing that
we think about as, you know, the secret formula for Coke, but
it is information related to the manufacturing process. It is
critical to be able to share that information with regulatory
partners if we want to take advantage of their regulatory reach
and be as efficient as possible. So addressing the inability to
share that sort of information would be very helpful.
Mrs. Capps. Would that require legislation?
Mr. Beckerman. It would.
Mrs. Capps. OK. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady and recognizes
the gentleman from Louisiana, Dr. Cassidy, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you, Dr. Woodcock. I am always impressed
at how well you answer questions.
The gray market--I am speaking of course about drug
shortages--what is the volume of drug on the--5-FU is in a
shortage, do we have a sense of how much the gray market will
arise to fill that need?
Ms. Woodcock. Well, I would ask Captain Valerie Jensen, who
is our head of drug shortages. Do you have any insight into
that?
Ms. Jensen. Yes. I am Val Jensen, Associate Director of
Drug Shortage Program, and we don't think there is a large
supply in the gray market from what we understand about the
gray market. FDA doesn't receive a lot of information about the
gray market, but we do know that from what we hear, it is a
very small volume that is in the gray market right now.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, but I am concerned in this report of HHS,
they speak about if there is early notification of shortages,
there may be hoarding. That almost seems like you are throwing
gasoline upon the potential of a gray market. Would you agree
with that?
Ms. Jensen. We would agree with that.
Mr. Cassidy. And so it is good to have early notification
or not?
Ms. Jensen. So if we received the early notification, what
we do with that is try to work with the company, whatever
company is having the problem on addressing that issue as soon
as possible. Hopefully, we can prevent the shortage before it
even occurs. That is our goal.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, I am also concerned, and I don't know
this; I am just asking--do some people make it a practice to
hoard in anticipation and therefore step in? It clearly would
be a nice way to make some money. You mentioned there could be
a referral to DOJ, but this is kind of a late development. Have
people done that in the past? Have we looked at the ordering
patterns of companies? Do they order here, then they suddenly
order there sort of thing?
Ms. Jensen. FDA doesn't normally get that type of
information, the ordering information.
Mr. Cassidy. Would that be HRSA?
Ms. Jensen. The manufacturers would know what is being
ordered. When there is a potential shortage, sometimes
companies do----
Mr. Cassidy. But let me ask because I think here last
time--and people have mentioned they don't know the source of
drugs on the gray market--it seems logical to look at wait, who
is ordering? Is there a difference in ordering pattern relative
to a particular entity's patient base? Does that make sense?
Now, that just occurs to me and frankly I have looked at that,
and when you look at that, you think that is kind of
interesting, small little hospital ordering a lot of drugs.
Now, has anybody pursued that more than just kind of looking at
it?
Ms. Jensen. It is just not data that FDA has access to as
far as hospital ordering patterns.
Mr. Cassidy. I could give it to you. I mean I just made a
phone call and got it and it actually just kind of raises
questions frankly.
Ms. Woodcock. Right. Well, I think those are the types of
things that law enforcement might be interested in. Also, I
would say if we have early notification process, we would not
plan to make it public unless we had failed to avert the
shortage and the shortage was imminent.
Mr. Cassidy. And again, as you were describing the means by
which you averted shortage, there seems to be somewhat of an ad
hoc basis to it. You got a call, you rushed in, you started
making it. In my life I have learned that it is better to have
a system as opposed to an ad hoc. Now, do you systemize that or
is it still somewhat ad hoc?
Ms. Woodcock. I think we have systematized it to the extent
it is possible. The problem is that the manufacturers cannot
predict when they are going to run into shortage. Many of these
shortages are precipitated by manufacturing failures. They make
the drug, they are going along making the drug, everything is
fine, and then they discover particulates, they have mixed up
the drug----
Mr. Cassidy. Presumably there is quality control that on a
regular basis they are going to pull up and say, OK, every 6
weeks we are going to, you know, run a sample and make sure it
doesn't have sporacide or something in it.
Ms. Woodcock. Well, it is much more than that actually.
There is a very tight system of controls. You were talking
about the good manufacturing processes call for very tight
controls----
Mr. Cassidy. I only have 53 seconds. By the way, just to go
back, if you don't have access to the ordering pattern of the
hospitals, who does have that data?
Ms. Jensen. Yes, I think we would have to look into that.
Mr. Cassidy. Could you let me know that? I would be really
interested in that.
Let me ask one more thing. Going back, Mr. Dingell had a
line of questions about whether or not you need more resources.
I think it was our previous conversation you mentioned that
union contracts would limit the ability to send people
overseas. Dr. Hamburg was here and she really kind of rope-a-
doped me on that, so let me just ask a yes or no. Do you have
the ability under your union contract to send somebody overseas
to inspect a plant if they otherwise object? Yes or no?
Ms. Woodcock. I don't know the answer to that. I don't
supervise the field staff. And I imagine it depends on the
circumstances. So I can get back to you but I can't answer that
straight out.
Mr. Cassidy. Does anybody on the panel know that? OK, if
you could, I would appreciate that.
Ms. Woodcock. Certainly.
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
the members of the subcommittee questioning.
Without objection, we will go to the members of the full
committee. Ms. DeGette of Colorado is recognized for 5 minutes
for questions.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to ask a follow-up question about the drug
shortages and I appreciate my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle working with me on this issue because it is something
that sort of hit and escalated, and we are all hearing about it
from our hospitals. And, you know, we are all concerned about
the stories we hear, particularly with these generic
injectables, about the shortages that hospitals are having. A
lot of them are pediatric cancer patients and other patients
like that. But I am hearing from my pharmacist at the hospital
that this is now expanding to many other drugs. They told me
that they have a drug shortage a day at some of these
hospitals, some place where they are trying to make these value
judgments about what they treat the patients with. And so I
also am concerned about the hoarding issues and the other
issues, but I guess I would ask you, any of the witnesses, to
talk about under the current voluntary program that you have,
do you see a lot of problem with hoarding right now?
Ms. Jensen. We do receive reports from pharmacists, mostly
faxes and emails that they have received from gray marketers,
from companies advertising these drugs at very high prices, and
we do forward all of those reports to the Department of
Justice.
Ms. DeGette. And have you seen a large incidence of that?
Ms. Jensen. We have----
Ms. DeGette. OK.
Ms. Jensen [continuing]. Over the past----
Ms. DeGette. And do you think there are some ways we can
write legislation so we don't experience a lot of hoarding if
we make a mandatory reporting program?
Ms. Jensen. So with notifications of mandatory reporting,
we would not post a shortage until we know that shortage is
going to occur, absolutely going to occur, or has already
occurred. We would want to hold off because our goal is to try
to prevent all shortages. If we can do that through working
with the manufacturers, through working with alternate
manufacturers to ramp up, as well as sometimes having to
temporarily import product, that is what we are doing.
Ms. DeGette. So your process would be if you got
notification of a shortage to contact the manufacturers to see
if it could be resolved internally----
Ms. Jensen. Absolutely.
Ms. DeGette. It is a little bit of a waiting game, isn't
it, because if you don't notify the hospitals and the
physicians quickly enough, then having any kind of a
notification system is pointless, right?
Ms. Jensen. Right.
Ms. DeGette. So you are going to have to figure out how to
do that.
Ms. Jensen. We need a good way to get information out when
we know there is going to be a shortage, get it out as quickly
as possible so that hospitals can make decisions.
Ms. DeGette. And what would happen if you did have a system
where you could get that notification out? What would the
hospitals then do with that information?
Ms. Jensen. Well, they could plan accordingly. Sometimes
treatments can be reserved for certain types of patients where
there is an alternative for other patients. They can use those
alternatives. Sometimes it helps hospitals make those
decisions.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Dr. Woodcock, in your written testimony,
you had said that the FDA sent a letter to the pharmaceutical
manufacturers reminding them of their current legal obligations
to report certain discontinuances to the Agency and urging them
to voluntarily notify the FDA of all potential disruptions of
the prescription drug supply to the U.S. market even when
disclosure is not currently required by law. After you did
that, you said that there has been a significant increase in
the number of potential shortages reported to the FDA. So my
question is, is it your sense that manufacturers were not
complying with current law before they got that letter?
Ms. Woodcock. Our sense is I think that manufacturers were
complying with current law, but the current law only has a
limited universe of things that have to be reported. And we
asked for voluntary reporting of a much wider universe.
Ms. DeGette. So as I understand it, the Agency cannot
expand the reporting, cannot require more reporting without
authorization from Congress, is that right?
Ms. Woodcock. Not more mandatory reporting.
Ms. DeGette. Without authorization from Congress, right?
OK. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, I am sorry, Dr. Woodcock. I know you have
been here for a while. I had to go speak on Yucca Mountain, so
I had my different jobs I have to do.
So I just really wanted to focus on Generic User Fee Act
issues and the proposal to develop better science for new
bioequivalent methods for locally acting drugs. So how do we
know what the promises are? So what types of metrics do you
think there will be for Congress and the American people to
judge whether we are getting our best return on investment with
this?
Ms. Woodcock. Well, similar with the user fee program, you
know, there are interim goals throughout this Generic Drug User
Fee Program that have been devised, and we will report on those
goals and you will know exactly what our performance is against
the goals. So there are many metrics that are put into place
for performance of the program. We intend to meet those
metrics, but right from the beginning, we will have to do
things in the first year, and we can report on those actions.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, and I appreciate that. I think Congress
would like to see I think the folks who are working with you
collaboratively would like to make sure that is transparent,
there is predictability. A lot of our concern is the length of
time without it. So I mean there is just hope that in paying
for an expedited, clear, safe system, that we are going to get
what is going to be paid for.
Ms. Woodcock. Well, I hope you can feel some confidence
because of our track record of the Prescription Drug User Fee
Program where we have exceeded or met our goals up through
almost the entire program.
Mr. Shimkus. And I mentioned this numerous times in various
hearings and I applaud it; I think focusing on the risk-based
approach in the recent reports is right on. I mean if good
actors are good actors and they have been good actors, they
continue to be good actors, then there may be a time to revisit
but annually may--we can make that determination. Obviously,
when we are not inspecting, we would much rather have
inspections of facilities we haven't even visited versus
continually re-inspecting the good actors. So I find that a
positive and I look forward to that.
Utilizing prediction information from companies, foreign
governments, and third parties could help us, obviously, to do
this risk-based system. Can you describe the importance of the
risk-based approach in ensuring the safety of imported drugs?
Ms. Woodcock. Certainly. What we know about facilities is
that if they are having problems, they may not correct them and
the problems may get worse. So we go into a plant initially, we
discover problems, if we don't go and return and verify that
they are on an improvement trajectory, we may be seeing a
situation where the production methods may be deteriorating.
And so it is very important for us to go sort of where the
money is, where the risk is and to be able to follow up on
those facilities that are subpar, all right, and also to follow
up more closely on those facilities that are producing riskier
products such as the sterile injectables to make sure they are
continuing to meet their obligations.
Mr. Shimkus. And I appreciate that. And my last question is
how can we leverage the third party actors or foreign
governments? Help me talk through how do we get a little more
buy-in or can get them to understand the importance of what we
are trying to do.
Ms. Woodcock. The foreign governments?
Mr. Shimkus. Right, or other third party entities that may
be involved.
Ms. Woodcock. Other third parties, um-hum. As Mr. Beckerman
said, we would like to have better ability to exchange
information with foreign countries who have inspectorates. Many
countries now are developing pharmaceutical inspectorates. They
go to the factories; they have information. We do get heads up
from them when there are problems, but we would like to have a
much better global safety net so that all the regulators are
working together and any other inspectorates that might be out
there, third party inspectorates. So we share information and
we make sure around the world that that safety net exists.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, historically, I think we have all
believed that FDA has been really the gold standard. I think
the EU is because of their timeliness is getting into a
competitive arena with us. We would like to continue the gold
standard and maybe push those values but also a timely process
so we don't lose that leverage.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Thank you, Dr. Woodcock.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. And that
concludes panel one. Do we have another one? I am sorry. I
didn't see you.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New York for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is hard to see on
the side, I know. Thank you.
Dr. Woodcock, several of the witnesses in the second panel
in their written testimony mention that the user fees included
in GDUFA and BsUFA are meant to be in addition to a solid base
of annually appropriated funds for the FDA. So I was pleased to
see that for the fiscal year 2012 the FDA received a 50 million
increase in funding over fiscal year 2011 funding levels. But
this was a hard-fought victory given that the first proposal
was a 285 million cut in FDA funding. So could you elaborate on
why it is so important that the FDA be adequately funded and
how cuts to the FDA could impact the Center for Drug Evaluation
and researchers' ability to meet the review time frames and
inspection standards outlined in the GDUFA and BsUFA user fee
agreements?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes. All of the user fee programs assume that
there is an appropriated base funding that we build on and that
is augmented by the user fees. As I think the discussion on
drug shortage has illustrated, FDA has many other jobs, and the
drug program has many other jobs other than simply review. And
for the health and safety of our population, we need to do all
those activities well and we do need resources to do them. So
the Generic Drug User Fee Program that is being proposed is
built upon a platform of appropriated dollars and is additive.
The Prescription Drug User Fee Program has always had a trigger
and is of appropriated funds and the fees are additive that
allow us to meet the goals and accomplish all that ambitious
program. And similarly, for biosimilars it will be built on an
appropriated base.
Mr. Engel. Well, thank you. You mentioned the drug
shortages. The largest employer in my district is Montefiore
Medical Center in Bronx, New York. They are, as you know, a
premier academic medical center with centers of excellence in
cancer care, cardiovascular services, pediatrics,
transplantation, and neurosciences, and my constituents have
really come to rely on them. All three of my children were born
there and they are really, really a treasure. When I asked them
about the impact of drug shortages on Montefiore, they
estimated to me that members of their staff, including
pharmacists and physicians, spent more than 110 hours a week
addressing issues directly related to drug shortages. So
clearly this issue, dealing with this, requires a significant
amount of people power and labor costs in order to track down
medications. Can you describe the steps the FDA is taking to
assist our hospitals like Montefiore in staying on top of
current and anticipated drug shortages?
Ms. Woodcock. Certainly. We sent a letter out to all
manufacturers reminding them of their statutory obligations and
asking them to voluntarily notify us in advance of potential
shortages so that we can do what we do to mitigate them. We
work with manufacturers to mitigate. We have even allowed drugs
to be shipped with filters, with instructions to filter the
drug because it had particulates if we were sure that the
filter wouldn't take out the agent as well and we had verified
that. So we do those risk mitigation efforts. We even allow
importation of unapproved drugs from other countries
temporarily to fill the gap for our patients. And we have a web
page and we work with the associations and with the physician
community to try and figure out how to mitigate these
shortages. But at the end of the day, if there is no drug there
that can be had, we are all in trouble.
Mr. Engel. I agree. Let me ask you this final question
which also ties in with the drug shortage problem. I have heard
from healthcare providers and patients that there is an added
layer of difficulty in addressing shortages in this area
because they say that the DEA limits the amount of active
pharmaceutical ingredient a company can purchase and
manufacture. I have also heard from parents who are frustrated
when they have struggled to obtain generic forms of their
children's ADHD medications in recent months. So I do recognize
that the DEA has to do its part to ensure that controlled
substances are not being abused, but how can DEA and FDA work
together to ensure that the shortages of controlled substances
such as the ADHD medications or pain medications like fentanyl
are quickly addressed and access to these to patients with a
clear need?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes, we worked very closely with the DEA, and
my understanding is that the manufacturers have received their
2012 quotas for the ADHD drugs and we expect that situation to
be ameliorated very rapidly. But we do work very closely with
them. We provide information to them every year that is very
relevant to them setting the quotas of these various drugs, how
much we expect will be needed. So we have a very close
relationship.
Mr. Engel. OK, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
OK, I think that concludes panel one. The Chair would like
to thank Dr. Woodcock and her panel for your excellent
testimony.
Ms. Woodcock. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. And excuse panel one and call panel two to the
witness table. And while they are coming, without objection,
the chair would like to enter into the record four documents: a
statement by the American Academy of Pediatrics, one by the
American Society of Health System Pharmacists, another by the
National Community Pharmacists Association, and one by the
Biotechnology Industry Organization. And it has been shared
with minority. Without objection, they will be entered into the
record.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. All right. The Chair will call panel two to the
table and would like to thank you all for agreeing to testify
before the subcommittee today. And I would like to quickly
introduce our panel. First, Ms. Heather Bresch is the CEO of
Mylan, Inc; second, Mr. David Gaugh is the vice president of
regulatory sciences at the Generic Pharmaceutical Association;
and Dr. Bill Greene is the chief pharmaceutical officer at St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital. Again, thank you all for
coming. We have your prepared statements which will be entered
in the record and we ask you to summarize your opening
statement 5 minutes.
Ms. Bresch, we will begin with you. You are recognized for
5 minutes to summarize your testimony.

STATEMENTS OF HEATHER BRESCH, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, MYLAN,
INC.; DAVID GAUGH, VICE PRESIDENT, REGULATORY SCIENCES, GENERIC
PHARMACEUTICAL ASSOCIATION; AND BILL GREENE, PHARM.D, BCPS,
FASHP, CHIEF PHARMACEUTICAL OFFICER, PHARMACEUTICAL SERVICES,
MEMBER, PHARMACEUTICAL SCIENCES, ST. JUDE CHILDREN'S RESEARCH
HOSPITAL

STATEMENT OF HEATHER BRESCH

Ms. Bresch. Thank you and good morning, Chairman Pitts and
Ranking Member Pallone and members of the subcommittee, and
thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
I am Heather Bresch, CEO of Mylan, Inc., the largest global
generics company in the world headquartered in the United
States. Mylan was founded 50 years ago in West Virginia, and
for the first 45 years of our history, Mylan was a domestic
company that served the U.S. market. In 2007, we transformed
into a global company. Today, we provide products in more than
150 countries, have a global workforce of more than 18,000,
including more than 5,000 employees in the United States. Our
largest drug manufacturing facility is located in Morgantown,
West Virginia, where we produce nearly 20 billion doses of
medicine each year. We also have multiple facilities outside of
the U.S. that produce drugs that are distributed in this
country and which are inspected by the FDA. Today, 1 out of
every 11 prescriptions dispensed in the United States is a
Mylan product. In light of our success in the global market,
Mylan is adding manufacturing jobs around the globe, and we
would like to not only maintain what we already have here in
the United States, but we would also like to expand our U.S.
presence.
As we transform from a domestic to a global company, we
were surprised to discover that FDA is still operating as a
domestic agency and is not equipped with the resources or legal
authority to regulate the now global drug industry that serves
the United States. In fact, FDA is governed by a 1938 law,
which has been largely unchanged since its initial passage and
does not give FDA the full authority it needs to oversee the
global industry.
Unfortunately, the 1938 law also creates an unlevel playing
field for American manufacturers by requiring U.S.
manufacturers to be inspected every 2 years while the law is
silent on foreign drug manufacturers. As a result, two
standards are created--one for the United States' manufacturers
and one for foreign. U.S. manufacturers actually have a
perverse incentive to move existing U.S. jobs abroad where they
will face less regulatory scrutiny and also can avoid the
second-highest combined Federal/State corporate tax rate of 39
percent.
As the Pew Health Group reported to this subcommittee last
week, complying with quality systems and FDA regulations
represents approximately 25 percent of a drug manufacturer's
operating cost. This disparity in standards raises very real
and profound questions about the integrity and quality of the
drug supply in the U.S. Clearly, every consumer should have the
peace of mind of knowing that every drug product dispensed in
the U.S. is held to the same standard of quality regardless of
whether the product originated in the United States or outside
of its borders.
Over the last several years, the number of foreign
facilities supplying the U.S. has grown by 185 percent, while
at the same time, FDA inspection rates have decreased by nearly
57 percent according to the FDA. FDA estimates that up to 40
percent of drugs now consumed by U.S. patients are manufactured
abroad and 80 percent of the active ingredients used in drugs
come from foreign countries.
The growth in the number of foreign facilities coupled with
a significant increase in generic drug application has caused
FDA's workload to be far outpaced by its resources, and as a
result, the time it takes to get a generic drug approved has
nearly doubled with more than 2,700 generic applications
awaiting approval from FDA today. Now more than ever Americans
need more timely access to more affordable generic medicine
which has saved patients and the government more than 930
billion in the last decade alone.
With a 50-year history of working closely with Congress and
the FDA, Mylan is pleased that the generic industry has stepped
up first and addressed an industry-wide issue impacting brand
and generics to help address FDA's challenge of carrying out
its mission within a global industry, especially given the
current scarcity of government resources.
The landmark and novel user fee program is aimed at three
critical components: safety, access, and transparency. Through
GDUFA, FDA will receive approximately 1.5 billion in new
funding over the next 5 years, and in return, FDA has agreed to
more timely reviews of generic drug applications, increased
transparency, and by any old good manufacturing practice
surveillance inspections of all generic finish dosage form and
active pharmaceutical ingredient manufacturers, foreign and
domestic, on a risk-adjusted basis, among other benefits
outlined in a negotiated goals letter.
Strengthening the supply chain, a key aim of GDUFA through
routine GMP inspections for all facilities, as well as
transparency initiatives that require the identification and
registration of facilities involved in the supply chain will
also provide a more holistic solution to current drug
shortages. Additionally, decreased review times will ensure
more timely access to new generic products, including those
that addressed an unmet medical need or those in short supply.
While the generic industry and API industries will help
provide the financial resources to globalize the FDA, it is
imperative for Congress to update the 1938 law to ensure the
integrity of the supply chain and a level playing field so
companies like Mylan are not disadvantaged to grow American
manufacturing jobs. A level playing field will also benefit
foreign facilities as well as small and first-time entrants who
are currently disadvantaged by delays in new product approvals
because of a lack of a recent inspection.
We urge Congress to adopt GDUFA as negotiated and move
forward in updating the 1938 law. Only by taking these steps
can we provide more timely access to more affordable generics,
ensure competitiveness by leveling the playing field for
American manufacturers, and equip FDA with the authority it
needs to become a global agency to ensure the integrity of the
global drug supply chain.
Thank you. And I would be happy to address any questions of
the committee.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bresch follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Thank you. Mr. Gaugh, you are recognized for 5
minutes to summarize your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DAVID GAUGH

Mr. Gaugh. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Pitts, Ranking
Member Pallone, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me to testify on these very timely and important
issues. I am David Gaugh, Vice President for Regulatory
Sciences at the Generic Pharmaceutical Association and a
licensed pharmacist. GPhA represents the manufacturers and
distributors of finished-dose generic pharmaceuticals, bulk
pharmaceutical chemicals, and suppliers to the generic
industry. Generic pharmaceuticals fill 78 percent of all
prescriptions dispensed in the United States but consume just
25 percent of the spending for prescription medicines.
I would like to begin by commending the committee for your
continued focus on these most important issues that you are
examining today. Though I have just begun my time with GPhA, I
have been working in and around the generic industry for more
than 2 decades and have witnessed firsthand the industry's
remarkable growth and the vital role it plays in the lives of
Americans every day. This growth of the generic industry has
also served to underscore the critical importance and the role
of the Food and Drug Administration. As shown by these two
historic user fee agreements and our continued efforts to
address drug shortages, the level of cooperation between the
industry and the FDA has never been greater. It is our hope
this collaboration will continue and even extend throughout the
interactions for future activities with the Agencies.
However, the Agency remains underfunded and the
responsibilities of ensuring safe and effective access for
affordable medications is shared with the entire pharmaceutical
industry, not just with the FDA. This is why the generic
industry has stepped up to the plate, and I would be pleased to
provide some examples.
Currently, well more than 2,000 generic drug applications
are awaiting approval for the FDA Office of Generic Drugs and
average approval time for these applications is now stretched
to 32 months. Unfortunately, the backlog keeps growing for
these generic drugs, keeps off market competitors, and prevents
the prices from continuing to go down further. The proposed
Generic Drug User Fee, or GDUFA, that we are discussing today
will provide the FDA with nearly $1.5 billion over the next 5
years to help alleviate this backlog and expedite consumers to
new generic drugs. It will also take the historic step of
holding all players contributing to the U.S. generic drug
system, both foreign and domestic, to the same inspection
standards and enhance FDA's ability to identify and require the
registration of active pharmaceutical ingredients and finish
dosage from manufacturers involved in the production of the
products being sold in the U.S.
It is paramount that as we work and save the future of our
country's generic industry, we also work with the FDA to bring
them into the 21st Century and ensure that the Agency's
authority to achieve its mission and the goals are kept up to
date. This is exemplified by the user fee program we are
discussing today, both GDUFA and the biosimilar fee structure.
During the biosimilar fee negotiations, GPhA expressed its
support for user fee funding to provide FDA with adequate
resources to apply consistent regulatory standards to all
biologics. Both industry and patients will benefit from this
user fee program by gaining a higher degree of certainty in the
timeliness of the applications, the review, and their approval.
It is important to emphasize that the funding provided by these
user fee programs is in addition to and not a substitute for
congressional appropriations.
And while the programs provide an excellent framework for
the industry to help support the growing global needs of the
FDA, they do not completely solve the problems. For example,
some manufacturers are using the REMS program as a way to delay
generic competition. For products that require a full REMS and
distribution in accordance with restricted systems, REMS
manufacturers are making it difficult for the generic
manufacturers to acquire samples of products so that they can
actually run the tests on the products to be able to produce
the exact bioequivalent product in a generic form. GPhA also
supports the adoption of a Federal drug tracking system with
uniformed standards across all States to prevent a patchwork by
state law.
Now, let me address the drug shortage crisis. The generic
pharmaceutical industry has spearheaded the development of an
unprecedented multi-stakeholder collaboration, which we believe
will accelerate the recovery of certain critical drugs in short
supply that are in patient need. This private sector solution,
which we have labeled as the Accelerated Recovery Initiative,
is designed to provide a more accurate, timely, and
comprehensive view of the critical drugs and drug shortage,
provide greater visibility to potential shortages of those
critical drugs that are established for potential loss, and
voluntary production adjustments to lessen and even eliminate
certain current drug shortages. This initiative is predicated
on voluntary communication between an independent third party
and all key stakeholders involved in the approval, the
manufacturing, and the distribution of drugs that are in
shortage.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, it is our hope that Congress
will act on these historic user fee proposals as an expeditious
process. Nothing is more important to our industry than
ensuring patients have access to life saving generic
medications they require, and with a joint effort among all
involved, we believe we can continue to make significant steps
towards accomplishing this goal.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gaugh follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes Dr. Greene for 5 minutes to summarize your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF BILL GREENE

Mr. Greene. Chairman Pitts and other members of the
committee, I am grateful for the opportunity to address you
today as a representative of St. Jude's Children's Research
Hospital and also a representative of colleagues at children's
hospitals throughout the United States. As you know, I am chief
pharmaceutical officer at St. Jude and at St. Jude we are
committed to developing research that leads to new cures for
children with catastrophic diseases. We are also committed to
providing unsurpassed clinical care for those patients. I am
really grateful that you would offer me time to share some
comments.
My short testimony--if we can have some slides here--I
would like to share three ways Congress can help alleviate drug
shortages for the pediatric community. But first, I would like
to begin by putting a face to my discussion, and it doesn't
look like the face will be able to be displayed.
I can tell the story of Lucy, who is a 5-year-old from
Covington, Tennessee. Lucy and her family have given me
permission to share her story as a way of illustrating the
challenges that drug shortages pose for patient care and for
the caregivers that are providing that care. She is being
treated for medulla blastoma, which is a type of brain cancer.
She has been doing well, and last spring she was being treated
in her prescribed course of treatment and was being supported
by intravenous nutritional support. She began to develop
symptoms, rapid eye movements, blurred vision, other visual
changes, some gait changes that caused her care team to suspect
that her cancer was relapsing. So she was admitted to the
hospital and worked up. Fortunately, during that time, she was
treated with intravenous thiamin. She experienced a dramatic
recovery and was able to continue with her treatment course.
The interesting background on this issue is that the cause
of the thiamin deficiency was very simple. We were simply
unable to secure intravenous preparations of multivitamins to
add to her intravenous nutritional support. That caused the
thiamin deficiency, the thiamin deficiency caused the symptoms,
the symptoms resulted in a hospital admission. This was a
preventable admission and it should not have happened.
You are aware that the number of drug shortages occurring
in the United States has increased dramatically in recent
years. While not all of these shortages have directly affected
St. Jude, the number of shortages affecting us have increased
dramatically. If I were able to show my second slide, I would
be able to illustrate to you that we have experienced a 10-fold
increase in the number of shortages requiring action at our
organization since 2008. In the last 2 months alone, January
and December, I have had to issue communications to our
clinical staff on 14 separate occasions. Now, once that
requires my action, those are important drug shortages that
impact patient care--14 times in the last 2 months.
Our drug shortages threaten our Nation's healthcare system
and especially children in three distinct ways. First, we know
that we cannot always provide the best care for these patients.
Second, we know that shortages do affect research that cause
modifications for protocols, sometimes delays in research and
terminations. We know that at least 85 children's oncology
group protocols that have been affected by shortages. And
third, we know that all of these shortages definitely add real
cost to the system. I know the subcommittee has previously
heard testimony of this type. Much data has been shared. Many
of the comments today have been very interesting and helpful.
It is now time for immediate action.
I have three points I would like to make about what
Congress can do to help. First, I urge Congress immediately to
pass legislation to give the Food and Drug Administration the
tools that it needs to prevent and minimize the impact these
shortages have on pediatric care and research. The FDA has been
effective in minimizing the impact of shortages when
appropriate communication is made to the Agency. Their efforts
have avoided almost 200 shortages in 2011. Congress can
strengthen their reporting system by enacting H.R. 2245, Senate
Bill 296, to give the FDA more complete knowledge of permanent
and temporary supply chain disruptions in advance and allowing
the FDA to facilitate its communications with caregivers like
me.
Second, I urge Congress to give the FDA the resources and
authority it needs to combat drug shortages in a proactive
manner. While the FDA's efforts have been laudable, these
efforts have been largely reactive. Once a shortage has
evolved, we know patients are going to be affected. The Agency
must have what it needs to develop proactive approaches to
predict and prevent shortages and the FDA should have
sophisticated systems in place facilitating forecasting,
prediction, and enabling proactive work with suppliers and
purchasers to prevent shortages from ever occurring. Further,
other relevant agencies such as the DEA must work closely,
collaboratively, with the FDA to combat these shortages.
Third, Congress must ensure that in any solution it
develops, pediatric protections are built in and pediatric
experts are broadly engaged. Children require medications in
special strengths, packaged in smaller dose sizes, dye-free and
preservative-free when possible. Hospitalized children
frequently require intravenous medications, and in many cases,
fewer alternatives exist for them when a drug is in short
supply. For these reasons, the expertise of pediatric
practitioners who are familiar with the nuances and intricacies
of the care of children must be included in developing
solutions for shortages.
Finally, I would like to conclude by recognizing that the
underlying causes of drug shortages are complex. Solutions
offered today will not solve the many reasons drug shortages
exist and continue to increase in frequency. Before enacting
legislation focused on addressing these underlying factors, I
urge you to carefully and comprehensively study and understand
these factors and the downstream impact of any proposed
solutions with input from healthcare professionals and other
stakeholders. We must return to a state that used to exist when
I was a younger practitioner, a state when we had a consistent,
reliable, and safe supply chain of needed pharmaceutical
products. Nothing less is acceptable.
Thank you for your dedication to this issue and for
allowing me minutes to speak as a provider and caregiver
representing children throughout this country who have been
affected by these shortages. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Greene follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the panel for your opening
statements. We will now go to questioning, and I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes for that purpose.
Ms. Bresch, how will the Generic Drug User Fee Agreement
bring predictability and efficiency to FDA's review of generic
drugs?
Ms. Bresch. Thank you. As I think you have heard this
morning, especially through Dr. Woodcock's testimony, the need
for the resources to truly globalize the FDA is of upmost
importance. So as I mentioned, the fact that the generic
industry stepped up to provide those resources, the fees are
split primarily in two buckets, about 70 percent going towards
the inspection and fees for facilities and about 30 percent for
the applications. So we believe that with the goals and the
metrics laid out in GDUFA that that parity, not just from a
timing perspective but also the rigor at how inspections are
performed because, you know, I can tell you as having
facilities around the world inspected by many regulatory
agencies, the FDA does have the gold standard and I think it is
very important to raise the bar for the rest of the world, not
let the United States' bar come down.
Mr. Pitts. Will this predictability and efficiency bring
down the cost of generic drugs and what are the metrics that
are included in the goals letter to ensure that progress is
made on the review of generic applications?
Ms. Bresch. So as we have noted, that approval time today
for generic drugs is about 31 months, almost double that in
recent years. So the goals the metrics laid out bring that back
down to about 10 months within 5 years. So it certainly keeps
the competitive nature of our industry very much at the
forefront while, as we level that playing field, making sure
that it is not just competition at any cost. I think what is
important to remember is that the competition is important if
everybody is held to the same standard. So the certainty comes
with the reduction of approval time but making sure that we are
having good competition, not just any competition.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Gaugh, why is the new Biosimilars User Fee
Program important to the generic industry and to patients and
what are the metrics included in the goals letter to ensure
that progress is made in that regard?
Mr. Gaugh. Well, it is extremely important to the American
public to have access to the biosimilar pathway of products. As
you heard Dr. Woodcock say today, today is the first day that
they have announced that they are going to release the
guidelines for the biosimilars. So unfortunately, until we see
those guidelines, it is going to be hard for me to answer the
rest of the question. But it extremely important to have that
affordable access to the American public. And you will find
that many of the companies that GPhA represents already have
these products produced and approved in foreign countries, both
Europe and other markets.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Dr. Greene, talk a little bit about how drug shortages
affect St. Jude and how many drugs used at your hospitals
regularly go into shortage.
Mr. Greene. Thank you for that question. We deal with
shortages on a continual basis. I believe Mr. Engel referred to
Montefiore and the number of hours that they have dedicated to
managing drug shortages. I believe you have mentioned 100 or
120 hours per week of total personnel time. That is not a gross
exaggeration in any form or fashion. As I mentioned, I am
continually engaged in interacting with my clinical staff on
what are the shortages, what are the alternatives, when we have
fentanyl, when we don't have fentanyl, when we have Zofran,
when we don't have Zofran, when we have multivitamins, when we
have mannitol, what are we doing when it goes away. It has a
dramatic impact and it diverts significant resources away from
actually taking care of the patients because we are focusing on
one of the most basic elements of care and that is simply do we
have the product available for us? So it is a very dramatic
impact on us on a day-in, day-out basis. Some days are better
than others but some days are simply very traumatic in trying
to provide that care.
Mr. Pitts. Can you walk us through, Dr. Greene, what
happens from your perspective when there is a drug shortage?
Who notifies you? How much warning do you get? What do you need
to do to notify people in your organization? Is there any way
at present to anticipate a shortage and what preparations do
you need to put in place at the hospital level?
Mr. Greene. You know, I made reference in my testimony the
need to support the proposed legislation that effectively
builds the tools to allow for early warning types of systems.
Historically, we are not aware of a drug shortage evolving
until we simply place an order, we check our inventory when it
comes in, and we realize after 1 day, 2 days, or 3 days, we
keep getting shorted on the order. We don't know about it.
Nobody tells us the shortage is there. So effectively, you
place an order, you get the drug or you don't, and of course,
the shortage is recognized when we don't get it the day after
we order it. We place another order, again we are shorted in
it, and then finally you begin to realize there is something
going on here.
Now, fortunately, at the University of Utah Drug
Information Center and American Society of Health System
Pharmacists now have a very useful tool that allows
organizations to become aware of the experience of other
organizations healthcare systems that have experienced
shortages so that, for example, I might report to that system
that we are having trouble getting methotrexate and that might
be the first notification that we are beginning to see problems
with methotrexate in the country. And that way other
organizations become aware of that. So there is no warning in
too many cases and we simply have to be reactive in dealing
with those problems.
Mr. Pitts. OK. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the ranking member for 5 minutes for questions. Mr.
Pallone?
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to ask a question, Ms. Bresch first, if I could.
In your testimony, you emphasized that the imbalance of
inspection requirements between U.S. and foreign manufacturing
facilities creates an uneven playing field for pharmaceutical
plants in the U.S., and certainly one way to help level the
playing field, which was mentioned by our previous panel, is to
apply a risk-based oversight system to all manufacturing
facilities, both foreign and domestic. However, my question is
to ensure real parity for all manufacturing locations, do you
think that a minimum inspection frequency is also necessary and
should that be defined in the statute that we would pass.
Ms. Bresch. I believe that risk-based is appropriate but I
do believe that defining how that risk-based works is
incredibly important. I mean if I give the example--I talk
about our facility in Morgantown, West Virginia. There are two
full-time employees by the FDA who live in Morgantown, West
Virginia, for just our facility. So if the risk-based is not
defined properly, our concern is that it will be easy to go to
where FDA has been going and that compliance-based will be
extremely important to define that formula. So I believe that
the legislation needs to have a very well defined formula and
that there should be some minimum that a facility would need to
have been inspected by.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Thank you.
Let me ask Mr. Gaugh, I am interested in this Accelerated
Recovery Initiative, or ARI--I mentioned it previously also, I
think before the last panel--that you described in your
testimony. It sounds like a promising effort that would help
industry address or prevent shortages, and I am interested in
hearing exactly how it would interface with the FDA. Could you
explain what the role of the FDA would be in that initiative
and particularly I would like to learn what the third party
would be able to do that the FDA does not do and whether you
see this initiative as potentially complementary to legislation
that would mandate FDA notification? Or is it your hope that it
would be instead of legislation?
Mr. Gaugh. Thank you. From the standpoint of pulling this
together, as I said earlier in my verbal testimony but also in
the written testimony, this will be a multi-stakeholder event.
And there are many questions that were asked of Dr. Woodcock
that would be addressed by the ARI. For example, as we were
talking about the gray market and I can't remember--I think it
was Mr. Cassidy that asked about how we know how much product
different organizations, a hospital can get when they order or
how much is available to them. That would mean that in this
ARI, the key stakeholders would be the manufacturers, the
wholesalers and distributors, purchasing organizations, the FDA
most importantly, and then the third party, as you mentioned,
which would be an independent third party.
The issues that we have addressed in the small group that
is pulling the ARI together is that this is a very competitive
marketplace, of course, and it would be fraught with some FTC
potential issues if not handled in an appropriate fashion. So
the appropriate fashion that we have come up with to this point
is an independent third party that will be a blinding party if
you will so they are the only party that sees all information
coming from all the competitive companies.
To answer your question about why the FDA couldn't perform
this, there are multiple reasons. One, it isn't currently in
their responsibility of duties as you see the responsibilities.
Number two, Dr. Woodcock talked about the limited resources
they currently have, which is very true. The drug shortage was
only four or five people up until a few months ago. It has now
been doubled, I believe, to seven or eight people. So that
would be a limiting factor. The other piece is the third party
is going to have to be somebody who really understands
production planning extremely well and can take production
planning reports from the multiple different companies to make
determinations and decisions on who could or who could not
produce products to help alleviate this drug shortage. That is
not something that currently exists within the----
Mr. Pallone. Just because I am running out of time, it
sounds to me that in terms of the question I asked that you are
saying that the initiative, the ARI is complementary to
legislation that we would initiate. In other words, not that it
would be instead of, but because of the need to work together
and certain things that can't be done, this would have to be
something that we would have to work out in terms of the
legislation. Is that accurate?
Mr. Gaugh. That is correct. That is accurate.
Mr. Pallone. OK. All right. Thanks so much.
Mr. Gaugh. You are welcome.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman, recognizes the
vice chairman of the committee, Dr. Burgess, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Gaugh, if I could stay with you for a moment. And
let me just ask you and I know this is a wide-ranging question
so I am going to ask you to be as brief as you can, but in your
opinion, what are the reasons that a drug goes into shortage?
Mr. Gaugh. I am sorry. Can you repeat----
Mr. Burgess. What are the reasons that a drug goes into
shortage?
Mr. Gaugh. Dr. Woodcock described the overall situation
with drug shortage, so it really is a demand versus supply
situation right now. So the demand continues to increase in the
United States with the graying of America, et cetera. So demand
continues to go up. The currently available supply is going
down, so as she talked about in the injectable industry in
particular, there is a defined quantity of production
capability in the U.S. Currently, most of the companies that
are under the production capability piece are in remediation
efforts due to their compliance or their lack of compliance
situation. So the available capacity today is less than it was
about a year and a half ago.
Mr. Burgess. And here is the thing. The manufacturing
processes in many of these drugs are not new. They have been
around for a long time. The FDA has been doing inspections for
years. The companies have had to get the raw materials for
years. They have been making injectables for years. So why the
acceleration in the last 5 years?
Mr. Gaugh. If we are still just talking about sterile
generic injectables, the basic five companies that have the
majority of the production capability, these are aged
facilities. So as the manufacturing lines are becoming older,
they need to be replaced, refurbished, upgraded. Specifically,
also, the specifications, the criteria that need to be met are
changing year after year. Those have to be implemented. Sterile
injectable production is a very complex process. It takes time
to upgrade those systems, and when you do upgrade them, you
have to take them down for a period of time.
Mr. Burgess. Right. But don't you find it odd that it
really has been a snowball effect? I can remember in the 2004
presidential election, in one of the debates that fall, flu
vaccine had been contaminated with serratia. We got it from an
overseas source and President Bush was just pummeled for this
flu vaccine shortage. And now the shortages are happening all
the time. That level of scrutiny doesn't seem to be being
applied to the fact that more and more drugs are drifting off
into a shortage situation. Why is that?
Mr. Gaugh. Because I would say the level of scrutiny that
is upon those companies by the FDA has increased over the last
3 to 4 years, and that level of scrutiny is what----
Mr. Burgess. But the shortages are going to be manifested
by the clinicians not having the compound to deliver to their
patients, not the Food and Drug Administration saying aha, we
have identified a shortage in your line. It is because at the
end of the line, the doctor and the patient are saying I can't
get this stuff. So let me ask you this. There are some new
branded drugs that are complex molecules, difficult to
manufacture, and there are 10 to 15 generic oncology drugs that
have been around forever and are quite basic in their
formulation, and those are the ones that are in shortage, not
the complex new molecules. So why is it that the complex
branded drugs are readily available and the basic generic drugs
are in short supply?
Mr. Gaugh. Typically, the complex brand molecules you are
talking about are manufactured in one facility, one line for
that particular product. Or do you look at the generic
injectables. Those companies produce anywhere from 50 to 120
different molecules on their different lines. So it is a
supply-and-demand issue again within that facility of the
number of products that are made.
Mr. Burgess. I brought this up in my opening statement. Do
you think there is the possibility that we have perhaps made
things a little too tight, made the margins a little too tight
where it is difficult for companies to justify continued
manufacture if they have a difficulty in their manufacturing
process or for other companies to step in and fill the gap if a
company has to withdraw from the manufacturing?
Mr. Gaugh. In the market----
Mr. Burgess. We just don't have the profit margins built in
under current constraints?
Mr. Gaugh. Profit margin could be one of the causative
effects, but it is not one of the major causative effects, no.
Mr. Burgess. OK.
Mr. Gaugh. It is still a demanding market in the U.S. and
you can change the price as needed.
Mr. Burgess. Very well. Dr. Greene, let me just ask you a
question. You heard Dr. Cassidy on our side, you heard Lois
Capps on the other side of the dais reference what they suspect
was a problem in the gray market where some hospitals might be
buying up a compound that is going into shortage and then
reselling it at a much higher markup. I mean Dr. Cassidy has
some specific questions. You deal in hospital purchasing all
the time. Was he on the mark there or was that off?
Mr. Greene. Someone certainly is getting product somewhere
and, you know, maybe it is an entrepreneurial way, but they are
taking advantage of shortages to make dramatic markups. Now,
how they get the product, I don't know. I would be very, very
surprised if any hospital is actually purchasing it for the
purpose of diverting it to the gray market. We know that it
happens; we just don't know where these individuals get their
drug. And that is one of the reasons why St. Jude, we do not
purchase off of a gray market.
Mr. Burgess. Well, where would be a more likely place to
look, then, if it is not the hospital purchasing?
Mr. Greene. I wish I could explain that. I don't know. I
know that there are thefts. There are reports of tractor-
trailer loads of drugs that have been simply stolen and you
don't ever know where those go and how they get into the
marketplace and so I simply do not know where those drugs come
from.
Mr. Burgess. You agree that it is a problem?
Mr. Greene. I don't know that it contributes dramatically
to shortages. I think it is a problem in the context that it
provides potentially very expensive and potentially harmful
products for use in patients.
Mr. Burgess. All right. Thank you for your time.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and yields to the
ranking member emeritus, Mr. Dingell, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you.
These questions go to Ms. Bresch. First I want to welcome
you to the committee. Thank you. And second, I want to thank
you for your leadership in this matter and tell you how much it
has meant to me. These questions will be all yes or no. Do you
agree that both FDA and the industry have a responsibility to
ensure the security of our drug supply chain? Yes or no?
Ms. Bresch. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Do you agree that the knowledge of your
suppliers is important? Yes or no?
Ms. Bresch. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Does Mylan have systems in place to know their
suppliers and monitor manufacturing quality? Yes or no?
Ms. Bresch. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. It would be nice if you had more assistance in
this, however, from FDA, would it not?
Ms. Bresch. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Does Mylan have systems in place to
demonstrate quality control? Yes or no?
Ms. Bresch. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Should all companies making drugs for the
United States know their suppliers and have quality systems in
place?
Ms. Bresch. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Should all companies making drugs for the U.S.
be able to demonstrate quality control? Yes or no?
Ms. Bresch. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Should companies be using risk analysis to
target safety risks? Yes or no?
Ms. Bresch. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Do you need to have the same kind of attention
given to the supplies and the commodities and the other things
that go into the pharmaceuticals that you sell as finished
products?
Ms. Bresch. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Do you agree that strong quality management
systems and risk analysis will help companies to ensure the
safety and quality of the finished drug product?
Ms. Bresch. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. I want to turn now to inspections. The brand
industry has noted that its user fees go to pay for a
preapproval inspection which could include an inspection of a
foreign facility. Is preapproval inspection the same as a GMP
inspection? Yes or no?
Ms. Bresch. No.
Mr. Dingell. Please explain the difference.
Ms. Bresch. The way PDUFA was written and is implemented is
really focused on the speed for an individual product. So a
preapproval inspection is on a certain product which could be
made on one line in a facility, and once that product is
approved, it would never require the FDA to come back and
inspect that line. GMP inspection covers the entire facility
and ensures that that facility is complying to good
manufacturing practices.
Mr. Dingell. And you do desperate need Food and Drug to
come back for that purpose to ensure that good manufacturing
processes are being carried out at the plant being inspected.
Is that right?
Ms. Bresch. Absolutely. I think as we have heard a lot
today, the vigilance that is required is on an ongoing basis.
Just because you meet GMP inspection or are GMP compliant, that
does not mean you are GMP compliant for the rest of that
facility's life. And that is why earlier when asked about a
risk-based approach to inspections and that we still believe
that there would be a minimum number of years that the FDA
would need to be back in that facility because it requires
ongoing constant vigilance.
Mr. Dingell. Now, you stated in your testimony that the
Federal Food and Drug and Cosmetic Act should be updated to
require parity of inspections for domestic and foreign
facilities. Why does Congress need to change the statutory
language when FDA has already agreed to do on a voluntary basis
in the Generic Drug User Fee Act?
Ms. Bresch. Well, and I want to thank you for your
leadership in this area for many years. I think to have an
agency as important as the FDA to be governed by a 1938 law
that was written from a very domestic standpoint and yet we are
needing and demanding the FDA to govern a global industry. So
if we are not going to have the global industry return to a
domestic one, we have no choice but to have the 1938 law be
representative of the world that the FDA needs to operate in
today. I think we heard Dr. Woodcock speak about the fact that
there is just a different standard. For products manufactured
in the United States, it is assumed to be adulterated unless
proven that it has been made to GMP, yet if we are importing
drugs, the standard that we hold those imports to are we have
to show and prove that they are not up to GMP or we have to let
them in. So I believe that that 1938 law desperately needs----
Mr. Dingell. To be changed.
Ms. Bresch [continuing]. To be updated so that the FDA has
all the ability to make all the decisions and necessary demands
to ensure the safety in the supply chain integrity on a global
basis.
Mr. Dingell. Now, it is also grossly unfair to surround
American manufacturers with all these requirements while
literally FDA is able to surround foreign manufacturers with
virtually none, isn't that right?
Ms. Bresch. Absolutely. Again, we talk about the
competitive nature of this industry, so we are forced to
compete really at any cost. So we are competing every day from
competition and companies around the globe that perhaps don't
hold their facility to the same standard as we do. We have
facilities all over the world, as I mentioned, that make
product for the United States and we hold all of our companies
to the same GMP whether that facility is in the United States
or outside of the United States. So the need for the
competitiveness as a U.S. manufacturer is very unlevel at the
moment, and unfortunately, as a manufacturer who employs many
American jobs, like I said, we would like to not only maintain
those but to increase them. And right now we are
disincentivized to do so.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I have used all my time but
could I have one more question?
Mr. Pitts. You may proceed.
Mr. Dingell. Ma'am, the Generic Drug User Fee Act Agreement
is unique in that it recognizes that FDA needs new resources
and new authorities to properly oversee what is now a
globalized industry as you have been pointing out to us. I
happen to believe that the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act should
and needs to be updated to reflect the global nature of our
drug supply, again as you were pointing out, and to adequately
equip FDA with the authority to properly ensure the safety of
our drug supply, and that would include the commodities that go
in an unfinished state. This committee has worked in a
bipartisan manner to secure the safety of consumer products in
our food supply, and I hope that we can do so for
pharmaceuticals.
I want to commend you for what it is you have done today
and for your guidance and counsel in these matters. It has been
most helpful and you go with my thanks and I think the thanks
of the committee.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your courtesy.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, I do
appreciate the panel and your time today.
Ms. Bresch, you are from West Virginia, is that correct? I
mean the facility is in West Virginia, is that what you said?
Ms. Bresch. That is where our largest facility is. We have
facilities all over the United States.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Do you know how many drug manufacturing
facilities are in the State of West Virginia?
Ms. Bresch. I don't know of any other.
Mr. Shimkus. At the West Virginia facility, there are two
FDA inspectors 24/7?
Ms. Bresch. They live in Morgantown, yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And they are dedicated solely to your
facility?
Ms. Bresch. I can't speak to what they are dedicated to but
I can tell you that they live in Morgantown, West Virginia, and
like I said, we are the only pharmaceutical company----
Mr. Shimkus. I mean, do they come in every day to your
facility?
Ms. Bresch. They are not necessarily in our facility every
day so that is why I am saying I am sure the FDA can utilize
them in other manners. My point is being that we have countries
that don't have an FDA employee, so when you think about
Morgantown having two, it can just demonstrate the unlevel
playing field.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, I would like to have two in China maybe.
Ms. Bresch. Or maybe 200, but yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, at least two would be a start.
Ms. Bresch. Exactly.
Mr. Shimkus. But I think that raises an issue and I do
appreciate your comments. I have been focused on this risk-
based system for a long time and it is not to walk away from
U.S. facilities but it is to recognize the fact that as
Chairman Emeritus Dingell said, I mean you had an inspector
onsite, you have got programs and plans and systems to
obviously check that yourself. We also have a pretty good
litigious environment that also keeps U.S. Manufacturing
facilities somewhat cognizant of the safety and efficacy of
what they are doing in the facility. So I think there would be,
if we did aggressively move in a risk-based approach, there
would be a return. It is not like they are never going to come
back to Morgantown, West Virginia, and check in on you.
Ms. Bresch. And we want them to. And I think that is the
point of the vigilance that I spoke about. It is that need, you
know, we say all the time there are good actors out there and
bad actors everywhere, United States included. It is just the
rigor that the FDA has to inspect the U.S., we find those
quicker or perhaps never in some other countries.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. Dr. Greene, I apologize for you not
getting your charts and stuff up on the overhead because we
were able to pull it from your testimony. And this is pretty
stark. And I would guess you are pretty concerned that trend
line is not changing any time soon, is that correct?
Mr. Greene. It doesn't portend good things for the future
if it continues in the same direction.
Mr. Shimkus. And so from the other members in this
discussion, it seems like we kind of mealy-mouth around trying
to really identify the problem. We talked about this in the
last hearing and I was just asking a basic question because I
am a conservative competitive market corporate Republican,
believer in supply-and-demand principles. Why is that not
working here? Why isn't there a signal being sent to
manufacturers, hey, there is a demand that is not being filled.
Can you not send a price signal----
Mr. Greene. Right.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. That would then generate an
interest, especially as Dr. Burgess said. Some of this stuff
isn't really the high-tech type stuff. I mean when the mention
of saline solution with vitamins inside of it you are thinking
he is telling me that, that stuff we do all the time. For that
to be a limited availability, that is crazy talk.
Mr. Greene. Yes, I am not qualified to really comment on
whether the economics are dramatically a part of this or not. I
would leave that to the economists. It would seem to me that--
--
Mr. Shimkus. Well, let me ask if anyone else can talk--I
mean part of hearings is trying to find an answer. So go ahead,
Mr. Gaugh.
Mr. Gaugh. So economics can be a piece of it, absolutely,
but are they the driving factor? They are not the driving
factor.
Mr. Shimkus. OK, when you say the economics could be, so
drill down a little bit.
Mr. Gaugh. So in drilling down a little bit, the economics,
yes, if a product in the competitive market space went down so
far that there was no more margin, you would make a decision
potentially to get out of that market, but this is a free
market environment and you can raise that price back up and
get----
Mr. Shimkus. That is what I would assume but it doesn't
seem that the market signals are being sent when there is a
limit that the price is going up to encourage people that are
in the market.
Mr. Gaugh. Right. And the issue we are talking about now is
sterile generic injectables. When you look at that line on the
graph that he had, the majority are those. It is purely a
capacity limitation to be able to produce those products.
Mr. Shimkus. So the market signal would send if they can
get a return on investment, it would send a signal to the
manufacturers, expand to meet the demand, but the signal is not
being sent.
Mr. Gaugh. It is being sent but expand is a 7-year
proposition typically from the day that you----
Mr. Shimkus. OK. But why is that?
Mr. Gaugh. The day you break ground until you are approved
by----
Mr. Shimkus. Rules, regulations, siting, permitting, all
this other junk?
Mr. Gaugh. The FDA approval is an 18-month process----
Mr. Shimkus. There is a--OK.
Mr. Gaugh [continuing]. And that is just to get the site
approved and then to move the products into that site is an
additional----
Mr. Shimkus. Well, and that is a great--and my time has
expired, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate it, but I think that is
where some of this debate needs to be. How do we move
aggressively, safely to allow expansion to meet these
shortages? Because this is ridiculous and we shouldn't put up
with it. And I yield back my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from New York, Mr. Engel, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Engel. Well, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gaugh, I want to follow up on something that Dr.
Burgess mentioned before. In your written testimony, you stated
that your trade association acknowledged that roughly half of
all reported shortages are associated with manufacturing
problems. Why do you believe that there has been such a
significant increase in manufacturing-related issues in recent
years and can you please elaborate on what steps the
manufacturers of generic medications are taking to address this
problem? Obviously, we cannot neglect patients' safety and so
it is a matter of great concern.
Mr. Gaugh. So if I understand your question correctly, you
look at the environment today--and again I am going to focus on
the sterile generic injectables--roughly 25 to 30 percent of
the currently available capacity is not available for
production due to remediation efforts. So if you take that 30
percent roughly out of production, that is the majority cause
of these drug shortage situations.
Mr. Engel. All right, thank you. Dr. Greene, you had
commented on a comment I had made involving Montefiore Medical
Center having to take hours to, you know, make sure the things
are ameliorated. I want to give you a chance to elaborate on
that a little more.
Mr. Greene. Specific to St. Jude I presume?
Mr. Engel. Yes.
Mr. Greene. Yes, one of the things we have simply developed
is a standard practice every week is one of the questions we do
in our routine administrative discussion is what is our latest
state of drug supply issues? What are they? What is their
acuity? Do we move them out into the clinical discussion realm
or is this one that we work within the pharmacy? I have
literally three individuals that are routinely engaged in the
discussion and evaluation and follow up to me every day. That
is not all that they do but they spend a significant amount of
their time dealing with these issues. And part of the problem
from my point of view is the volatility in the supply. I have
fentanyl today; no, I don't have fentanyl tomorrow. It is back.
I only have large-volume files. I don't have small volume.
Well, I have got single-dose vials this week but I don't have
the vials that I need to use to make PCAs. So those are the
kinds of issues that we are dealing with at any given time.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. I mentioned to Dr. Woodcock, I had
asked her this question that many of you mention in your
written testimony that the user fees included in GDUFA and
BsUFA are meant to be in addition to a solid base of annually
appropriated funds of the FDA. In fiscal year 2012, the FDA
received a 50 million increase in funding, which was a very big
victory for those of us who felt that happen because the first
proposal was a $285 million cut in FDA funding for fiscal year
2012. So would any of you care to elaborate on why it is so
important that the FDA be adequately funded and how cuts to the
FDA could impact your industry or the patients your
associations serve?
Ms. Bresch. I will speak to that. I think that as Dr.
Woodcock mentioned the premise has always been the FDA would
have the appropriations and that they would never solely rely
on user fees for any particular industry. And that is why I
think as you see the GDUFA being, you know, a very novel and
landmark user fee, the Agency has obviously funded the Office
of Generic Drugs since 1984 and has been very successful.
Hopefully, the user fee is now complementing that. I think that
when you look at the need for the Generic Biologics Program,
the same does not hold true and I think that is where we run
some risk of having it being way too weighted on strictly user
fees and not having the appropriate appropriations from the
Agency perspective to carry out their mission.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. I agree with you.
Anybody else care to--oK, well, then thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from Louisiana, Dr. Cassidy, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Cassidy. If I seem in a hurry, I am missing a lunch
with the greatest chefs in Louisiana, so--oh, my gosh, I am
tasting the food.
Now, Mr. Gaugh, you mentioned, though, that there is no
reason a price signal could not be sent, but there actually are
constraints on how 340B will allow a company to raise its
pricing. And you will know more about 340B than I but I am
struck that this price signal Shimkus is after is dampened by
the 340B process.
Now, Dr. Greene, you are St. Jude's?
Mr. Greene. That is correct.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, I think I know but correct me if I am
wrong that pediatric IV immunoglobulin, because of a shortage,
was taken out of the 340B program. One, is that correct? And
two, if correct, how has that affected supply?
Mr. Greene. Well, it is my understanding that that is
correct. We have not to my knowledge in the time that we have
been engaged in the 340B program, it has only been about a year
and a half now I suppose, not quite that long. I don't think we
have ever been able to purchase any consistent supplies of IV
IG in the 340B program, and yes, I would say that that is true.
The supply has been available to us; it is just that we have
had to pay the regular market rate defined through our group
purchasing organization.
Mr. Cassidy. So that is interesting. And again, I think IV
IG was taken off of 340B pricing. I think that is true. So now
the supply is there and it was absolutely taken off because it
was never available before. I think I know that but I am a
little rusty on my thought.
Mr. Gaugh, you are nodding your head yes. Is that a
correct----
Mr. Gaugh. That is correct.
Mr. Cassidy. I remember that correctly?
So if you will, the restoration of a price signal restored
supply. I will just point that out. Now, Dr. Greene, you also
mentioned St. Jude's--everybody knows St. Jude's--that you have
had a hard time at times in your testimony you said you could
not get chemotherapeutic agents. But you all are big so I
presume you obtained them someplace. I was kind of interested
in the gray market. Do you get them from other hospitals, do
you buy them from third parties, do you go into the gray
market? I am not asking you to indict yourself but I am trying
to understand what do companies do when they can't get this
drug?
Mr. Greene. I can think of two specific examples in the
last year, one was cytarabine--we use a lot of that for
treatment of our ALL patients--and it got to the point where we
had to consider seriously whether we could accept new patients
for treatment of ALL.
Mr. Cassidy. I knew it at the time so if you could cut to
the chase, how did you supplement your supply?
Mr. Greene. Well, we were diligent first on the marketplace
to try to find any source but also communicated with colleagues
at other organizations. I had other hospitals in the region----
Mr. Cassidy. Did you ever go on the gray market?
Mr. Greene. Oh, no. No, we do not buy from gray market.
Mr. Cassidy. OK. Ms. Bresch, I am struck when I asked in a
previous time why don't you just backtrack? OK, here is a
hospital that buys on the gray market. Why don't you just take
this all the way back and find out where the source of the gray
market was? Because different hearing but same topic, oh, we
don't know where it is coming from. You don't know where it is
coming from? Why don't you just call up hospital X and say who
did you buy it from? Now, you are on this end, not that end,
but how would you comment upon how we are tracking drugs?
Ms. Bresch. I think you perhaps just answered your
question. We don't track drugs and the FDA does not track drugs
and in fact one of the premises of GDUFA, the generic industry
proposal was the fact that this has led to a very weak supply
chain. So I know there has been a lot of discussion today on
drug shortages about is there a price point, what is really the
cause of it? And I would contend that one of the issues that we
are seeing as a result is this very weak supply chain we have
today. So not only do we not track--I mean I believe the FDA
would tell you they have no idea where some products are
manufactured throughout the world, they have no even idea where
the facility is----
Mr. Cassidy. So when people buy online from oversea
pharmacies, we have no clue whether that pharmacy is doing GMP,
the manufacturers, or even whether it is counterfeit drug,
correct?
Ms. Bresch. You don't have any idea if you walk into your
corner pharmacy here in Washington, D.C. You don't even have to
go online. Today, you have no idea where the product you are
buying comes from.
Mr. Cassidy. My jaw drops.
Ms. Bresch. I couldn't agree more, and that is why
sterilization which has been a topic, I know of some other
hearings, and the need for us to be able to track and trace, we
highly agree that that needs to happen----
Mr. Cassidy. Now, let me stop just because we have 18
seconds left before I return to my Louisiana seafood, how would
you all define the gray market? I am just curious what is a
working definition in your mind?
Mr. Gaugh. Entrepreneurial America is how we define it.
Mr. Cassidy. So you wouldn't see a problem with it or you
would just say that----
Mr. Gaugh. Oh, I do see a problem with it, absolutely, but
it is not illegal that we are aware of. It is a brokerage firm
if you will so it is people----
Mr. Cassidy. So it is not a black market in the sense that
it is legal. On the other hand, it is a gray market created by
price distortions and shortages?
Mr. Gaugh. Exactly.
Mr. Cassidy. Would you agree with that, Dr. Greene?
Mr. Greene. I would. And there is no pedigree that runs
through the gray market process and that is why you can't trace
it back through the gray market.
Mr. Cassidy. OK.
Mr. Greene. You can trace it to a certain level but not
completely because the pedigree doesn't exist in a gray market
environment.
Mr. Cassidy. OK. Thank you all. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentlelady from Colorado, Ms. DeGette, for 5
minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you for the comity that you have given to allow me to question
as a member of the full committee.
Dr. Greene, I wanted to ask you what would you be able to
do with these patients if you were informed in a timely fashion
of an impending drug shortage?
Mr. Greene. Well, of course, it would depend upon the
severity and the shortage and what details would come out of
that, but the first step we would assess is the number of
patients that would be dependent upon that drug, the number of
patients affected, the alternatives that we would have to
consider and their relative risk-benefit compared to the first
drug of choice that would----
Ms. DeGette. Let me ask you this because you said that you
were supporting House Bill 2245----
Mr. Greene. Yes.
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. Which gratified me because I am
the prime sponsor of that bill----
Mr. Greene. We are grateful for that, too.
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. Along with Congressman Rooney. It
is a bipartisan bill that has Democratic and Republican
cosponsors, so what that does is it basically expands the
current FDA voluntary reporting program and makes it----
Mr. Greene. Right.
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. Mandatory. Who would that help
you be able to do your job better in treating these patients?
Mr. Greene. In short, it would alert us to situations that
we could do something about before it reached us. We could
modify our dosing approaches; we could take additional steps to
minimize waste. You know, there are sometimes alternatives
depending on the drug that we could easily switch to before we
deplete our on-hand supply. There are a number of on-hand
things we could do.
Ms. DeGette. Now, you would agree with all of us that this
legislation and just doing reporting, that doesn't solve the
underlying problems. It just mainly helps you deal with that
chart that some folks were showing where you have these
terrible shortages and it impacts patient treatment, right?
Mr. Greene. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. Now, Ms. Bresch, I am going to assume you
don't like the idea of drug shortages either, do you?
Ms. Bresch. No.
Ms. DeGette. And I would assume, Mr. Gaugh, you don't like
them either, right?
Mr. Gaugh. Do no.
Ms. DeGette. And I know, Ms. Bresch, your company right now
in fact participates in the voluntary FDA reporting program
right now. You have got four drugs, largely injectables, that
are right now on the shortage list, right?
Ms. Bresch. But to my knowledge, our shortage is because we
have helped fill the capacity because another manufacturer----
Ms. DeGette. Right. No, I am just saying you participated
in that program, right?
Ms. Bresch. Yes, absolutely.
Ms. DeGette. And it has worked for you, right?
Ms. Bresch. Yes, for years.
Ms. DeGette. And for years. And what you are suggesting I
think is really important, which is if we modified some of the
underlying laws that have been on the books for decades and
decades, that might help solve the underlying problem of drug
shortages, right?
Ms. Bresch. Absolutely. I believe strengthening the supply
chain----
Ms. DeGette. Right.
Ms. Bresch [continuing]. Would go a long way.
Ms. DeGette. Right, and expediting the approval process and
everything else----
Ms. Bresch. Absolutely.
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. Right? And Mr. Gaugh, you are
nodding, too. You think so, too, right?
Mr. Gaugh. Yes, I would agree.
Ms. DeGette. But, you know, it is time to start fixing the
underlying problems even if we pass legislation right away,
which I would support doing that, that is not going to solve
the drug shortage issues that Dr. Greene and all the other
hospitals are dealing with right now, correct?
Mr. Greene. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. Yes. And so I know Mr. Gaugh, your association
has proposed this Accelerated Recovery Initiative, which would
be a voluntary collaboration for the industry to work on some
reporting issues, correct?
Mr. Gaugh. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. And you are not moving forward with that until
you make sure that the FTC has addressed your antitrust issues,
right?
Mr. Gaugh. We are moving forward in a parallel path if you
will, yes.
Ms. DeGette. Right, but if there is antitrust issues, you
are going to have to address those. Now, that particular
program, it is not either/or with the FDA reporting program,
right? You could have both the industry program and the FDA
program, right?
Mr. Gaugh. Yes, and it would be in support of it. We have
already presented to the FDA and they are in agreement in
concept with the process.
Ms. DeGette. Yes. And by the way, I am in agreement with
the concept, too. I like the concept of having industry having
a reporting process but also having the FDA have a reporting
process. Now, has your association taken a position on House
Bill 2245? That is the legislation that I talked about.
Mr. Gaugh. Not the notification process. We agree with
notification; it is the details that would be in that. And----
Ms. DeGette. Have you looked at my bill?
Mr. Gaugh. Oh, absolutely, yes.
Ms. DeGette. And what is your position on my bill?
Mr. Gaugh. And have spoken with your staffers as well.
Ms. DeGette. Sorry?
Mr. Gaugh. And have spoken with your staffers as well, yes.
Ms. DeGette. I heard that rumor. And what is your position
on my bill?
Mr. Gaugh. We support the communication process as far as
industry communicating to the FDA when drug shortages are
known. The devil, as I said, is in the details on----
Ms. DeGette. What details do you have a concern about?
Mr. Gaugh. The mandatory timing of those, so, you know, the
6-month or the 1-year notification process as long as we are
aware of that is appropriate, but in many cases we are not
aware----
Ms. DeGette. So it is just some technical language that you
think we could work out?
Mr. Gaugh. Technical, yes, absolutely.
Ms. DeGette. And we look forward to working with you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gaugh. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. The Chair
thanks panel two for your testimony, excellent information.
That concludes our second panel. And I would like to thank
all of the witnesses and members for participating in today's
hearing and remind members that they have 10 business days to
submit questions for the record, and I ask the witnesses to
respond promptly to the questions. Members should submit their
questions by the close of business on Friday, February the
24th.
Without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:09 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


