- H.R., LEGISLATION TO REVISE THE CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY IMPROVEMENT ACT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. --------, LEGISLATION TO REVISE THE CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY
IMPROVEMENT ACT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

----------

APRIL 7, 2011

----------

Serial No. 112-34

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

H.R. --------, LEGISLATION TO REVISE THE CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY
IMPROVEMENT ACT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 7, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-34

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

67-423 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ANNA G. ESHOO, California
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
Vice Chair                         GENE GREEN, Texas
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JIM MATHESON, Utah
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              Islands
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade

MARY BONO MACK, California
Chairman
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       JIM MATHESON, Utah
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
PETE OLSON, Texas                    MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio)
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Mary Bono Mack, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     4
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     5
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     6
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     7
Hon. Cliff Stearns, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Florida, opening statement..................................     8
Hon. G.K. Butterfield, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina, opening statement.....................     8
Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, opening statement...........................     9
Hon. Pete Olson, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................    10
Hon. John D. Dingell, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Michigan, prepared statement................................   120
Hon. Edolphus Towns, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New York, prepared statement................................   226

Witnesses

Dana Best, American Academy of Pediatrics........................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Answers to submitted questions...............................   254
Barbara D. Beck, Principal, Gradient.............................    27
Prepared statement...........................................    29
Answers to submitted questions...............................   266
Robert Jay Howell, Assistant Executive Director, Hazard
Identification and Reduction, Consumer Product Safety
Commission.....................................................    45
Prepared statement...........................................    47
Answers to submitted questions...............................   271
Caroline Cox, Research Director, Center for Environmental Health.    73
Prepared statement...........................................    76
Answers to submitted questions...............................   289
Sheila A. Millar, Partner, Keller and Heckman, LLP...............    80
Prepared statement...........................................    82
Answers to submitted questions...............................   295
Paul C. Vitrano, General Counsel, Motorcycle Industry Council....    91
Prepared statement...........................................    93
Answers to submitted questions...............................   302
Erika Z. Jones, Partner, Mayer Brown, on behalf of the Bicycle
Product Suppliers Association..................................   100
Prepared statement...........................................   102
Answers to submitted questions...............................   306
Charles A. Samuels, Member, Mintz, Levin, Cohn, Ferris, Glovsky,
and Popeo, P.C.................................................   123
Prepared statement...........................................   126
Answers to submitted questions...............................   311
Frederick Locker, Locker, Greenberg, and Brainin, P.C............   136
Prepared statement...........................................   138
Answers to submitted questions...............................   313
Dan Marshall, Vice President, Handmade Toy Alliance, and Co-
Owner, Peapods Natural Toys and Baby Care......................   151
Prepared statement...........................................   153
Answers to submitted questions...............................   317
Rachel Weintraub, Director of Product Safety and Senior Counsel,
Consumer Federation of America.................................   155
Prepared statement...........................................   157
Answers to submitted questions...............................   321

Submitted Material

Statement, dated April 3, 2009, from Nancy Nord, Acting Chairman,
Consumer Product Safety Commission, submitted by Mr. Kinzinger.    69
Letter, dated April 6, 2011, from Edward Moreland, Senior Vice
President, Government Relations, American Motorcyclist
Association, to subcommittee leadership, submitted by Mr.
Kinzinger......................................................    71
Statement, undated, on behalf of American Apparel & Footwear
Association....................................................   185
Letter, dated April 6, 2011, from Consumer Product Safety
Commission chairman and commissioners to subcommittee
leadership.....................................................   192
Letter, dated April 6, 2011, from Jim Gibbons, President and CEO,
Goodwill Industries International, Inc., to subcommittee
leadership.....................................................   196
Letter, dated April 1, 2011, from Michael S. Bass, President,
Hobby Manufacturers Association, to John ``Gib'' Mullan, Chief
Counsel, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade Subcommittee.......   198
Letter, dated April 5, 2011, from David E. Jacobs, Research
Director, National Center for Healthy Housing, to Mr. Upton....   200
Joint letter, dated April 6, 2011, to subcommittee leadership....   203
Letter, dated April 5, 2011, from Linda Ginzel and Boaz Keysar,
Co-founders, Kids In Danger, to subcommittee leadership........   206
Letter, dated April 7, 2011, from Nancy A. Nord, Commissioner,
Consumer Product Safety Commission, to Mrs. Bono Mack..........   209
Letter, dated April 5, 2011, from Lisa L. Olney to Mr.
Butterfield....................................................   211
Letter, dated April 5, 2011, from Lisa L. Olney to Mrs. Bono Mack   213
Letter, dated April 5, 2011, from Scott Clark, Professor,
Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati,
to Mr. Upton...................................................   215
Letter, dated April 6, 2011, from Bob Wopperer, Senior Director,
Marketing and Business Development, Thermo Fisher Scientific,
to Mr. Upton...................................................   217
Letter, dated April 3, 2011, from Michele Witte to subcommittee
leadersip......................................................   219
Statement, dated April 6, 2011, on behalf of YKK Corporation of
America........................................................   221
Discussion draft of H.R. --------, a bill to amend the consumer
product safety laws............................................   229

H.R. --------, LEGISLATION TO REVISE THE CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY
IMPROVEMENT ACT

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 7, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
Room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mary Bono
Mack (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Bono Mack, Blackburn,
Stearns, Bass, Harper, Lance, Cassidy, Guthrie, Olson,
McKinley, Pompeo, Kinzinger, Barton, Butterfield, Dingell,
Towns, Rush, Schakowsky, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Gib Mullan, Chief Counsel; Shannon Weinberg,
Counsel; Paul Cancienne, Policy Coordinator; Brian McCullough,
Senior Professional Staff Member; and Alex Yergin, Legislative
Clerk.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Good morning. It is with a sense of purpose
as well as a sense of urgency that we gather here today to
consider some sensible ways to make the Consumer Product Safety
Improvement Act, also known as CPSIA, work better for all
Americans. There is bipartisan agreement that CPSIA, while
well-intentioned, has created a number of serious problems for
manufacturers and retails. Today, we will examine some ways to
make a good law even better.
The chair will now recognize herself for an opening
statement. You can start me back at 5. Thank you.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARY BONO MACK, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In our first hearing of the year, we heard about many of
the problems associated with passage of CPSIA. Today, we will
focus on a preliminary discussion draft, which offers a range
of possible solutions.
One major area for reform relates to the regulation of
children's products. In this area, we have the benefit of five
unanimous recommendations from the CPSC. We also have draft
legislation from last year and other CPSC suggestions in
response.
The discussion draft aims to reduce the regulatory burdens
of the law without undercutting consumer protection. A
fundamental premise is that the Commission can actually protect
consumers far better when it is allowed to set priorities and
regulate based on risk. Where possible, we should spare the
Commission from having to make time-consuming, case-by-case
determinations, and let it spend more time on its bigger
problems. This is especially true in our current budget climate
where we have to make the best use of agency resources.
We need to strike the right balance and that is seldom
easy. The discussion draft points to areas where we must decide
important policy questions. I hope our witnesses today will
help us to make wise choices by shedding light on these issues.
In Section 1, for example, the draft leaves open the age
for defining the term ``children's product.'' At our last
hearing, my friend and colleague Mr. Dingell, the chairman
emeritus of the full committee, reminded us that a lot of the
problems with CPSIA originated in the Senate, but this is one
that did not. The Senate-passed bill applied the lead content
limits to products for children ages 7 and under. That age
would have kept the focus on children who are at greater risk
when it comes to lead, because very young children, according
to the CPSC, are much more likely to put things in their mouth.
The House set the top age at 12 years old because of the so-
called ``common toy box'' concern. But by pushing the age to
12, we ended up regulating a huge number of products that are
never going to be mouthed or even handled by young children.
These include not only the well-known examples of ATVs,
bicycles, and books, but also band instruments, scientific
instruments, and clothes for older children, among other
things.
Another key area is third-party testing. Again, the
discussion draft tries to strike an appropriate balance. It
preserves third-party testing for lead paint, cribs, pacifiers,
small parts, and children's metal jewelry, all priorities that
Congress explicitly set in CPSIA. For other standards, however,
it gives the Commission discretion to decide what standards
should require third-party testing. And it gives the Commission
new authority and flexibility to require testing for only some
portions of a standard or only for certain classes of products.
It also asks the Commission to make sure that the benefits of
third-party testing justify the costs before making it
mandatory.
Another major area of reform is the CPSC's public database,
which just recently began to post complaints. The discussion
draft addresses some of the more significant problems that were
brought to light in our earlier hearing.
First, the draft spells out in greater detail who can
submit reports of harm for the public portion of the database.
Among consumers, only those who have suffered harm or a risk of
harm--as well as members of their family, legal
representatives, or any person authorized by the family--could
make public reports.
Second, the draft sets forth a process for improving
product identification. The database cannot help consumers if
they don't know which products have problems. The draft enlists
manufacturers to help consumers provide better descriptions.
Third, the draft gives CPSC more options for solving claims
of material inaccuracy. The fundamental premise here is that
the database may do more harm than good if it misleads
consumers based on inaccurate information.
Finally, the draft would strengthen the Commission's
authority to investigate complaints. While some consumers may
benefit from the ability to see safety-related complaints, a
lot more consumers will benefit if the Commission can
investigate complaints more quickly.
Congress must move quickly, too, because the clock is
ticking. Unless we act soon, the 100 parts-per-million lead
limit will take effect retroactively in August, and once again,
millions of dollars worth of products will become illegal to
sell, donate, or export.
We have an opportunity and an obligation to make CPSIA a
law that benefits all Americans.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Bono Mack follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Mary Bono Mack

The committee will come to order.
Good Morning. Today, we turn back to the subject of the
Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act of 2008, also known as
CPSIA. In our first hearing of the year, we heard about the
many problems associated with this law. Today, we will focus on
a preliminary discussion draft, which offers a range of
possible solutions.
One major area for reform relates to the regulation of
children's products. In this area, we have the benefit of five
unanimous recommendations from the Consumer Product Safety
Commission. We also have draft legislation from last year and
other CPSC suggestions in response.
The discussion draft aims to reduce the regulatory burdens
of the law without undercutting consumer protection. A
fundamental premise is that the Commission can actually protect
consumers far better when it is allowed to set priorities and
regulate based on risk. Where possible, we should spare the
Commission from having to make time-consuming, case-by-case
determinations, and let it spend more time on bigger problems.
This is especially true in our current budget climate, where we
have to make the most of scarce agency resources.
We need to strike the right balance, and that is seldom
easy. The discussion draft points to areas where we must decide
important policy questions. I hope our witnesses today will
help us to make wise choices by shedding light on these issues.
In section 1, for example, the draft leaves open the age
for defining the term ``children's product.'' At our last
hearing, my friend and colleague Mr. Dingell, the Chairman
emeritus of the full committee, reminded us that a lot of the
problems with CPSIA originated in the Senate, but this is one
that did not. The Senate-passed bill applied the lead content
limits to products for children age 7 and under. That age would
have kept the focus on children who are greater risk when it
comes to lead, because very young children, according to the
CPSC, are much more likely to put things in their mouth. The
House set the top age at 12 years old, because of the so-called
``common toy box'' concern. But by pushing the age to 12, we
ended up regulating a huge number of products that are never
going to be mouthed or even handled by young children. These
include not only the well-known examples of ATVs, bicycles, and
books but also band instruments, scientific instruments and
clothes for older children, among other things.
Another key area is third-party testing. Again, the
discussion draft tries to strike an appropriate balance. It
preserves third-party testing for lead paint, cribs, pacifiers,
small parts, and children's metal jewelry--all priorities that
Congress explicitly set in CPSIA. For other standards, however,
it gives the Commission discretion to decide what standards
should require third-party testing. And it gives the Commission
new authority and flexibility to require testing for only some
portions of a standard or only for certain classes of products.
It also asks the Commission to make sure that the benefits of
third-party testing justify the costs before making it
mandatory.
Another major area of reform is the CPSC's public database,
which just recently began to post complaints. The discussion
draft addresses some of the more significant problems that were
brought to light in our earlier hearing.
First, the draft spells out in greater detail who can
submit reports of harm for the public portion of the database.
Among consumers, only those who have suffered harm or a risk of
harm--as well as members of their family, legal representatives
or any person authorized by the family--could make public
reports.
Second, the draft sets forth a process for improving
product identification. The database cannot help consumers if
they don't know which products have problems. The staff draft
enlists manufacturers to help consumers provide better
descriptions.
Third, the draft gives CPSC more options for solving claims
of material inaccuracy. The fundamental premise here is that
the database may do more harm than good if it misleads
consumers based on inaccurate information.
Last, the draft would strengthen the Commission's authority
to investigate complaints. While some consumers may benefit
from the ability to see safety-related complaints, a lot more
consumers will benefit if the Commission can investigate
complaints more quickly.
Congress must move quickly, too, because the clock is
ticking--unless we act soon, the 100 ppm lead limit will take
effect retroactively in August and once again millions of
dollars worth of products will become illegal to sell, donate
or export.

Mrs. Bono Mack. And now I would like to recognize the
ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Waxman, for his 5-
minute opening statement.
Mr. Waxman. Chairman Bono, thank you very much for
recognizing me to give this opening statement and Mr.
Butterfield to allow me to go ahead of him.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

I share your belief that some changes are needed to the toy
bill that we passed in 2008. That legislation was an historic
step forward for children's safety, but like most legislation,
it was not perfect. It has had some unintended consequences and
needs refinement. But the discussion draft before us, which is
the subject of today's hearing, takes a wrecking ball to the
law and would endanger young children. As the chair of the
Consumer Products Safety Commission wrote us today, this draft
would turn back the clock to an era when harmful products made
their way into the stream of commerce and into the hands of
innocent children.
In 2008 our committee led the way in passing a strong toy
safety law. We held hearings at which we learned about children
who died or were severely injured by lead in toys and small
charms. We learned that other children suffered catastrophic
internal injuries from magnetic toys that ripped through their
intestines. And we witnessed record recalls and loss of
confidence in the safety of children's products. Despite strong
bipartisan support for the new law, implementation has not
always been smooth. The ATV industry, the bicycle industry, the
publishing industry, and makers of handcrafted toys have all
raised valid compliance issues.
I know it is possible to address these concerns without
gutting the law. When I was chairman of the committee in the
last Congress, we initiated a stakeholders' process to produce
the draft bill that gave targeted relief to industry while
maintaining the most important health and safety protections in
the new law. That draft legislation was supported by both
industry and consumer groups. Although the Republican staff
were consulted at every step in the process, Ranking Member
Barton decided he would not support the bill and we never acted
on it.
The discussion draft before us is a very different
document. Democrats, consumer groups, and health experts were
not consulted. The result is a one-sided proposal that provides
relief to industry but sacrifices children's health and safety.
According to the Consumer Federation of America and Consumers
Union, this proposal undermines safety testing for children's
products, undermines lead protections, undermines the
effectiveness of the new crib safety standard, and undermines
the new public safety product hazard database.
According to Chairman Tenenbaum and Commissioners Adler and
Moore, this proposal would be a reversal of several of the core
safety provisions in the law. Not only are they critical of the
bill, but let me just state quite clearly, there is no chance
that a bill this extreme could ever become law. It would not
survive in the Senate, and if it did, it would be vetoed by the
President. The result would be a lost opportunity. Many of the
witnesses who will testify today have identified legitimate
concerns but they will receive no relief if all we produce is a
more partisan gridlock kind of legislation.
If we work together, I am confident that we can find a way
to address most of industry's concerns without jeopardizing the
important safety advances we made in the toy safety law. And I
had a discussion with the chairman yesterday. I think there is
an opportunity for us to work together and produce a product
that will be a consensus product. I hope that after this
hearing is over we can start fresh and we can produce a genuine
bipartisan reform we all can support.
Madam Chair, I would like to yield the rest of my time and
an additional 1 minute without any objection to Mr. Rush, who
chaired this subcommittee in the last Congress and I think has
an important statement to make.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Without objection, the gentleman is
recognized.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I want to thank the
ranking member for the full committee for yielding this time to
me.
Madam Chair, consumer protection is one of the core
functions of this subcommittee, and I want to commend you for
convening this important hearing. However, I am surprised to
see that instead of talking about improving safety for our
children, making our new law's implementation possible, we are
focusing on undoing one of the legislative achievements of this
subcommittee historically. Demolition and destruction, not
creative solution seems to be the policy agenda for our new
Republican majority. I am still waiting to see when we will
talk about real policy solutions, including the policy
implementation issues as it relates to this bill for the
American people.
Regulations are not a problem. It is the constant changes
or the risk of changes that are difficult to manage for our
manufacturers, our consumers, and for the American public. We
need to agree once and for all and implement the laws that we
have developed. We need regulatory predictability. There is a
similar Product Safety Improvement Act that the Republicans are
attempting to revise today represents demolishing the most
comprehensive overhaul of U.S. consumer protection oversight in
a generation, one that established policies which repaired our
Nation's broken product safety system.
And I must say, Madam Chairman, that I am very proud of
what we did with bipartisan input, with input from all the
stakeholders despite the political differences that we all
shared. We were able to reinvigorate the CPSC with resources.
We added additional commissioners. We authorized a shiny new
testing lab. And Madam Chair, may I ask for an additional 30
seconds?
Mrs. Bono Mack. The clock----
Mr. Rush. All right. Well, Madam Chair, I just want to
conclude by saying that this hearing could be better spent if
we were really trying to--maybe we could solve some of the
problems----
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right----
Mr. Rush [continuing]. That we have implementing the bill.
Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. So the gentleman yields back.
And now----
Mr. Rush. I yield back the time I have.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Chairman Upton, in accordance with the
committee rules, yielded me his 5 minutes, and as his designee,
I would like to recognize the chairman emeritus of the full
committee, Mr. Barton, for 2\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Barton. Well, Madam Chairman, I really can't do it in
2\1/2\ minutes. So you are going to have to give me at least 3
minutes or just go to somebody else.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Well, we were rather lenient with the other
side, so that is not a problem. Go ahead.
Mrs. Blackburn. Madam Chairman, I will yield the chairman
emeritus my time.
Mrs. Bono Mack. So the chairman emeritus is recognized for
3\1/2\ minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Barton. There is an old joke about somebody trying to
get somebody to vote for him and the guy says I would never
vote for you if you were running unopposed. And the man goes
back and says well, how do we put that voter down? He says put
him down undecided. That is kind of what we need to put Mr.
Waxman down after what he said.
I participated as the ranking member when this bill was
passed. I participated in the last Congress when there was an
attempt to amend it. When Chairman Waxman said that the
Republicans and the staff were consulted, that is a true
statement, but we weren't listened to. In the last Congress,
Chairman Waxman and his allies were almost totally inflexible
in trying to come to some common ground on changes to the law
that was passed under Chairman Dingell's chairmanship back in
2008.
This discussion draft does not take a wrecking ball to the
law. It is a good-faith attempt to reconcile the law that, in
its current state, is literally unenforceable. We have that in
testimony from the Consumer Product Safety Commission. They
have basically--I wouldn't even use the term basically--they
have no flexibility at all. The discussion draft that
Chairwoman Bono Mack has crafted does give flexibility. I think
that is a good thing. It does change some of the principles or
modify some of the principles from the law that was passed 2
years ago, but it keeps the core of the law together and it
does give the Commission the flexibility and the industry that
has to live by it the ability to actually use a little common
sense in implementation. I think that is a good thing. I think
this discussion draft is a vehicle that can be a bipartisan
compromise. But a compromise means both sides have to come
together. And Chairman Waxman's statement indicates to me that
it is the bill or nothing. And I don't think that is a position
to take when we are trying to do something that should be
everybody's best intentions to actually protect the children of
America, but also gives those that provide the products for our
children the ability to provide them in a safe and effective
fashion.
I am the father of a 5-year-old and the grandfather of five
grandchildren that are under the ages of 13. There is no way in
this world that I want to do anything that would put my 5-year-
old child or my grandchildren in harm's way. So Madam
Chairwoman, I think the discussion draft is a good starting
point. It is a starting point. It is not an end point. And if
Mr. Waxman and Mr. Rush and our friends on the minority side
wish to work with us, we can come up with something that
improves the bill that is now the law and gives the flexibility
that is necessary.
So with that, I want to thank the Chairwoman for giving me
some extra time and thank the vice-chairwoman, Ms. Blackburn,
for giving me some of her time. And I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman for his statement and
yield 1 minute to Ms. Blackburn.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I am only going
to take about 30 seconds because there are several individuals
that would like to speak on this issue. I want to thank the
chairman for bringing forward a discussion draft that will
encourage us all to listen to the science and to use some
common sense. I am a mother. I am a grandmother. I am an aunt.
I am a sister. There is no way I would want to have products in
the marketplace that are going to be harmful to children and
grandchildren, no way at all. And I think it is important that
we listen to the science. I think that it is important that we
apply some common sense. I have also listened to a lot of the
crafters and the small producers in my area and have had good
discussions with them. Also, Mr. Howell, when we get to you, I
am going to want to talk about this database that I think is
seriously flawed. And I thank the chairman and yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentlelady and recognize the
gentleman from Florida, Mr. Stearns, for 1 minute.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CLIFF STEARNS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Let me echo what
the emeritus chairman, Joe Barton, said. I was a conferee on
this. We had lots of recommendations. We in fact specifically
recommended what the CPSC did in January 2010 when they
reported back to Congress and they identified some of the
problems. There was no flexibility. And they recommended
solutions. And we had these recommendations under Joe Barton's
leadership to provide the CPSC with this kind of flexibility
they need to grant exclusions to the lead limits but they
didn't listen. So I think, Madam Chair, what you are doing here
is the Lord's work. We need to have the flexibility. And we
heard from Commissioner Northrup, who was a former Member of
Congress. She also bought this out. And so I am pleased to be
here and to support you and I appreciate what you are doing.
Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman. Last but not least,
the gentleman from North Carolina, the ranking member of our
subcommittee, Mr. Butterfield, is now recognized for his 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. G.K. BUTTERFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA

Mr. Butterfield. Let me thank you very much, Chairman Bono
Mack, and especially thank you to all of the witnesses who have
come forward today to give us your testimony.
You know, Madam Chairman, my recollection--and I was simply
a rank and file member of the subcommittee in the last
Congress--but my recollection of this is somewhat different
from my good friend from Texas, Mr. Barton. My recollection is
that CPSIA followed a long and well-considered road to passage
that included many, many hearings and extensive conference with
the Senate from introduction to enactment. I recall that this
legislation at all times remained a bipartisan effort, and I am
surprised to hear today that it was not. The vote tally speaks
volumes about the bipartisanship nature of this law. Much of
the law was taken word-for-word from some of Mr. Barton's
language that he had authored. The House passed the conference
report with a vote of 424 to 1. And while I don't know it for a
fact, I suppose Mr. Barton may be the 1, but the vote was 424
to 1. And the Senate passed it----
Mr. Barton. Could the gentleman yield?
Mr. Butterfield. Yes.
Mr. Barton. I voted for the bill.
Mr. Butterfield. You did vote, right.
Mr. Rush. He voted for it, yes.
Mr. Butterfield. All right. And the Senate vote was 89 to
3. Today, however, it is apparent some portions of the law need
to be refined. The ranking member of the full committee has
acknowledged that and I do as well. Unfortunately, the
discussion draft does not seek to refine the law. Rather, it
seeks to undo nearly 2 years of close consultation and careful
compromise with Members of Congress, industry--many of whom are
here today--and consumer groups, and potentially puts consumers
and children at risk. The minority was not consulted to my
knowledge in the preparation of the draft legislation. And I am
confident the language would look very different had we been
invited to the table and had an opportunity to participate. The
draft language would redefine what is considered a children's
product to a yet-to-be-determined age, possibly exposing both
those who would be classified as children and those who would
not to potentially dangerous products.
I ask my colleagues about households with multiple
children, if a 9-year-old has a toy intended only for ages 9
and older, is it not reasonable to expect that 9-year-olds with
a preschool-age sibling would also want to and will find a way
to play with that toy? But perhaps most alarming is rolling
back the current lead content limits in favor of risk
assessment. This is similar to the model that proved to be
inadequate prior to CPSIA but with the twist of creating
additional burdens for the Commission.
Since the model and the draft will require premarket risk
assessment, CPSC will have to determine for each and every
children's product how manufacturers should measure the risk. I
am troubled that the draft eliminates independent third-party
testing for all children's products with a very narrow
exception for five categories. I remind my friends of the
millions of toys that were recalled in '07 due not only to high
lead levels but design-related safety defects as well. It was
clear that manufacturers of children's products and their
suppliers had fallen asleep at the wheel and their in-house
safeguards were inadequate.
Finally, and I am going to yield to the gentlelady from
Illinois in just a minute--CPSIA required the CPSC to create a
Public Product Safety Information Database so that consumers
would have a convenient way to report and learn about dangerous
products. The draft language marginalizes the efficacy of the
database by limiting who can submit information, as well as
establishing a drawn-out process by which the submitter, the
Commission, and the manufacturer are required to have ongoing
contact. The more burdensome it becomes to make a safety
complaint, the less likely consumers are to use the database.
At this time I will yield my remaining time, Madam Chairman, to
the gentlelady from Illinois.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Ms. Schakowsky. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
To say that I am concerned about the draft bill would be a
vast understatement. Here we are in the Subcommittee on
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade, and instead of looking at
ways that we can create jobs, good jobs for the American
people, we are examining a bill to undermine consumer
protection, words that used to be part of the subcommittee's
title. The draft bill is not a collection of small fixes. It
would fundamentally gut key pieces of the CPSIA, including the
provisions I authored to ensure that durable infant and toddler
products are subject to rigorous testing requirements.
I want to read a letter I received from Danny Keysar's
parents, which I hope to submit for the record, along with two
other letters from parents who lost their children. Danny's mom
wrote, ``As parents who have paid the ultimate price for unsafe
products, we know you don't want to see more children suffer as
our son did.'' Giving flexibility to the CPSC to enforce safety
provisions is one thing, but this wholesale reversal of crucial
safety provisions sends us back to a scenario we know leaves
children at risk.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. And the chair inadvertently
overlooked the last 30 seconds on our side, and I would like to
recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Olson, for 30 seconds.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PETE OLSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Olson. I will be brief. I am pleased to be here, and I
thank the Chair for her leadership in bringing forward this
important draft legislation to fix the unintended consequences
of CPSIA.
As a parent, nothing is more important to me than the
safety and health of my children. I think this draft provides
us with a balanced way forward that protects my children from
harmful products without devastating our country's small
businesses. If my children are protected, your children are
protected.
I thank the Chair and looking forward to helping her
advance a commonsense fix to this law. I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman. And now all opening
statements are concluded. And we have three panels before us
today. Each of the witnesses has prepared an opening statement
that will be placed in the record. Each of you will have 5
minutes to summarize that statement in your remarks. On our
first panel we have, in reverse order, but we have Robert
Howell, Assistant Executive Director of Hazard Identification
and Reduction at the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission.
That is a mouthful. And then Dr. Barbara Beck, a widely
respected expert in toxicology and a former EPA region chief
and fellow at the Harvard School of Public Health; and Dr. Dana
Best, who is presenting on behalf of the American Academy of
Pediatrics.
Good morning. I would like to thank you all for coming. You
will each be recognized for 5 minutes. To help you keep track
of time, the little clock in front of you, when it turns
yellow, please recognize that is the 1-minute mark if you could
start wrapping up and when the light turns red, your time is
up. I would also ask you to remember to turn the microphone on
before you begin. And now I would like to start with Dr. Best
for your 5 minutes. Good morning and welcome.

STATEMENTS OF DANA BEST, MD, MPH, FAAP, AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
PEDIATRICS; BARBARA D. BECK, PH.D., DABT, FATS, PRINCIPAL,
GRADIENT; AND ROBERT JAY HOWELL, ASSISTANT EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
HAZARD IDENTIFICATION AND REDUCTION, U.S. CONSUMER PRODUCT
SAFETY COMMISSION

STATEMENT OF DANA BEST

Ms. Best. Good morning. Thank you for this opportunity to
testify today. I am a pediatrician and pleased to represent the
American Academy of Pediatrics. The AAP is deeply concerned
that the subcommittee is considering legislation that would
profoundly alter the CPSIA and could reverse the progress
towards safer toys and children's products. Today I will focus
on four areas: the scope of children's products, lead limits in
children's products, risk assessment, and the need for third-
party testing.
First, the scope of children's products should protect
children up to age 12. The AAP recommended that the CPSIA cover
products for children up to age 12 years based on developmental
and pragmatic concerns. With regard to developmental issues,
the mouthing behaviors that cause the most concern for exposure
to hazards like lead peak in the toddler years and taper off
throughout school age, although it is not unusual for school-
age children to place toys and other objects in their mouths or
to mouth or suck on items like jewelry and pens. For some
groups, such as children with developmental delays, mouthing
behaviors may persist until adolescence or later.
Another concern is that toys are often shared. While most
parents work hard to keep toys for older children away from
younger children, they may not always be successful. It is
therefore important to ensure that toys are as safe as possible
for all children in the household.
Second, the CPSIA's limits on lead in children's products
should not be relaxed. In the judgment of the AAP, there is no
scientific basis for establishing a de minimis level for lead
in children's products. To date, science has not identified a
threshold below which lead ceases to damage a child's brain or
body. There is no known safe level of lead. During the
development of the CPSIA, the AAP was asked to recommend a
limit for lead in children's products. Following a rigorous
scientific review, the Academy recommended that lead in
children's products be limited to 40 parts per million. The
rationale behind this level is explained in my written
testimony.
The AAP is also concerned that the discussion draft
proposes to distinguish between lead exposure due to sucking on
an item from lead exposure due to licking an item. From a
scientific perspective, there is no basis for making this
differentiation. Both actions defined as ``mouthing'' in the
pediatric literature are associated with lead ingestion.
The AAP urges Congress to resist calls to set differing
standards for lead in children's products based solely on the
likelihood of sucking, licking, or swallowing. Given the
extreme toxicity of lead, its bioaccumulation, and the
irreversible nature of the damage it causes, the concept of
setting different levels of lead for various types of toys or
children's products is troubling.
Third, risk assessment is not an appropriate method for
limiting lead exposure in children's products. The draft before
the subcommittee appears to shift from measurement of total
lead in children's products to risk assessment frameworks. The
AAP urges you to leave intact the straightforward, predictable
total lead standard in the CPSIA. The fundamental premise of
risk assessment is that some degree of risk is acceptable such
as when the benefit of receiving a drug is compared to its side
effects. In the case of lead, there is no benefit to exposure.
While the harms are numerous and significant such as decreased
IQ, if the CPSIA standard is altered, Congress would need to
determine what level of IQ loss is considered acceptable.
In addition, standards should protect not only the average
child, but also children at higher risk of lead exposure and
its consequences. This is best accomplished using the lead
limits currently in the CPSIA.
The AAP is deeply concerned that a risk assessment
framework would require the CPSC to perform or confirm risk
assessment on many different products. It is unclear who would
bear the ultimate responsibility for determining risk or what
the process would be for reconciling differences when risk
assessments differ between the agency and the manufacturer.
Finally, third-party testing is necessary to ensure the
safety of children's products. The discussion draft proposes
significant changes to CPSIA's third-party testing
requirements, dramatically reducing the number and types of
products subject to independent testing. This would essentially
return us to the pre-CPSIA state of affairs in which consumers
were expected to guess which toys and children's products were
really safe.
The AAP would like to make one more comment on another
point made in the discussion draft and strongly recommend that
noncompliant cribs not be permitted in childcare facilities.
In conclusion, the AAP urges you to not weaken the CPSIA's
protections against lead and other hazards as you consider ways
to improve the ability of manufacturers and businesses to
comply with this important law. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Best follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentlelady and recognize Dr.
Beck for 5 minutes. Can you make sure your microphone is on and
close to your mouth, please?
Ms. Beck. Sorry.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF BARBARA D. BECK

Ms. Beck. My name is Barbara Beck. I am a toxicologist risk
assessor at Gradient, an environmental consulting company and I
have worked on issues of lead exposure, toxicology, and risk
for over 20 years, starting from my time at EPA Region 1 where
I was involved in development of one of the first clean up
levels for lead in soil that I am aware of. I have evaluated
exposures, toxicology of lead in products, workplace, and in
the environment.
In its present version, the CPSIA Act has established a
concentration limit of 300 parts per million for lead, which
will go in August to 100 parts per million unless it is not
feasible. This is going to be problematic and is problematic at
present, especially for metallic alloys that contain lead such
as tire stem valves. My concern with the present approach is
that it doesn't consider the actual exposure, the intake, the
absorption, and the impact of lead releases from such products
on blood lead levels. Blood lead levels are typically
considered the appropriate metric for evaluating exposures to
lead.
Risk-based approaches have been used to establish limits
for lead for decades. It has been used to establish limits for
lead in air, water, and soil. Such approaches have been
beneficial. Blood lead levels of children in the U.S. have
declined by over a factor of 10 over the past 20 years as lead
has been removed or reduced from air, from food, and from
paint.
The proposed changes represent a step in the right
direction. Determination of a de minimis level of lead exposure
is consistent with what has been conducted with other types of
materials such as soil, air, and water, and it also proposes
the use of a methodology to identify how much lead is released,
what the actual exposure would be from a children's product.
This approach is not only consistent with regulatory policy in
other settings, but with fundamental principles of toxicology.
The dose is what matters. The dose of a chemical--whatever the
chemical is, how hazardous it is--is really critical in
determining whether there would be a risk or no risk.
I am not here to propose a specific model or a specific de
minimis limit, but I do note that the approaches should
consider the age of the child: mouthing behavior peaks at age 2
to 3, absorption of lead from the gut peaks around that age,
and choosing a value of, say, 7 years old would be protective
of younger children. The method that is considered should
consider how a child actually interacts with the product and
risk-based methods are available to evaluate mouthing behavior,
contact by hand with products, hand-to-mouth, as well as the
potential swallowing of a product and the impact that contact
on blood lead. That can be modeled.
My comments that are provided to the committee provide a
hypothetical example of how such an analysis could be
conducted. It is not meant to propose specific de minimis
values or the specifics of an approach but to demonstrate that
there are methods. In my particular example, I demonstrate how
a release of 1 microgram of lead from a product per day every
day for a 2- to 3-year-old child would not have a discernible
impact on blood lead. Some people may consider that de minimis.
In conclusion, I strongly encourage the committee to
consider the use of such risk-based approaches in proposing
amendments to the CPSIA. Such approaches will allow for health-
protective risk-based limits that would be sound public health
policy, as well as sound risk management policy. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Beck follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Dr. Beck. Mr. Howell, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT JAY HOWELL

Mr. Howell. Good morning, Chairman Bono Mack, Ranking
Member Butterfield, and members of the subcommittee. My name is
Robert Howell. I am the assistant executive director for the
Office of Hazard Identification and Reduction at the Consumer
Product Safety Commission. I appreciate the opportunity to
testify before you this morning regarding certain technical
aspects of the discussion draft of legislation that would
revise the Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act. The
testimony that I will give this morning represents my personal
views and has not been reviewed or approved by the Commission
and may not necessarily reflect the views of the Commission.
In my role at CPSC, I oversee the technical work of the
Agency within the Office of Hazard Reduction's directorates for
Engineering Sciences, Epidemiology, Economic Analysis, Health
Sciences, and Laboratory Sciences. My office is responsible for
the collection and analysis of death and injury data associated
with consumer products, the evaluation of consumer products for
potential safety hazards and regulatory compliance, and the
development of technical solutions to product safety concerns.
Prior to joining CPSC in 2006, I served as vice-president
of manufacturing and operations for a multinational corporation
with responsibility for the management of global manufacturing
and logistics.
On January 15, 2010, the five members of the CPSC issued a
report to Congress regarding possible improvements to the
CPSIA. In suggesting those improvements, the commissioners
noted that the recommendations were focused on maintaining the
``safety and welfare of consumers while minimizing
administrative burdens on the Agency or significant market
disruptions caused by the implementations of specific
provisions of the CPSIA.''
Specifically, the Commission listed the following
recommendations for improvement of the statute: that the
Commission ``needs additional flexibility within Section 101 to
grant exclusions from the lead content limits in order to
address certain products, including those singled out by the
conferees;'' that ``Congress may, with some limitations, choose
to consider granting an exclusion for ordinary children's books
and other children's paper-based printed materials; the
Commission believes that a prospective application of the 100
parts per million lead limits would be helpful for our
continued implementation of the law;'' and that the
``Commission remains committed to working with Congress to
explore other ways to address the concerns of low-volume
manufacturers'' with regard to the testing and certification
requirements in Section 102 of the CPSIA.
From my perspective, the CPSIA has improved the health and
safety of consumers, particularly children. In additional,
industry has made substantial progress over the past 2\1/2\
years adapting to the requirements of the law. For example, the
children's product industry has made progress in reducing the
levels of lead since the enactment of CPSIA. In a recent
Commission hearing on the technological feasibility of reducing
the lead limits to 100 parts per million, a representative of
SGS--a global inspection, verification, testing, and
certification company--presented a statistical analysis of lead
content testing data with close to 90,000 data points collected
primarily from its Shenzhen laboratory that specializes in the
testing of children's toys and other children's products.
In its analysis, SGS found that 96.3 percent of metal
components tested at or below 100 parts per million. The
analysis also determined that just over 97 percent of glass and
ceramic components tested at or below 100 parts per million.
Concerning plastic components, SGS found that 99.4 percent of
those components tested at or below 100 parts per million.
However, there are certain provisions of the CPSIA such as the
current exceptions to the Section 101 lead limits that can be
improved in such a way as to reduce the burden on the regulated
community while maintaining an appropriate level of safety for
America's consumers. I personally believe this balance is
necessary to ensure efficient and effective implementation of
the CPSIA from the perspective of both the regulated community
and the regulators.
There are several approaches that could allow the CPSC to
address the unintended consequences of certain regulatory
requirements in the CPSIA. For example, the Commission has
heard from a number of Members of Congress that they did not
intend to cover all-terrain vehicles under the provisions of
Section 101. Accordingly, Congress could permit the Commission
to exempt certain products like ATVs from the lead limits. This
will allow the CPSC to weigh the risk of possible lead exposure
to a child riding a youth-sized ATV against the risk to the
child from riding a larger and more powerful adult ATV.
Assuming that the exceptions would be made on a notice-and-
comment basis, the underlying analysis and support for any
exceptions would be public, allowing for transparency and
accountability for all stakeholders involved in the process.
Finally, allowing the Commission to regulate on a timetable
influenced by the seriousness of the actual risk would allow
for better priority-setting that will permit Commission
resources to be put towards the most serious health risk.
Mrs. Bono Mack. If you could please sum up now.
Mr. Howell. Madam Chairman, thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Howell follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. Oh, perfect. Thank you. That
worked out just well. I want to thank our panel of experts. And
now the chair will recognize herself for the first 5 minutes of
questioning.
And Mr. Howell, the first question to you. How does the
CPSC staff go about deciding whether a substance or a product
poses a risk to children? And briefly, what factors are
important?
Mr. Howell. As CPSC staff evaluates potential risk to
children, it involves several different teams within CPSC. We
have a human factors team that will actually age-grade the
product and determine what particular product characteristics
are important in age-grading to ensure that the product is
targeted to the correct group of children. If, for example, we
are evaluating that product with regards to lead, for example,
a complete risk assessment would be conducted taking into
account not only the intended consumer but any other children
that may be attracted to that particular toy based on
characteristics of the toy.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. Does the Commission have
information on the cost of third-party testing? For example, do
you know how much it would cost to have a bicycle tested by a
third-party laboratory to all the applicable standards?
Mr. Howell. We have heard from the bicycle industry that
the cost to test a $50 bicycle for all the applicable standards
would run somewhere in excess of $10,000.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Wow. Thank you. And the focus of a lot of
our attention, especially on this side of the aisle and again,
Mr. Howell, is the database. I actually think the database is
helpful and useful, but I think it has problems and we should
talk about it a great deal. My thinking is that it is 100
percent negative derogator and that if the manufacturer can
respond that they are seen as defensive. There must be a way--
if you buy anything anywhere on the internet now, Amazon, I
mean even Zappos.com, you know, there are comments on both
sides. People can give the good and the bad of a product. Yet
this database is 100 percent negative. Can it not be refined so
that there is a more accurate depiction of a product?
For example, if I complain about something potentially
hurting my child but this is one example out of 10,000--but
nobody else would have any way of knowing that--can't the
database be refined to be a more accurate depiction about a
product in society?
Mr. Howell. Chairman Bono Mack, I am quite certain that
either Congress or the Commission could--within CPSIA as
written--make modifications. But that is certainly more of a
policy matter and is beyond my responsibilities at CPSC.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Well, thank you. I think I made my thoughts
pretty clear there in my questions. So also, to you Dr. Best,
you state from a scientific perspective that there is no basis
for differentiating between a child licking versus sucking on
an object. In CPSIA however, Congress drew that very
distinction for purposes of phthalate limits. Do you see a
reason why this is changed? And I always do that on that word.
Do you see a reason why this distinction makes sense for
phthalates but not for lead?
Ms. Best. We didn't actually work on the phthalates issue,
and so I can do some research and perhaps offer you a response.
But again, I am an expert on lead, not on phthalates.
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. Thank you. And you mentioned
also that older children sometimes put ballpoint pens or
jewelry in their mouths. You also mentioned that toys may be
shared among multiple children in the same household. But
aren't there many other items which older children do not mouth
and to which younger children rarely, if ever, have access?
Ms. Best. Of course. But we are talking about the harms to
children from lead-containing objects. And so, you know, our
focus is on those lead-containing objects that may be dangerous
to younger children.
Mrs. Bono Mack. But common sense would say, as a parent--my
kids are now 23 and 20 and my step-kids are 8 and 11--common
sense would say to a parent their children don't only come in
contact with children's products whether it is a 2-year-old
toy, a 10-year-old toy or an adult, say, electronic component
of some sort. Is that not a problem as well? Is it common sense
that we are trying to say that a--from what I understand--a
Hannah Montana DVD is under one category and a Miley Cyrus DVD
is on another category and then a DVD player is entirely
exempt? So parents ask themselves these questions all the time.
It is one of these things, what are they thinking in
Washington? Because it makes no sense at all. As a
pediatrician, how do you address that?
Ms. Best. I am having trouble understanding the question.
So yes, there are products in the house that are not intended
for children that do not come under the CPSC's purview in this
context. And while there are other safety groups that may work
with those products, we are focusing on the safety of
children's toys here and products intended for children. And
that is our focus.
Mrs. Bono Mack. We are out of time. Just to make a little
more clear that it is common sense, sometimes, that you can't
protect from everything here. And that is the question. Is the
Commission focused on its highest priorities? So I am sorry,
but I need to yield now to Mr. Butterfield for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you, Chairman. Prior to the
enactment of this legislation, the Consumer Product Safety
Commission assessed the risk posed by children's products
containing lead by estimating the amount of lead intake from
the product and the subsequent effects of exposure on blood
lead level. For the most part, this was what I call an after-
the-fact assessment. That is the Commission mostly looked at
products for exposure to and risks from lead after products had
entered the marketplace and been put into the hands of
children. The discussion draft seems to create a de minimis
exception that makes the total lead content limits in CPSIA
more meaningless. Basically, any component part that cannot be
swallowed can contain any amount of lead so long as a child
isn't expected to ingest more than some amount to be determined
amount of lead. So rather than determining the total amount of
lead contained in a product, the discussion draft would call on
manufacturers to estimate the amount likely to be ingested and
takes it as a given that it is oK for kids to take in some
amount of lead from their toys.
Ms. Best, the de minimis exception in the discussion draft
is essentially a return to the approach that the commission
used prior to the legislation. As I read it, any component part
of a toy or other children's product such as a crib would be
allowed to release a de minimis amount of lead, say 6
micrograms per day. Can you please explain what would happen if
a child played with more than one toy in one day? Even a child
who has one special toy plays with dozens of toys in a day.
Could that child be exposed to 6 micrograms per day per toy? I
do not read the de minimis standard as requiring the
consideration of other exposures to lead in a given day. Can
you help me with this?
Ms. Best. Well, the Academy is very much against the de
minimis standard for many of the points you raised. Lead
exposure doesn't come just from one individual product. It
comes from the environment. It can be found in our food, in our
air, certainly on paints, certainly in the water in Washington,
D.C., in the past. And so we are very concerned about the
bioaccumulation of lead through all these different sources.
Because lead doesn't immediately get passed out through your
body, you can actually store it. Some of these stores persist
for years, if not decades. And that is one of the things we are
very much concerned about.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. Many of us agree that there are
specific products that can't meet the lead content limits and
can't be made without lead--we acknowledge that--and that some
form of relief should be provided for the narrow universe of
products. We agree, some of us, that this relief should be as
simple to understand and apply as possible while remaining
protective of children's health and safety. So far as I can
tell, the proposed de minimis exception in the draft fails on
all of these counts. Implementing the de minimis exception will
require taking into account very product-specific
considerations, and on a good number of instances, it will
require applying varying lead requirements for differing parts
of the same product.
For example, say I manufacture a toy truck that contains
plastic and metal, some large enough not to be swallowed and
others that can be swallowed. For each plastic component, I
would have to ask is this small enough to be swallowed? If the
answer is no, then I would have to ask how do I expect a child
to interact with this component? Is lead likely to be ingested
from the interaction? How much lead can I expect to be ingested
from the interaction? What age is the child doing the
interacting? For the metal components, the manufacturer would
then have to ask, can I meet the alternative 600 parts per
million total lead count standard in the draft? If the answer
is no, the manufacturer would again have to run through the
analysis as I described. Can it be swallowed? So forth and so
on.
Mr. Howell, let me ask you this yes or no, sir, and I am
going to be out of time momentarily. Would the Commission have
to develop multiple methodologies given that children interact
differently with different products?
Mr. Howell. Yes.
Mr. Butterfield. Would requiring the Commission to develop
multiple methodologies to account for the different ways
children can interact with different products and parts require
substantial investment of the Commission's limited resources?
Mr. Howell. No.
Mr. Butterfield. In your experience, sir, do retailers and
manufacturers prefer clear lines for compliance over estimating
the likelihood that their product might behave in a certain
way?
Mr. Howell. Many do.
Mr. Butterfield. Under current law, sir, enforcement is
simply the product meets the standard or doesn't meet the
standard. Under the draft that we have in front of us, the
Commission's enforcement seems to be more complicated. For each
product at the border where there might be a problem, the
Commission will have to do complicated testing. Couldn't this
slow down products and have them retain longer at some of our
ports?
Mr. Howell. Yes.
Mr. Butterfield. All right. Thank you very much. My time is
out.
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. The chair recognizes the vice
chair of the subcommittee, Ms. Blackburn, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses.
Mr. Howell, I would like to start with you if I may,
please. As I mentioned in my opening statement, the database--
as we hold our initial hearing on this issue, we are very much
aware that the database is incomplete; it has problems. The
chairman mentioned some of the problems that are there with how
information is recorded. And I want to know two things from you
if you would, please, sir. Number one, would we be better off
to take that thing down until the problems are worked out? And
number two, what needs to be done to correct the problems that
are around the database? Very quickly, please. I have got other
questions.
Mr. Howell. Ms. Blackburn, because the problems that you
cite are not clearly defined, I am going to respond to your
question clearly in a very broad way. Certainly the decision
whether to keep the database up or down becomes a policy
decision. It is not one that my technical staff necessarily are
the appropriate ones to make. The challenges of implementing
anything that is new certainly will require the attention of
staff in order to get it right. Many of the things that we see
in the database, regardless of the nature of the reports of
harm, would require resources to get a handle on the
appropriate way to respond.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. And I will help you with that
definition. The prior hearing that we had we heard from the
commissioners that if there is a complaint against, say, Graco
cribs, then all Graco cribs are--you know, you don't define
between that. So I would ask you to submit to us in writing
with a little bit more detail what you think needs to be done.
Because I think we need to take the thing down and bring it
offline, work out the kinks, and then bring it back so that it
is understandable to consumers so they know exactly what the
product is and so there is a method for them to evaluate what
actually is the problem and then if they do or do not want to
purchase that product. At this point right now, people can just
rail against a brand and not necessarily a specific product or
a part. And there is that problem of definition within that
use.
I want to come to Dr. Beck. Mr. Vitrano, who is going to
testify on the next panel, submitted testimony. And thank you
all for submitting your testimony in advance. And in there he
talks about the lead intake from children's interaction with
ATVs is less than the intake from drinking a glass of water.
And I would like to know in your opinion do you agree with
that? Do you find that to be an accurate statement and a little
bit of definition around that and see if--what I am looking at
is if the metal parts on an ATV contain higher lead than are
permitted by the EPA for drinking water standards, I am sure
you can understand our confusion with that issue.
Ms. Beck. Yes. His statement is correct. It is based on
analysis that we did in which we had wipe samples. Because the
question is how does a child interact, say, with the valve
stem? We had samples of wipes that rubbed the valve stem, and
that was to mimic a child touching a valve stem when they fill
their----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. So Dr. Beck, it would be true that a
child gets more lead content in drinking a glass of water than
from playing with an ATV?
Ms. Beck. They would get more lead from what is commonly
found in drinking water but is permissible under EPA than they
would get from contacting their hands with the valve stem on an
ATV or from touching the handles.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK, now, let me ask you this. Do you find
this with other products? Have you found this same association
in other products that you have tested, maybe with the wipe
test?
Ms. Beck. We have also done wipe tests on scooters and we
had similar results, that what came off in a wipe was
relatively small, less than what a child might typically get
from drinking water.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Thank you very much. I appreciate that.
And I will go ahead and yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentlelady. The chair
recognizes Ms. Schakowsky for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Mr. Howell, in
your testimony you note that an independent testing lab, SGS,
has found that almost 90 percent of toys tested by it recently
comply with the 100 parts per million lead limit. While I
realize this is data from only one entity, it seems to provide
at least some evidence that the children's product marketplace
has largely adapted already to the 100-parts-per-million limit.
Would you say that is true?
Mr. Howell. Yes, I would. I would also add to that, though,
that it may also indicate that we are rapidly approaching a
point of diminishing returns in that the effort to achieve the
final reduction in lead may be much more costly than the
incremental cost of getting to where we are today.
Ms. Schakowsky. Certain members of industry have been very
critical of fixed parts-per-million limits for lead in
children's products and have advocated a move back--as we heard
from Dr. Beck today--to risk-based standard. However, the
American Society of Testing and Materials, ASTM's F-963 toy
standard, which has been drafted through a consensus process
and is now a mandatory rule under the CPSIA, contains fixed
parts-per-million limits for certain toxic metals and surface
coatings of toys like cadmium--is it antimony?--and barium and
in those areas--well, so I am asking why not lead? If they
could go to a PPM for other things, why not lead? And let me
pose the same question to Dr. Best. But Mr. Howell?
Mr. Howell. Certainly you can regulate lead either on a
fixed-content limit or on the extractable amount. That becomes,
basically, not only a policy choice but a choice of economics
and ease of test, if you will, that would facilitate
compliance.
Ms. Schakowsky. So would you say that it is easier to
administer for many companies and for the Commission to go on a
parts-per-million basis?
Mr. Howell. Certainly, there are advantages to testing by
content in the fact that it is that time is much faster. It
certainly doesn't generate the level of hazardous waste than
what chemistry does. But at the same time I believe another way
to look at the problem, perhaps, would be a balance between
both the parts-per-million content at some prescribed level and
then a risk-assessment approach at levels above that to deal
with, perhaps, products such as ATVs and bicycles where the
exposure is, perhaps, much, much less of a concern than you
might have in something that is mouthable or swallowable.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. Dr. Best, I wonder if you would
comment on these issues.
Ms. Best. One of the big differentiations between the CPSIA
and the ATSM--or MS, whatever--their levels is that the ATSM's
levels are soluble lead. And we are concerned not only about
the surface coating but as the product wears, the surface
coating may be worn off and so then you are getting deep into
the content of whatever product we are talking about, and
again, the swallowing question comes into play.
Ms. Schakowsky. Right. But my question is if the toy
manufacturers could go to a parts per million for these other
things, why not with lead?
Ms. Best. Well, we believe that they can go to a total lead
content level and achieve that reasonably. And as some of these
data have shown, many manufacturers----
Ms. Schakowsky. OK. One other question on lead content. You
had mentioned that children with disabilities sometimes
continue mouthing, you know, well past a little kid and yet
products designated as--I am looking what it is called--special
products for the disabled are not in the category that would
require a mandatory third-party testing for almost all
children's products. Do you think that is a mistake?
Ms. Best. I can't say I know all of the definitions of
special products for the disabled. Certainly, you know, I
wonder if some of them are more adapted products such as
adaptive listening devices and adaptive hearing devices, so
they are not toys. And so we have been very focused on the toys
and so that is where, you know, all of our evidence has been
based.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. The chair recognizes Mr. Barton
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you. Mr. Howell, my recollection is that
in the Congress and the hearing in this Congress that the
commissioners who testified, testified that the current law
doesn't give them the flexibility that they need to implement
the law. Is my recollection correct?
Mr. Howell. I recall the same thing.
Mr. Barton. You recall the same thing? So that is a yes?
Mr. Howell. That is a yes.
Mr. Barton. OK. Dr. Best, what is wrong with giving the
CPSC some flexibility to implement the law?
Ms. Best. It is my understanding that they already have
some flexibility to----
Mr. Barton. That is not their understanding.
Ms. Best. Well----
Mr. Barton. I mean they testified at least twice----
Ms. Best. Right.
Mr. Barton [continuing]. That they need more flexibility.
So let us stipulate that they don't have flexibility. Why,
then, would it not be prudent for Congress to give them some
flexibility?
Ms. Best. Well, the stipulation I would have to look at.
But the concern we have is that children's health is not
something that should be negotiated based on manufacturers'
profit.
Mr. Barton. Well, nobody is saying that the stipulation
should be based on profit. That is a fairly obnoxious comment
to make in reply to my question.
Ms. Best. When we do a risk-based assessment or we allow
great freedom in terms of how safe toys are, we go back to the
days where children----
Mr. Barton. OK, well, look, I don't have time for a 5-
minute longwinded non-statement. Do you support any flexibility
at all for the Commission? Yes or no?
Ms. Best. I will support some----
Mr. Barton. So that is a----
Ms. Best [continuing]. Very defined, limited----
Mr. Barton. Thank you.
Ms. Best. [continuing]. Carefully protective flexibility.
Mr. Barton. You do support some flexibility. That is a good
thing. Let me go back to Mr. Howell. The House bill, when we
actually passed the bill under Chairman Dingell's leadership,
had a 12-year-and-under standard. The Senate bill had a 6-year-
and-under standard for children. The Senate receded to the
House to the 12-year. That is one of the changes in the draft
before us is that we leave the age as undefined. If you split
the difference between the Senate and the House, obviously it
would be 9 and under. Is that a reasonable compromise or is
that unfeasible in your opinion?
Mr. Howell. To some degree it depends on the risks that you
are trying to manage. I will say in that some work done several
years ago in establishing lead limits for children's jewelry,
which the work was terminated because of the CPSIA, staff had
determined that 9 and under would be an appropriate age based
on how children interact with a product such as jewelry.
Mr. Barton. Let me ask that same question to Dr. Best. Is
there some middle ground between 6 and 12?
Ms. Best. We carefully reviewed this in 2007 and we believe
12 is the right age.
Mr. Barton. OK. What about Dr. Beck?
Ms. Beck. I think that it is somewhat of a science policy
decision that there really is no bright line. I do think what
Mr. Howell has proposed, 7, 9, that they are reasonable
compromises. Obviously, a young child might play with toys of
an older child, but it will be less frequent. But as I said,
ultimately, I think that there is need for some judgment in
determining what the actual age should be.
Mr. Barton. OK. Mr. Howell, on third-party testing, the
draft preserves third-party testing for certain priority
standards and priority products and it gives the Commission the
flexibility to require third-party testing for other standards.
Is that something you think the Commission would support in
this draft, the third-party testing amendments?
Mr. Howell. Sir, I am unable to speak for the Commission.
Mr. Barton. You work for the Commission. You are the only
Commission representative we have.
Mr. Howell. I work for the Commission but the question was
do I believe the Commission would buy into this proposal,and I
cannot predict what the Commission might accept or not accept.
Mr. Barton. So you just walk around in a daze when you are
at the Commission even though you are the----
Mr. Howell. No, sir, but I do not control the votes of the
commissioners.
Mr. Barton. Well, but you can have an opinion about what
their position might be. You have got a better opinion than I
do.
Mrs. Bono Mack. The chair would recognize that we are out
of time and, with all due respect to my dear colleague, but
recognize now for 5 minutes Mr. Towns.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Let me ask
discretion, first of all, I guess to you Dr. Best. Can you
explain how lead buildup in bones throughout a lifetime can
impact pregnant women and developing fetuses and why children
are born with lead in their blood?
Ms. Best. Yes. Lead is similar to calcium in that our
bodies see lead as if it was a calcium molecule and then absorb
it into our bones throughout our lives. And so if you are
exposed to more levels of lead as you are developing bones or
remodeling bones, which goes on throughout life, you are likely
to absorb and store lead in your bones to a greater extent.
During pregnancy, there is a very high calcium demand on
the mother's body and the fetus actually steals calcium from
the mother. And if the mother doesn't have enough daily dietary
intake from calcium, the bones will be resorbed and calcium
from the bones will then be used to help the fetus develop. And
so if there is calcium being released from the bones and there
is also lead in the bone, the lead is released at the same time
and then transferred to the fetus.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much. Let me ask you this, Mr.
Howell. When can a product that has shown consistent
compliance, you know, through a third-party testing be relieved
from testing? How many years?
Mr. Howell. If the objective is to establish a prevention-
based program, the answer to that would be that while the
frequency of testing could certainly be extended, I would
suggest that perhaps it could never be terminated if you will
but just longer periods of time between third-party testing. In
the industry that would be a skip-lot quality approach.
Mr. Towns. Even if you test it and there is consistency and
you still feel that you can't say 2 years, 10 years, 20 years?
You just would have to continue?
Mr. Howell. Well, the assumption there is that things never
change in the manufacturing process. And, for example, the lead
in paint that some say was the beginning of the CPSIA
discussion was a total surprise to the manufacturer. They
thought they had their process totally under control and they
had a supplier who brought material into their factory, they
assumed it was correct--and, in fact, it was loaded with lead.
So if indeed the goal is to measure compliance to assure the
American public that the product is safe, I would suggest that
while you could increase the time between testing that you
might be accepting some risk if you chose to terminate the
testing until such time as you determine there was another
problem and then reinstitute the testing.
Mr. Towns. Right. Thank you. Is there sufficient
flexibility for the Commission to allow for--I am trying to see
if there is anything on this side that we need to do.
Mr. Howell. In my opinion and, of course, as has been
stated many times by the Commission itself, there is certainly
a need for additional flexibility for the Commission to act
appropriately to implement the law and safeguard consumers.
Mr. Towns. Dr. Best, is there anything that we need to do
on this side as Members of Congress? Let us switch roles for a
minute.
Ms. Best. Besides pass a budget? Sorry. I think we need to
remember that toys are not a requirement for life and we want
children to have the best opportunity that they can possibly
have. And, you know, the option is not between a drug that has
side effects for a child. The option is between a toy that is
safe and a toy that may not be safe. And so we need to remember
that, you know, every toy is not a required product to help a
child grow. They need toys but they need to know that those
toys are safe. And we need to continue to remember that lead is
dangerous at small levels. Even very small levels it causes IQ
loss and the more we find out about the low levels of lead, the
more harms we discover.
Mr. Towns. Thank you. I see my time has expired, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman and recognize the
gentleman from New Hampshire, Mr. Bass, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bass. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman, and I
appreciate your holding this important hearing to discuss a
piece of legislation which corrects a response to a problem
which was clear and understandable and necessary which occurred
during the period of time that I was not serving in the
Congress. And I was thinking of saying I am not surprised that
the response that was passed by Congress essentially endeavors
to use a Howitzer to kill a mosquito and so here we are trying
to make this necessary new law work better.
However, my questions are for Mr. Howell, and they don't
deal with the central controversy of the bill but rather with
some equipment that the CPSC is using and whether or not its
use should be expanded. I understand that the Consumer Product
Safety Commission uses several dozen handheld x-ray
fluorescence analyzers and they are used both in the laboratory
and also in ports of entry. They quickly, effectively, non-
intrusively, and accurately determine whether and how much lead
is in a product. Can you give us a brief description of your
experiences using this equipment and enforcing limits on lead?
Mr. Howell. Certainly. The XRF scanners have certainly
helped the efficiency and effectiveness of implementing the
law. There initially were some limitations. The XRF is a good
tool for detecting lead and other potentially toxic heavy
metals in homogenous materials like plastics. However, there
were some limitations early on in checking for lead in surface
coatings, as in paint.
Mr. Bass. Um-hum.
Mr. Howell. However, just recently CPSC issued a Notice of
Requirements recognizing that HD XRF technology had been
developed, a testing protocol had been developed under ASTM and
that is now an approved method to test for lead in paint. So it
certainly is an efficient technology.
Mr. Bass. As the lead individual for hazard reduction's
support expanded use of these XRF devices by manufacturers,
retailers, and porters as a means to ensure compliance with
lead limits?
Mr. Howell. I believe the cost savings, in my experience,
has been motivation enough. Certainly, most manufacturers who
can afford a unit, to my knowledge, have acquired one.
Mr. Bass. So the expanded use of this equipment would, in
your opinion, improve the safety and quality of the products on
the market today?
Mr. Howell. It certainly is an effective way for a
manufacturer to monitor his incoming materials and his outbound
materials.
Mr. Bass. OK. And lastly, as you may know, the EPA and HUD
have used handheld XRF for decades to test for lead in homes
and they are obviously protecting children. CPSIA includes a
limit for lead in small painted areas on children's products. I
think it is 2 micrograms per square centimeter of paint. Do you
support making this limit applicable to larger painted areas as
well?
Mr. Howell. If you would allow me to respond to that
question in writing, I would like to get with our chemist and
give you an appropriate response.
Mr. Bass. OK. Fair enough. Thank you very much. And I thank
the chairlady. I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman. And the chair
recognizes we have a series of votes on the floor so it is my
intention to have Mr. Dingell as his 5 minutes of questioning
and then we will break and return to resume questioning after
the series of votes. So Mr. Dingell, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you, Madam Chairman. To the witnesses,
these questions will require a yes or no answer only because of
time.
The draft legislation requires the Commission to establish
procedures for estimating the amount of lead a child would
ingest from a given child's product. However, while the
Commission establishes such procedures, the draft legislation
would permit the manufacturers to use ``any reasonable
methodology to estimate the amount of lead a child would likely
ingest from exposure to a component part.'' Question: Is there
any such reasonable methodology in use by manufacturers today
for testing children's products? Starting with Dr. Best.
Ms. Best. I am not familiar with what manufacturers can do.
Mr. Dingell. Ms. Beck?
Ms. Best. Oh, I am sorry.
Mr. Dingell. Yes or----
Ms. Beck. There is methodologies. I don't know if the
manufacturers know about them.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you. And if you please, Mr. Howell, yes
or no?
Mr. Howell. I am not aware.
Mr. Dingell. Now, starting again, Dr. Best, is it possible
the ambiguity of the term ``reasonable methodology'' would lead
to a wide variance in test results across the manufacturers of
similar products? Yes or no?
Ms. Best. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. OK. Dr. Beck?
Ms. Beck. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Howell?
Mr. Howell. I do not know.
Mr. Dingell. Could this--well, I will just defer on that
particular question. Now, Mr. Howell, the draft legislation
would allow CPSC, subject to conditions, to require a third-
party testing of children's products. Under the draft bill,
CPSC would require a third-party testing only if the Commission
first verifies the testing capacity of ``accredited third-party
conformity assessment bodies,'' as well as establishes and
publishes Notice of Requirements for such accreditation of such
assessment bodies. Does this include both national and
international or domestic and international bodies? Yes or no?
Mr. Howell. I believe it does, yes.
Mr. Dingell. OK. Now, if so, how many such assessment
bodies are there worldwide?
Mr. Howell. CPSC recognized conformity assessment bodies
are currently in excess of 300 I believe.
Mr. Dingell. OK. Now, further, does the Commission have the
resources with which to verify the testing capacity of all
third-party conformity assessment bodies? Yes or no?
Mr. Howell. I can't answer that question yes or no.
Mr. Dingell. It means that you do not know they do have
such capacity. Now, moreover, is it your understanding the
draft legislation, the Commission would have to accredit all
third-party conformity assessment bodies? Yes or no?
Mr. Howell. No.
Mr. Dingell. If so, do you believe the Commission has the
resources with which to accomplish this purpose? Yes or no?
Mr. Howell. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. In summary, do you believe the practical
effect of these requirements would be that the Commission would
seldom, if ever, require third-party testing of children's
products? Yes or no?
Mr. Howell. No.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Mr. Howell, CPSIA defines a children's
product as one ``primarily intended for a child 12 years of age
or younger.'' The discussion draft would change this definition
to ``intended for use by a child,'' then it leaves a gap, ``age
to be determined--years younger.'' Would these words ``for use
by'' limit the number and type of products covered by this
definition? Yes or no?
Mr. Howell. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, to Drs. Beck and Dr. Best. Would you care
to comment briefly on Mr. Howell's response to the last
questions? Starting with Dr. Best.
Ms. Best. No.
Mr. Dingell. You can if you wish. Ms. Beck?
Ms. Beck. If the age decreases from 12 to some number less
than 12, then the number of products to be tested, of course,
would diminish because the products are defined for different
age groups.
Mr. Dingell. Ladies and gentleman of the panel, thank you.
Madam Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the distinguished gentleman. And it
is my intention that we recess now for this series of votes and
we return at high noon. So we will see you all at high noon if
we are quick on the floor with votes. If not, a little wiggle
room. See you guys at noon. Thanks.
[Recess.]
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. The chair will recognize Mr.
Pompeo for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pompeo. Great. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank you,
panelists, for hanging with us through the vote.
You know, I heard Mr. Waxman say this was a wrecking ball
and I heard somebody say we were comprehensively demolishing
the CPSIA. I think there is lots more to do. I think this is a
very good first step, but there is a lot more work to do.
I wanted to ask you, Mr. Howell, just a couple questions
about the database. We have been live now for almost a month,
right? How many reports have we received since March 11 under
the database rule?
Mr. Howell. The number is approximately 1,500 at this
point.
Mr. Pompeo. And other than those--so there is a 5-day
period before it goes out to the manufacturer. How many of
those have been sent on to the manufacturer of those 1,500?
Mr. Howell. I would like to respond in writing with precise
numbers. But at this point of those that we have received, I
think approximately 50 percent at this point have been sent to
manufacturers.
Mr. Pompeo. And so how many of those are past the required
time period to send on to the manufacturer approximately?
Mr. Howell. Actually, once they pass the CPSIA check, which
is the eight requirements to be considered, at that point they
would be passed to the manufacturer and we are not late in
sending the initial notice to the manufacturer. Those are
happening on time.
Mr. Pompeo. So everything is on time. Everything is good.
You have got the resources to respond at the level of the
reports that have come in so far and you are making all of the
deadlines that were imposed by the rules that CPSC put in
place?
Mr. Howell. I believe for the most part, yes.
Mr. Pompeo. And how is this being conducted? How do these
come in? Who is reviewing them? Are you reviewing them along
with staff and a committee? What kind of resources are being
dedicated to that project?
Mr. Howell. At this point in time, there are several
different staff members involved in the review, part of that
because it is a brand new process and we are trying to
understand what we are getting in, making the appropriate
decisions regarding reports of harm to ensure that they do,
indeed, meet the qualifications. It is roughly a team of 10 to
12 with representatives of technical staff, legal staff, and
IT.
Mr. Pompeo. Wow. 10 to 12 people. Wow, for 1,500 across 30
days. So what do you have? 35 a business day, 50 a business
day, something like that?
Mr. Howell. Probably somewhere in the neighborhood of 50 a
business day.
Mr. Pompeo. Yes. Can you keep up with it?
Mr. Howell. At this point yes, but we are in a learning
curve and we understand that as we get a better handle of the
nature of these incoming reports, we expect efficiencies to
increase.
Mr. Pompeo. Why would you go through a learning curve when
you have had this database running without it being public for
such a long time? Why wouldn't we have done the learning curve
before we went live?
Mr. Howell. When we were in the soft launch, not every
manufacturer necessarily felt compelled to respond knowing that
those reports would not necessarily go live. Now that we are
live, we are getting many more responses from manufacturers.
Mr. Pompeo. My first question focused on the process
internal to CPSC before forwarding on. Tell me how the process
is going in getting a response from manufacturers to date that
have had the deadline arrive for their response to be due?
Mr. Howell. You know, the manufacturers receive
notification that there has been a report of harm.
Manufacturers can file a claim of material inaccuracy.
Mr. Pompeo. How many have done that so far?
Mr. Howell. I believe there has been less than 10 percent
have filed claims for material inaccuracy. They can also file
claims for confidentiality, which is extremely rare at this
point in time. And they are certainly free to file a comment
without necessarily filing a claim of inaccuracy or
confidentiality.
Mr. Pompeo. How many have said ``not me, not my stuff?''
Mr. Howell. The vast majority of the material inaccuracy
claims tend to be just that nature. ``It is not my product.''
Mr. Pompeo. And are those still online readily accessible
to the public? So you all send it to the manufacturer and they
say it is not my stuff, are you then putting it online?
Mr. Howell. No, if they claim that it is not their product,
that is a valid claim of material inaccuracy. And until such
time as that is resolved and the problem clearly identified, it
does not get posted.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Howell. Ms. Best, you talked
about--she is not here. Let me ask you one more question, Mr.
Howell. How many items from the punch list that Commissioner
Tenenbaum gave me on the database have you all been able to
work through since she was here? That is what is still left to
fix?
Mr. Howell. I am not familiar with that punch list. I will
certainly respond to that in writing.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you. Madam Chairman, I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman and recognize Mr.
Butterfield to explain the absence of the witness.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you, Madam Chairman. You will notice
that Dr. Best is absent this afternoon. I want the record to
show that she had prior obligations this afternoon and had to
leave. I am told that she is seeing patients today and has
scheduled those appointments with the understanding that we
would convene this morning at 9:00 a.m. instead of 10:00 a.m.
But please be assured that she will be available to answer any
questions that any of the members may have. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman and would remind the
committee that we did delay the starting point of today's
hearing to accommodate the Democrats. And it is unfortunate
that the witness had to leave but remind members, too, you can
submit further questions to her in writing later. And at that
point, we will be happy to recognize Mr. Harper for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Howell and Dr.
Beck, thank you for being here today. I am sure you can come up
with a list of a dozen things you would rather be doing or
maybe 100 things, but we welcome your attendance and appreciate
what you are sharing with us.
And Mr. Howell, just a couple of questions on some issues
involving this. And I know that when we are talking about the
common toy box theory applying, of course, to toys, it seems
like there are a lot of other products that it really makes no
sense at all. For example, infants and toddlers are not going
to have access to motorized products like ATVs or at least we
hope they are not. What is the situation with, say, ATVs and
other things like that when it comes to these regs?
Mr. Howell. One would certainly not expect that small
children would have frequent access with those type of outdoor
products, certainly.
Mr. Harper. OK. When we talk about, say, electronics, you
know, the Commission set much higher lead limits for certain
metal alloys. When the Commission granted a stay of the lead
content limits for ATVs and bicycles, it set temporary limits
at the same or very low or similar levels I mean. Why does the
CPSC consider them to be safe or at least safe enough for now?
What is the rationale for that?
Mr. Howell. When the Stay of Enforcement was issued, it was
simply a stay from the testing and certification requirements.
There was not a stay of the requirement to conform to the law
as written. So the limits that are established are the limits
that were prescribed in law.
Mr. Harper. Got you. Now, I will ask if the Commission is
aware of any deaths in fixed-side cribs in daycares?
Mr. Howell. Would you repeat that, please?
Mr. Harper. Sure. Yes, sir. Is the Commission aware of any
deaths involving fixed-side cribs in daycares?
Mr. Howell. I am not aware of any but I will certainly take
that question back and have our epidemiologist do a data-pull.
Mr. Harper. In your testimony, Mr. Howell, you have
suggested the Commission be allowed to regulate on a timetable
influenced by the seriousness of the actual risk to allow for
better priority-setting. Do you have specific suggestions that
you can share on how you can do this or how we can do this?
Mr. Howell. I believe any organization that has finite
resources needs to ensure that they are allocating those
resources to the highest priorities. You know, certainly there
are various ways to rank those within the Commission. One might
suggest that frequency and severity at-risk populations are all
criteria that would help identify higher-priority projects
versus those that might fall lower on the list. And it is
really all about managing finite resources in a way that
provides the greatest return on those efforts.
Mr. Harper. OK. Dr. Beck, Mr. Vitrano, who will testify on
the next panel, submitted testimony that says you estimated the
lead intake from children's interaction with ATVs is less than
the intake from drinking a glass of water and I ask if that is
true or any info on that statement.
Ms. Beck. Yes, we did an analysis in which we used wipe
tests from ATVs so we had actual data and we compared how much
children would get from that scenario versus what a child might
drink in a typical glass of drinking water, which may contain
small amounts of lead. So that is a correct conclusion from our
analysis.
Mr. Harper. And when was that analysis done? How recently?
Ms. Beck. It was, I believe, either 2008 or 2009.
Mr. Harper. All right. But wouldn't it be true, though,
that the metal parts of the ATVs contain much higher lead than
permitted by EPA drinking water standards?
Ms. Beck. It is a little bit apples and oranges because the
drinking water standards based on what is in the water----
Mr. Harper. Right.
Ms. Beck [continuing]. That is a very low concentration in
the water. And then if you were to say what does that mean in
terms of--you could compare it to PPMs in a valve and, of
course, that would be much, much higher. But it is a little bit
of an apples-and-orange comparison.
Mr. Harper. But based on that analysis, your concern about
ATVs as it concerns infants and toddlers, you would not be
overly concerned with that at all, would you?
Ms. Beck. No, because it is really not a plausible
scenario.
Mr. Harper. Sure. OK. I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman and recognize Dr.
Cassidy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cassidy. I really enjoyed this panel. All of you
attempted to be very fact-based and referenced-based. So let me
just first compliment you. And my compliments to Dr. Best, who
is no longer here.
First you, Mr. Howell. Clearly it is common sense that a
kid is not going to chew on an ATV and probably not on the stem
of a bicycle. On the other hand, I can understand that if there
was some other product that the varnish wore off that the child
could gnaw down to and actually have some lead exposure. So I
guess my question to you is are we able to come up with a
definition that which is absurd that the kid would ever chew on
is moved over here and that which it is plausible is moved over
there? Is that something within the Commission's ability to
accomplish?
Mr. Howell. Certainly in the Commission's traditional risk-
based evaluation of consumer products, that would be an
evaluation that would be conducted. How a child interacts with
the product is important in determining the level of risk that
that child may be subjected to from that certain product. In
the case of ATVs, we would find it less likely the child would
swallow or mouth an ATV. Certainly you would expect that there
could be some migration of lead from contact with the hand on
an ATV.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, I gather from Dr. Best--and I am sorry
she is not here because I just wanted to explore this because
all three of you know so much more about this issue than I.
That is why you are the panel members and I am not--that there
was some dissatisfaction from the risk-based assessment. So now
I am sure there are many aspects of risk-based assessments, but
was one of the areas that folks were unhappy with, did that
include your ability to differentiate lead paint peeling off a
wall from an ATV, one is a great risk, one is a minimal risk
for lead exposure?
Mr. Howell. I have certainly heard the arguments against
risk-based but I am not fully aware of all the underlying
rationale behind that criticism.
Mr. Cassidy. So it sounds like you feel like risk-based is
a practical thing for the Commission to implement?
Mr. Howell. The Commission has been using a risk-based
approach for decades now.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, you mentioned in response to Mr. Harper,
the last line of your testimony to ``effectively prioritizing
Commission resources towards those of the most serious health
risk.'' Now, I have learned in life that if you attempt to
monitor everything, you end up monitoring nothing. But on the
other hand, if you monitor a few things, you often can monitor
them well. And I have also learned that there is oftentimes,
you know, 99.9 percent risk with this subset of activities and
.1 percent with this subset. Is that so clearly broken out in
lead exposure? Can you say, listen, this is really high-risk
stuff. We need to focus our resources even more so than now if
we were so allowed, as opposed to this, which is incredible
low-risk. We are kind of killing our time over here.
Mr. Howell. Certainly, the Agency is extremely concerned
with those lead-bearing items that can be swallowed. Acute
exposure to lead is certainly a very serious, serious thing.
One would expect that the risk decreases as you move from
swallowing to mouthing, from mouthing to touching. And the
management of that risk at that point then becomes a decision
on how the child interacts with the product and what you----
Mr. Cassidy. So you mean by risk-based would make some
differentiation between high- and low-risk and it would all be
upon how the child interacts and the relative amount, et
cetera, et cetera?
Mr. Howell. Yes, that is a basis of----
Mr. Cassidy. Now, the other thing occurs to me is that we
have heard last time from a previous panel about the craft-
makers and you know, somebody in Oregon who makes these nice
little airplanes that apparently needs a--I shouldn't laugh--
but you know, it would make probably 100 planes a year, sells
them out of their shop and now has to get a third-party
assessment as to the lead content of the paint. Now, in your
risk assessment, do you also say listen, if it is below a
certain production value or quantity per year--I mean the
ability of something that is produced on the scale of 100 a
year, as one example, is really unlikely to have a significant
impact, do you have any such sort of evaluation like that?
Mr. Howell. Our evaluation is from a risk approach is a
product evaluation and the consideration of the volume of the
product produced is not relevant to the assessment of the risk
that that particular product may present to the consumer who is
using that product.
Mr. Cassidy. Yes, it wouldn't be for the particular
consumer, but it would be for the epidemiology of it in terms
of a population issue, correct?
Mr. Howell. Absolutely. And when it comes to prioritizing
the Agency's work, that is where the frequency severity factors
come into play.
Mr. Cassidy. So you do incorporate the population aspect to
it. OK. Well, thank you. Ms. Beck, I am sorry, no questions for
you. It was just mine were more oriented to Mr. Howell. Thank
you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. The chair recognizes Mr. Kinzinger for 5
minutes.
Mr. Kinzinger. Let me see if I can get this to work here.
Well, maybe. Well, how are you doing today? Hopefully well. I
don't need to take a lot of time because I think you guys have
been very good at answering the questions. I appreciate your
time and I appreciate the chairwoman for organizing the
hearing.
You know, one of my concerns when we get to government
involvement in areas is something that I affectionately refer
to--as many other do--as the law of unintended consequences.
You know, it is obviously when somebody does something that
looks great on paper and then in actuality has a completely
different effect.
So Mr. Howell, my question, speaking in terms of the law of
unintended consequences to you, do you agree with the past-
acting Chairman Nord's statement of April 3, 2009, that the
``application of the lead content mandates of this act may have
actually the perverse effect of actually endangering children
by forcing youth-sized vehicles off of the market'' and in a
result actually children riding vehicles that are bigger or, in
essence, too big for them, adult-sized ATVs if you will.
Mr. Howell. I agree with that statement.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK. So you do agree with that. Madam
Chairwoman, I would like to ask unanimous consent to insert two
documents into the record.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Without objection.
Mr. Kinzinger. The first, a statement from acting Chairman
Nancy Nord of the CPSC from April 2009 requesting exclusions
from the lead-content limits of the Consumer Protection Safety
Improvement Act of '08. The other is a letter from Edward
Moreland, Senior Vice President of the American Motorcyclists
Association to Chairwoman Bono Mack and Ranking Member
Butterfield regarding the discussion draft.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Kinzinger. The next question I have, common sense seems
to support the notion that youth model OHV should not be
subjected to the lead content provisions of this act. Would one
of the solutions to this conundrum be an outright categorical
exemption, like the one provided in H.R. 412? It is called the
Kids Just Want to Ride Act. It is one I am a co-sponsor on.
Mr. Howell. As a policy decision, that certainly would be
an option.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK. Well, like I said, those are basically
my two big questions I had. You all have done a great job here
in front of us today. I appreciate your time. And I would yield
back my time.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman. And at that point I
am happy to thank our panelists for staying and for your expert
testimony. We appreciate everything you have had to offer today
and hopefully we will craft some great legislation. So thank
you for your time and we will spend a quick 30 seconds or a
minute seating the new panel and get started right away. Thank
you again.
All right. Thank you. Our second panel is comprised of four
witnesses. Welcome. And thank you for staying with us this
morning. Our first witness, again, but not in the order of
recognition, but to introduce Erika Jones. She is a partner at
Mayer Brown here representing the Bicycle Product Suppliers
Association. Welcome. Our second witness is Paul Vitrano,
General Counsel for the Motorcycle Industry Council. Also
testifying today is Sheila Millar, a partner at Keller and
Heckman, LLP. And our fourth witness on this panel is Caroline
Cox, Research Director for the Center for Environmental Health.
Welcome to each of you.
You all know the drill now, the 5 minutes and the clocks
and how they work. So if you could just pay attention to those,
we appreciate it. We will have some floor votes again
eventually, so if we can move it along, that would be terrific.
So now we are going to begin with our first witness and
recognize Ms. Cox for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF CAROLINE COX, RESEARCH DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH; SHEILA A. MILLAR, PARTNER, KELLER AND
HECKMAN, LLP; PAUL C. VITRANO, GENERAL COUNSEL, MOTORCYCLE
INDUSTRY COUNCIL; AND ERIKA Z. JONES, PARTNER, MAYER BROWN, ON
BEHALF OF THE BICYCLE PRODUCT SUPPLIERS ASSOCIATION

STATEMENT OF CAROLINE COX

Ms. Cox. Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify
today. My message is that CPSIA, as written, has been an
enormous success and I am really privileged today to be able to
provide research data to document that success.
You heard earlier that health professionals agree that
there is no safe level of exposure to lead for children. So I
am discouraged to see the proposed revisions in the CPSIA that
would weaken a law that has worked so well to protect American
children from unnecessary lead.
For the last 15 years, my organization, the Center for
Environmental Health, has worked to protect children and
families from harmful chemical exposures. Our experience before
and after passage of the CPSIA demonstrates that the law has
been highly successful. Prior to adoption of the law, we found
high lead levels in dozens of children's products sold to
millions of American families by major retailers. At that time
there was no federal law to protect children from lead so we
relied on California State Law. Since the lead limits under
CPSIA went into effect, our experience shows a dramatic change
in the marketplace for children's products.
In the last year and a half, we purchased over 1,200
children's products from major national retailers and screened
them for lead. These were stuffed animals, toys, games, lunch
boxes, backpacks, jewelry, toy sporting equipment, lots of
other things. As far as we know, it is the largest independent
monitoring of compliance with CPSIA to date.
Out of these 1,200 products, we found only 46 that did not
comply with CPSIA lead standards based on tests by a CPSIA-
certified lab. In other words, more than 96 percent were in
compliance. And because we intentionally purchased products
that were likely to have lead problems, we believe overall
compliance is even higher.
This data contrasts with what we found in 2007 and 2008.
Our results show that over the 4-year interval, the prevalence
of lead hazards in children's products was reduced by a factor
of about 3. Given the immense size of the U.S. market for
children's products, this is a major accomplishment.
We do understand that CPSIA requirements can be a hardship
for small business and we would support amendments to help with
that. We believe that the CPSIA has been effective because one,
the lead standards are comprehensive. They cover virtually all
children's products and all accessible parts of those products.
And that has created a huge market for complaint materials and
components.
The standards are straightforward, and because they are
based on a total content standard, testing is accessible,
consistent, and affordable. Lead content standards are the only
kind of standards that allow materials and components to be
tested upstream in a supply chain. When you have exposure-based
standards or risk-based standards, the testing can only be done
on finished products after it is already made.
And the third point I would like to make is that the lead
standards apply to a really meaningful definition of
``children,'' up to age 12. Because lead is a cumulative and
persistent toxicant, it is particularly important to maintain
this requirement. Protect children as they move into their
teenage years and girls move into childbearing years.
I wanted to just give a quick visual demonstration of the
success of the CPSIA. Here is Curious George from 2007. His
face contains lead at a level 20 times the current CPSIA
standard. Don't kiss this George. And I think most kids
probably wanted to. Here is the current post-CPSIA George.
George is lead-free and sold at the same price. I think this
really shows how successful the law has been.
We respectfully recommend that this committee support the
public health success that the CPSIA has been. Crucial support
includes the lead content standards, as well as the definition
of a child as 12 years old and younger. Thank you so much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Cox follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Ms. Cox. Ms. Millar?

STATEMENT OF SHEILA A. MILLAR

Ms. Millar. Thank you, Chairman Bono Mack and Ranking
Member Butterfield, members of the subcommittee. I appreciate
the invitation to appear here today.
As a longtime consumer protection attorney--and I think all
of the members of the panel here and everybody in this room
share the same view. We need and want a strong and effective
CPSC that has both the authority and the resources necessary to
adopt and enforce national consumer product safety standards.
Where we differ is that some of us favor revisions to CPSC's
arbitrary one-size-fits-all limits that apply irrespective of
the type of product, material, age of the user, or actual risk
of exposure, its illusory or nonexistent exemption scheme, its
retroactive effect and burdensome testing requirements, which
have cost money and jobs.
Based on my experience with many different federal
agencies, if I have learned one thing over the years, it is
that sound public policy should be based on facts and science
and risk. So I want to focus on a few key points from my
written testimony.
First, the lead and substrate limits were derived from the
unfounded assumption that presence equals risk. It doesn't. And
I think Dr. Beck illustrated that point carefully this morning.
The CPSC's own research has demonstrated that materials that
are high in lead may sometimes yield less migratable lead or
about the same amount of migratable lead as products that
comply with 600 or 300 parts per mission. Exposure is the key
to risk. And so we do believe that revisions that are more
targeted to exposure keying off of proven things that the CPSC
has done for years makes a lot of sense.
In terms of the lead exemption process, the proposal here
offers a good step forward but remains unnecessarily complex.
In addition, the limited exemption scheme is coupled with a
general provision that gives the CPSC new authority to adopt
600 ppm limits on older children's or even adult products.
Because I support a risk-based approach, I favor neither the
current exemption process as drafted, nor giving CPSC general
authority to simply adopt the 600 ppm limit on any product,
irrespective of risk.
In contrast, the phthalates provision offers an elegantly
simple view that could be applied more generally. It tracks the
CPSIA exemption for inaccessible component parts but gives the
Commission authority to adopt health-based exemptions,
exemptions from the prohibition that are not necessary to
protect children's health. Why not adopt a consistent science-
based exemption process for both lead and phthalates predicated
on the simple basic rule: that the government should not be in
the business of banning safe products.
I do want to spend a couple minutes talking about testing.
Let me be clear. Testing has an important role in compliance.
And as Mr. Howell referenced this morning, there may be ways to
look at how to dovetail testing regimes with supplier
assurances, self-certifications, and other proven techniques
that help confirm safety.
Let us also be clear that the prospect of $15 million
penalties offer very powerful incentives to comply to say
nothing of the prospect that your products will simply be
rejected by your customers.
From the standpoint of total content testing, I differ with
Ms. Cox in that we have seen over and over again the total
content lead tests are not so uniform as you might expect.
There is considerable variability and the absence of any
definitive inter-laboratory variability factor is a key
problem, particularly as levels drop lower and lower. So when
we look at these differences in terms of inter-laboratory
variability, a material--which may have residual lead content,
let us say, a plated piece of metal where you are building on a
piece of tin coupled with a nickel-plating, a copper-plating, a
silver-plating--at the end of the day, the addition of those
added metals, each of which could have residually low total
content, could put you above 100 ppm. And I think we have seen
the need for exemptions to perhaps look at a broader array of
material to address that naturally occurring problem.
I would also caution against assuming that component
testing is the solution to all ills with certification testing
here. I represent many raw materials suppliers of plastics,
chemicals, and other materials, and they are simply not willing
to subject themselves to the jurisdiction of the CPSC to
provide component-test certifications in the rigid scheme
required by CPSIA.
I strongly support a national safety net for consumers. I
also strongly support reducing unnecessary burdens on the
regulated community by restoring the CPSC its authority to make
sound risk-based decisions. Thank you again for the invitation
and I look forward to responding to any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Millar follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much. Mr. Vitrano, 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF PAUL C. VITRANO

Mr. Vitrano. Chair Bono Mack, Ranking Member Butterfield,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to testify. I am Paul Vitrano of the Motorcycle
Industry Council, which represents nearly 300 manufacturers of
motorcycles and ATVs, aftermarket companies, and allied trades.
We appreciate the subcommittee's efforts to address the
unintended consequence of the CPSIA, which has effectively
banned the sale of youth ATVs, motorcycles, and snowmobiles.
The act has actually created unsafe situations for young riders
by reducing the unavailability of appropriately-sized speed-
restricted youth models.
As you noted during the last hearing, Chair Bono Mack, the
CPSC has made the judgment that the risk of lead exposure to
children is outweighed by the risk that children face if youth
ATVs are not available. The act also has cost manufacturing and
dealership jobs.
We urge Congress to fix this unintended ban and appreciate
the subcommittee has offered an initial draft reform bill.
Within the framework of the draft bill, the only way to fix the
ban on youth vehicles with certainty and without imposing
further needless costs and burdens on our industry and its
customers is to amend the range of children's products at least
for these vehicles to age 6 and under.
Alternatively, we ask you to consider adding a categorical
exemption to the bill. There already is widespread support for
this approach. Representative Rehberg has authored the Kids
Just Want to Ride Act, H.R. 412, which currently has 61
bipartisan cosponsors. And just last week, Senators Klobuchar
and Tester offered a categorical exemption as an amendment to
the small business bill currently before the Senate.
ATVs and motorcycles do not present any lead-related health
risk to young riders and Congress has made it clear that it
never intended the lead content restrictions for toys to apply
to these vehicles. We ask that you keep in mind the following
points as you work to provide young riders in our industry with
much-needed relief.
First, the lead content in metal parts of ATVs and
motorcycles poses no risk to kids, as Dr. Barbara Beck
testified earlier this morning. The estimated lead intake from
kids touching metal parts is less than the lead intake from
drinking a glass of water.
Second, everyone agrees that the key to youth safety on
ATVs and motorcycles is ensuring they ride the right size
vehicles. By reducing the availability of these vehicles, the
CPSIA has created--in the CPSC's own words--a ``more serious
and immediate risk of injury or death'' than any risk from lead
exposure.
Third, in 2009 MIC estimated that a complete ban on youth-
model vehicles would result in about 1 billion in lost economic
value in the retail marketplace every year.
Fourth, motorcycles and ATVs are motor-powered machines,
not toys or other articles kids wear or play with. So the
extent and nature of the children's interaction with our
vehicles is materially different. As you know, kids do not
mouth tailpipes or swallow battery terminals. Young riders
typically only touch a few parts of the vehicles like
handlebars and clutch levers and often with gloved hands.
Finally, ATVs and dirt bikes are stored outside the house,
usually in garages, sheds, or barns and thus are much less
likely than household items to be touched by young children. In
addition to being remotely located, the vehicles have keys and
use is controlled and supervised by parents.
There are two commonsense ways to fix this problem once and
for all and without imposing further unnecessary testing and
certification costs and burdens on our industry and customers.
We urge you to exclude these youth vehicles from the lead
content provisions by lowering the age range to primarily
intended age 6 and under or adding a categorical exemption.
We also support the recommended changes to the CPSIA
database provisions. One of our members recently received a
report of harm where a rider who had been drinking prior to
riding rode off a cliff at night in the dark. Nothing in the
report indicated any problem with the ATV, but because the
CPSIA database on its face only accepts reports of ``unsafe''
products, the inclusion of this report will result in the ATV
implicitly being classified as an unsafe product. Unless
Congress acts, the database will become a repository of
inaccurate information that defames manufacturers and misleads
customers. We believe the modest changes proposed in the draft
legislation will result in a more useful database with accurate
and relevant information for consumers. Thank you. I am happy
to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Vitrano follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Vitrano. Ms. Jones, you are
recognized for your 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ERIKA Z. JONES

Ms. Jones. Good afternoon, and thank you for inviting me to
be with you this afternoon. I am Erika Jones, and I am counsel
to the Bicycle Products Suppliers Association, which represents
most of the manufacturers and importers of children's bicycles
and adult bicycles offered for sale in the United States.
The bicycle industry has taken very seriously the
expectations of Congress when the CPSIA was enacted. The
bicycle industry has made substantial progress toward reducing
lead in children's bicycle products or making the lead
inaccessible to children and appreciated the Stay of
Enforcement that was enacted by the Commission and used that
time productively to make these design changes and material
substitutions in their products.
Nevertheless, the industry is facing another brink of
uncertainty as later this year a new standard of 100 parts per
million looms on the horizon and presents a number of
feasibility and practicability challenges for the industry. The
industry presented data to the Commission in February of this
year and again last month in written comments providing data
from testing of a bicycle that was specced by its manufacturer
to be below 100 parts per million because retailers are
beginning to demand that level of achievement. And despite this
effort to reach that goal, over 38 of the over 100 parts that
were tested by the laboratory exceeded 100 parts per million,
and that is attributable to the variability that is present,
inherent, and we think at this point, can no longer be worked
out of the system. These were metal parts. The bicycle industry
has solved the issue with respect to plastic and other non-
metallic parts but continues to have a problem with those
components on bicycles that are made from metal alloys.
A witness at the CPSC regulatory hearing last month, who
was retained by the bicycle industry and who runs a CPSC-
certified lab, testified that he has in his experience seen a
shrinkage in the number of children's bicycle models that are
offered for sale and the number of manufacturers willing to
engage in this sector, which means a loss of choice for
consumers. And this, we believe, is attributed to the cost of
testing for the over 100 parts of a bicycle that are accessible
and therefore have to be tested.
Bicycles provide safe, affordable, and environmentally
friendly transportation. They provide children with an
enjoyable means of outdoor exercise, which we think is far more
important for the health of children than protecting them from
the theoretical risks from touching metal bicycle components
with their hands. If lead testing costs make children's
bicycles too expensive for average families to afford or if
affordable used bicycles are difficult to obtain, the health of
America's children could be affected far more than from the
presence of lead in a tire valve stem that they may touch only
on occasion.
I would like to address a comment made by the previous
panel, by Dr. Best, who made a comment that there is no benefit
to lead and therefore it should be inherently unnecessary. We
disagree with that. Lead in the quantities that we see it in
metal alloys that are used in bicycles provide a tremendous
benefit. They provide corrosion resistance. Lead alloys provide
strength and durability that is needed for appropriate
performance of a bicycle. And it would not be socially useful
or desirable to produce a bicycle that may meet a lead-free
standard but which falls apart or which cannot be operated in
an outdoor environment where it is intended to be used.
The industry applauds your subcommittee for convening this
hearing today. We believe there is a need to reform the CPSIA
to reverse these unintended consequences and eliminate the
unnecessary regulatory requirements that are driving up the
cost of children's bicycles making them less available and we
urge prompt action on sensible reforms of the CPSIA. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Jones follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Ms. Jones. You get the record
for coming in 45 seconds short, so I am going to recognize
myself for the first 5 minutes of questioning and direct my
question to you.
You made reference several times in your written testimony
to the August time frame. What happens in August that this time
frame is of such concern that we need to do something about it
in this amendment that we are looking at?
Ms. Jones. On August 11 of this year the lead standard for
substrate will drop to 100 parts per million, and under the
current interpretation of the statute that will have immediate
effect at the retail level, meaning it will really be
retroactively applied to products that are on the retail
shelves that are being built right now as we speak. And that
has a devastating effect on product planning and as I testified
a few minutes ago and as we have submitted data to the CPSC,
the 100-parts-per-million standard is technically not feasible
right now for the bicycle industry to meet.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. And you also state that ``except
in the rarest of circumstances, new government standards should
apply prospectively to products that are manufactured after the
effective date of the standard.'' Can you give us examples of
circumstances in which new standards have been applied
immediately and retroactively? And how do those examples differ
from the instance we have before us?
Ms. Jones. Well, the best example is the one we were just
discussion of the 100 parts per million, which will apply
immediately on August 11, not to products built after that date
but to products on retail shelves as of that date, the same
process applied when the 300 parts per million standard took
effect in 2009. And it had the same effect and disruptive
effect at the retail level.
This is not the norm for product regulation in other
government agencies where normally--even at the CPSC as well--
normally, manufacturers are given lead time to plan for the new
regulation, to redesign their products, to absorb the costs in
a more orderly fashion, and to work out their inventory so that
products sold after the effective date reach retail shelves in
a compliant fashion. That is the proper, orderly way to
regulate products for safety improvement, not to disrupt the
market with these very abrupt changes that do not permit that
kind of orderly transition.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. Ms. Cox----
Ms. Cox. Could I make a brief comment there?
Mrs. Bono Mack. No, I would like to move on. I have limited
time and I do have a question for you, though. And you do
mention that the FDA's warning about lunchboxes containing lead
claiming that FDA interpreted CPSC's data differently than CPSC
itself. How many lunchbox recalls did FDA order after it
reviewed CPSC's data?
Ms. Cox. This happened a long time ago but my recollection
is there were not recalls but just a warning letter sent to
lunchbox manufacturers telling them to fix the problem.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I guess you mentioned this in your
testimony that your discussion of lunchboxes suggests that FDA
would disapprove of a risk-based lead standard and insist on a
total lead content standard, but in fact they don't have any
total content standard for lead, do they?
Ms. Cox. I actually think the example of the lunchboxes
shows that, you know, one of the big advantages of the total
content standard, it provides a clear, consistent number which
manufacturers, retailers, regulators, everybody knows what the
threshold is. I mean one of the issues with the lunchboxes was
that it occurred pre-CPSIA, and so different agencies
interpreted the results of the risk-based testing in different
ways. And what we have now with CPSIA is a clear standard and
lunchboxes all across the country--I have tested a lot of them
over the last couple of years, and they are great.
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right----
Ms. Cox. They comply with the standards.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. Ms. Millar, why isn't a total
lead standard as health-protective as an exposure-based
standard?
Ms. Millar. The risk to a child or to any consumer is based
on actual handling and use. One of the assumptions that is
incorrect that is underlying CPSIA is the notion that 100
percent of lead and substrate will migrate out of the product.
That is actually not true and the CPSC's own data demonstrates
that actual migration rates are generally very low, even in
worst-case, 24-hour acid ingestion test conditions. That is why
we think that total content--and I think Mr. Howell expressed
it this morning--can be useful as a benchmark screen, but
absolute limits that ban products that actually don't result in
exposure of the sort that Mr. Vitrano and Ms. Jones talked
about this morning do serve to essentially ban products that
are objectively safe because they don't result in significant
harmful exposure to the consumer who is handling the product.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. Mr. Butterfield, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much. Let me go to you if I
can, Ms. Cox. In your testimony you state that exposure
assessment testing is a subjective process, open to
interpretation and manipulation. Is that a fair
characterization of your statement, that it is subjective as
opposed to objective?
Ms. Cox. It is definitely subjective, yes.
Mr. Butterfield. All right. And the gentlelady on the first
panel, Dr. Beck, testified and supports the risk assessment,
seems to provide support for your view as well. Her written
testimony that she submitted indicates that assessing risk is
highly contextual and hinges on a number of factors.
Dr. Beck testified that you would want to know a lot of
different things. You would want to know what the product is,
how frequently a child interacts with the product, the duration
of the interaction, will the child likely bite or suck on the
product, will the child touch the component, how large an area
the child will touch, and so forth and so on. That is about
seven separate pieces of information that Dr. Beck identified.
And I can add a couple more. How old is the child and in what
stage of development is that particular child? What is the
nutritional status of the child? Does the child have certain
genetic traits that will lead to greater absorption? And so
forth. It seems to me that perhaps the only person who could
know all of these things and come up with that type of risk
assessment would be someone who is superhuman.
Let me start with one simple question. Is it correct that
with a lead content limit, a manufacturer or a retailer only
has to know the answer to one simple question, how much total
lead is in the component?
Ms. Cox. Yes, that is correct. And just to reinforce what I
said earlier. That allows the manufacturer or anyone in the
supply chain to specify to their suppliers the type of material
that they need.
Mr. Butterfield. Dr. Beck also in her testimony asserted
that a standard based on soluble lead is generally preferable
to a standard based on total lead. And as I understand it,
total lead is a measure of how much lead is in a component,
period. This is the measure required by the legislation.
Solubility, on the other hand, refers to the amount of lead
released from a component under certain specified conditions.
Is it correct, Ms. Cox, that the conditions for measuring
solubility are not consistent? That is they could choose to
vary the time, temperature, and the solution that is used,
whether to agitate the solution and so on. Would you elaborate
on that, please?
Ms. Cox. I think I could just say that I have actually
heard people in the laboratory and testing industry say that if
something complicated like a solubility test or other exposure-
based testing was required that there actually wouldn't be lab
capacity enough to be able to do these tests because they are
so much more complicated and time consuming than a simple test
for lead content.
Mr. Butterfield. Will changing even one of these conditions
affect the amount of lead that will be released during the
test?
Ms. Cox. I think--yes, I am not a lab specialist but that
is my understanding, yes.
Mr. Butterfield. All right. My next question is--I guess I
have time to do it. Let me try this. In your testimony, Ms.
Cox, you point out that a total lead content limit allows
companies to specify materials that meet the standards when
contracting with suppliers. If I understand you correctly, a
manufacturer can tell his or her metal supplier, I want to buy
metal from you but only metal that contains no more than 300
parts per million and a supplier would be able to easily fill
that order as specified. Could you respond?
Ms. Cox. Correct. In the exposure-based testing you can't
do until the product is completed, so that would happen at the
very end of the manufacturing process, whereas with the total
content, you can specify the content of all the materials and
components that are used in a product. So it allows you to do
it sort of pre-manufacture rather than having to potentially
reject a product after it is already made.
Mr. Butterfield. All right. All right, Madam Chairman, I
yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Butterfield. And now I would
like to recognize Ms. Blackburn for her 5 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you so much. And thank you all for
your patience today.
Ms. Cox, I enjoyed listening to your testimony and
especially that you used Curious George. I have got a 3-year-
old and a 2-year-old grandchild and that is one of their
favorites. Let me ask you something. Do you find more lead in
products that we import or products that are domestically
manufactured?
Ms. Cox. I think probably everybody here is aware that
virtually all the products on the shelves of major national
retailers are products that are not made in this country. So,
you know, when we find products that exceed CPSIA limits, it is
not surprising that that is also true.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. In listening to your testimony and the
testimony of others, it has been kind of curious--and Mr.
Vitrano and Ms. Jones, I will ask you. With motorcycles and
bicycles, do you all find more lead in those that we import or
those that are domestically produced?
Mr. Vitrano. All the major manufacturers of ATVs actually
produce many of the models in the U.S. itself.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. Vitrano. Some models are made by those companies from
outside the U.S. and----
Mrs. Blackburn. Well, maybe that they are domestically
produced is one of the reasons we have less lead in a wipe test
than in a glass of water. Ms. Jones, bicycles?
Ms. Jones. Most children's bicycles are not made in this
country any longer.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. And so you don't see that as being
pertinent to what you all do?
Ms. Jones. We do not see that as being pertinent.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. That is fine. You know, I have wondered
if maybe since we have driven manufacturing out of this country
is one of the reasons we are here having this hearing today and
talking about the amount of metals that are there and some of
the environmental litigation that has been brought forward and
has driven manufacturing away from our shores. Maybe that is
one of the reasons that we are here.
And I know, Ms. Cox, that the Center for Environmental
Health uses litigation quite frequently under California's Prop
65 warning requirements. And I know that you all do some work
and wanted to ask you, do you all get a bounty for identifying
violations under Prop 65 labeling laws?
Ms. Cox. Proposition 65, for those of you who don't know,
was a ballot initiative in California in 1986----
Mrs. Blackburn. Yes, but you identify violations under
that, so do you all get a bounty?
Ms. Cox. The statute, as passed by the voters, provides for
if the statute is violated, there are civil penalties that are
paid to the State----
Mrs. Blackburn. Yes, I have got some of them in front of
me----
Ms. Cox [continuing]. And the plaintiffs who identify the
violation is entitled to 25 percent of those civil penalties.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. So I have got an exhibit in front of me
that identifies some of these. So if one type of fashion
accessory listed above is checked, it would be $45,000 in that
identification. So you all would get 25 percent of that if you
identified those.
Ms. Cox. 25 percent of the civil penalties.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. All right. So 25 of the 45,000. So, OK,
is this a funding revenue stream for your organization?
Ms. Cox. My organization has a diverse source of revenue.
Like most nonprofit organizations, we receive grants from
foundations. We also have a strong committed group of
individual supporters who support us financially. And then we
do get some money from our litigation as well.
Mrs. Blackburn. Is that with the Lexington Law Group? Is
that under a consent decree?
Ms. Cox. Could you repeat the question? Sorry.
Mrs. Blackburn. I said is that with the Lexington Law
Group, your litigation? OK. Let us move on. So then you get
some money that comes to you through identifying these
violations and most of the product, I guess, that you are
looking at is things that are imported and they are on the
shelves of major retailers, is that correct?
Ms. Cox. Yes.
Mrs. Blackburn. And how many lawsuits have you partnered
with the Lexington Law Group?
Ms. Cox. Let us see. There were a lot of questions there.
Mrs. Blackburn. Yes, let me help you out with this. My time
is nearly out. What I would like to know--and you can submit in
writing--I would like to know what percentage of your funding
relates to litigation. I would like to know how many lawsuits
you have partnered with the Lexington Law Group. And I would
like to know how much money you have made, what your revenue
stream is from Prop 65 lawsuits in violations since the passage
of CPSIA. And with that, Madam Chairman, I yield back the
balance of my time.
Ms. Cox. Yes, I think it probably would be best for me to
provide that information in writing since it is a lot of
numbers.
Mrs. Blackburn. Yes, ma'am, I was asking for it in writing.
Ms. Cox. I would be happy to do that.
Mrs. Blackburn. For the record.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. The chair is happy to recognize
Mr. Pompeo for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Following up on Ms.
Blackburn, would you submit all of the sources of funding for
your organization when you put that in writing to us, not only
that that you get for Prop 65 but other sources for funding for
the center, the CEH?
Ms. Cox. Yes, I would be happy to.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you.
Ms. Cox. And just to clarify, the work that I talked about
in my testimony, monitoring for CPSIA compliance, that money
came from the California Department of Justice, California
Attorney General.
Mr. Pompeo. So governmentally funded, is that right?
Ms. Cox. Sorry?
Mr. Pompeo. Government funding from the State of
California?
Ms. Cox. It went through a private foundation but the
source of the money was the attorney general's office.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you. Ms. Millar, this is fascinating to
me. I am new here. This is all very fascinating. You, on the
other hand, you get paid by your clients and you are here today
trying to avoid them paying you by reducing the regulatory
burden. I find that fascinating to see the charitable effort
you are making here today. Yes, no, I truly meant it that way.
I meant it as a compliment.
Ms. Jones, you said that you have a problem with metal
alloys in the bicycle industry?
Ms. Jones. Yes, sir.
Mr. Pompeo. Why do you use metal? Just why don't you stop
using it?
Ms. Jones. Metal alloys add a great deal of important value
to bicycles. They help the bicycle be corrosion-resistant, they
help them be strong and durable, and we really couldn't make
bicycles without them.
Mr. Pompeo. So there is no substitute?
Ms. Jones. Well, no, that is not true. There are
substitutes, for example, carbon fiber. Some very high-end
racing bikes for adults are made of carbon fiber but they would
be way too expensive----
Mr. Pompeo. But I am not going to buy that for my son?
Ms. Jones. You are not going to buy that. It would be too
expensive.
Mr. Pompeo. Yes. Yes, my son might like it but I am not
going to buy it.
Ms. Jones. There is no affordable, practical substitute.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you. That is what I figured. We were
talking before about these different tests. Mr. Butterfield,
Ms. Cox, asked you about some different tests and you said boy,
the testing would just be really hard. He was describing these
testing would be very difficult, soluble, non-soluble, it would
be really hard and inconsistent. Is that right? And so you then
said yes, that would be hard, so let us just take a simpler
test that probably doesn't really accomplish what we are trying
to do. So it is a proxy at best. The perfect testing would be
hard and difficult so what everybody defaults to is this simple
test that really doesn't get to the true risk of exposure to a
consumer of a product. Did I understand your response
correctly?
Ms. Cox. I would prefer to phrase it as----
Mr. Pompeo. I am sure you would.
Ms. Cox [continuing]. The goal----
Mr. Pompeo. I would prefer if you would not rephrase it but
simply answer my question.
Ms. Cox. The goal of CPSIA was to remove a toxic metal from
children's products. And there had been a long history prior to
CPSIA of risk-based approaches not being successful, and the
lead content standard has been very successful at changing the
marketplace and getting lead out of these products.
Mr. Pompeo. I have no doubt. And banning lots of things
would make them successful, too. We can always create a test
that is over-inclusive and solve a problem. But as you can see
from Ms. Jones' comment earlier, we create another one. My son
doesn't get to exercise on his bicycle. Ms. Millar, do you have
a view on the testing that Mr. Butterfield asked Ms. Cox about?
Ms. Millar. Yes. As I said earlier--and I think Mr. Howell
alluded to this as well this morning in his testimony--the
ability to use total content as screening is an important tool.
There is no question about it. And I think it is true that
people do try to target where they can meet a certain limit. It
does help in the supply chain. It is not true that total lead
tests are always uniform and never varied. We see a lot of
different variability in total content test. And I think the
problem becomes that when you establish an absolute ban, what
we have seen for bikes, for ATVs, for certain, you know,
pearlized buttons, for example, have agents in them that are
metallic, you can have violations of total content limits where
objectively applying standard accepted procedures that the CPSC
uses, whether it is a wipe test, a saline test to mimic
mouthing, which is a 6-hour-test procedure--they have an
established procedure--or their updated 24-hour acid exposure
test, you can establish whether or not that product is going to
pose a risk. And so the manufacturers are going to always
target to some objective limit where they can. The problem is
that you are going to ban them where they exceed it where there
is not a risk.
Mr. Pompeo. It makes sense. I have got one more question,
just 20 seconds. Mr. Vitrano, Ms. Jones, have any of you had
any experience responding to a CPS database complaint at this
point? There has only been a month. Have any of you had
experience responding to----
Ms. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Pompeo. How did it go?
Ms. Jones. We still have a couple in process but, you know,
it is certainly something that people pay attention to. They
take it seriously. In no case, however, has a client to date
had a materially inaccurate incident report submitted to them.
Mr. Pompeo. But they have had to spend a bunch of money
talking to you? Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman and recognize the
distinguished chairman emeritus, Mr. Dingell, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dingell. Madam Chairman, thank you. The questions are
to all witnesses and I would very much appreciate it if they
would be answered yes or no.
First of all, beginning with Ms. Cox, are you aware of a
uniform reasonable methodology in use by manufacturers of
children's products to find what is the amount of lead in a
product? Yes or no?
Ms. Cox. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Ma'am, Ms. Millar?
Ms. Millar. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. And you, sir?
Mr. Vitrano. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Ma'am?
Ms. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. OK. Now, is it possible the ambiguity of the
term ``reasonable methodology'' could lead to a wide variance
in test results across manufacturers of similar products? Yes
or no? Ms. Cox?
Ms. Cox. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Ms. Millar?
Ms. Millar. No.
Mr. Dingell. Sir?
Mr. Vitrano. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. Ma'am?
Ms. Jones. No, we are not seeing that.
Mr. Dingell. The next question, if it wouldn't lead to a
variance, do you believe that this could pose a risk to the
health of the children who use such products? Yes or no? In
other words----
Ms. Cox. I don't think I am able to answer that question.
Mr. Dingell [continuing]. Is that variance going to put the
children at risk? Well----
Ms. Cox. Well, certainly, we need consistent testing.
Mr. Dingell. Ms. Millar?
Ms. Millar. I don't see the variability, so my answer is
no.
Mr. Dingell. And you, sir?
Mr. Vitrano. It would depend on the variability.
Mr. Dingell. Ma'am?
Ms. Jones. And we are not seeing the variability.
Mr. Dingell. Ms. Cox, do you want to take another shot at
it? All right. We will go to the next set of questions because
time is very limited here.
We have the term ``accredited third-party conformity
assessment bodies.'' I assume that this includes both domestic
and international bodies that would do this kind of testing? Am
I correct? Yes or no, Ms. Cox?
Ms. Cox. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Ms. Millar?
Ms. Millar. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Sir, if you please?
Mr. Vitrano. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Ma'am?
Ms. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. All right. Now, if so, how many such
assessment bodies are there worldwide? I don't expect you to
know but give me a shot in the dark, the best count you can
give. How many do you think there are? Ms. Cox?
Ms. Cox. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. Ms. Millar?
Ms. Millar. A couple of hundred, I believe.
Mr. Dingell. Sir?
Mr. Vitrano. For youth model ATVs there currently is 1.
Mr. Dingell. Ma'am?
Ms. Jones. For bicycles there are only two in the U.S. and
about a half-dozen outside of the U.S.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you, my friends. Does the Commission
have the resources with which to verify the testing capacity of
all of these third-party conformity assessment bodies? Yes or
no? Ms. Cox?
Ms. Cox. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. Ms. Millar?
Ms. Millar. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. Sir?
Mr. Vitrano. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. Ma'am?
Ms. Jones. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. Now, is it your understanding of the draft
legislation that the Commission would have to accredit all
third-party conformity assessment bodies? Yes or no?
Ms. Cox. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. In other words, would they have discretion
under the legislation to decide who they would accredit and how
and why they would accredit? Yes or no?
Ms. Cox. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. Ma'am?
Ms. Millar. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. Sir?
Mr. Vitrano. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. Ma'am?
Ms. Jones. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. All right. Now, in summary, do you believe
that the effect of these requirements would be that the
Commission would seldom, if ever, require third-party testing
of children's products? Yes or no?
Ms. Cox. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. Ma'am?
Ms. Millar. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. Sir?
Mr. Vitrano. No.
Mr. Dingell. Ma'am?
Ms. Jones. No.
Mr. Dingell. Now, here are some questions about the
database which are troubling us. And everybody, I think, is
troubled. Is it your understanding that CPSIA requires all
information submitted to the consumer complaint database to be
published online within 10 days of its receipt, regardless of
the accuracy of the information? Yes or no? Ms. Cox?
Ms. Cox. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. Ms. Millar?
Ms. Millar. Yes.
Mr. Vitrano. Yes.
Ms. Jones. Generally, yes.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you. Now, should a manufacturer be given
the opportunity to contest the accuracy of a consumer complaint
before it is published? Yes or no? Ms. Cox, please? What is
your opinion, just your best judgment on the matter, please?
Ms. Cox. These questions are outside my expertise.
Mr. Dingell. All right. Then I will not press you on it,
ma'am. Ms. Millar?
Ms. Millar. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Vitrano?
Mr. Vitrano. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Ms. Jones?
Ms. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. All right. Now, if a manufacturer is allowed
to dispute the accuracy of the information in a consumer's
complaint, how should the dispute be resolved and by whom? If
you please, Ms. Cox?
Ms. Cox. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. Ms. Millar?
Ms. Millar. I think the CPSC should resolve the inaccuracy
before posting the complaint to the database.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Vitrano?
Mr. Vitrano. CPSC should resolve it before posting.
Mr. Dingell. Ms. Jones?
Ms. Jones. CPSC should resolve it before posting.
Mrs. Bono Mack. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Dingell. I thank you, Madam Chairman. I have one more
great question. Could I ask unanimous consent to ask it,
please?
Mrs. Bono Mack. Yes, without objection.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you. The draft legislation amends CPSIA
to permit only persons directly harmed by a consumer product,
their family, their legal representative, or another person
authorized on their behalf to submit a complaint to the
database. Previously, CPSIA permitted anyone to submit
complaints about a consumer product. Do you believe that the
draft legislation's narrowing of eligibility to submit the
complaints is necessary? Yes or no?
Ms. Cox. Not necessary.
Mr. Dingell. OK. Ms. Millar.
Ms. Millar. Necessary.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Vitrano?
Mr. Vitrano. Yes, it is necessary.
Mr. Dingell. Ms. Jones?
Ms. Jones. Yes, it is necessary.
Mr. Dingell. Madam Chairman, you have been most courteous.
May I have an additional unanimous consent request? I have a
splendid statement that I have labored long and hard on.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I have nothing but fondness and admiration
for the distinguished chairman, but we still have another
member and another panel to go and votes on the floor. So I
will----
Mr. Dingell. I am not delaying----
Mr. Butterfield. Madam Chair----
Mr. Dingell [continuing]. Madam, I have a statement I would
like to put in the record.
Mr. Butterfield. Whenever the chairman emeritus talks like
that, he has a pleasant surprise for us. I would ask unanimous
consent to yield to the chairman emeritus.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you very much. No, it is just a
statement that I want to put in the record, Madam.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Of course. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Dingell. And I do thank my good friend for his kindness
to me. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. And reminder, I am new at this
chairmanship, so I appreciate the kindness of the distinguished
chairman emeritus but will recognize Dr. Cassidy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cassidy. I don't know. I am sorry. I was out when you
all were making testimony so I don't know if anyone can address
what I am about to ask. As I look at the epidemiology of lead
poisoning, it seems to be not generally distributed, but it
seems to be in certain populations. Those which are recent
immigrants, for example, appear to have a disproportionate
amount of lead toxicity. And in fact I was looking at something
from a hospital in Los Angeles that found even within the
Hispanic community there, there was three ZIP codes which were
particularly impoverished ZIP codes in which there was even
more. Now, assuming that toys are generally distributed but
that the people who have problems with lead toxicity are
concentrated in certain areas, it suggested to me that the
culprit for those children who have increased lead, it may be
geographic or related to how recently they came from another
country without standards than it is almost anything else.
I toss that out not knowing if anyone can answer that or if
these are just musings. Anybody want to take a crack at that?
Ms. Cox. I will take a crack at it. Exposure to old lead-
based paint in homes is the primary source of lead exposure to
children, and that has been the case for several decades.
Current statistics are about 70 percent of elevated blood lead
levels in children are caused by exposure to paint. The other
30 percent are not. Further----
Mr. Cassidy. Now, wait. I am sorry. Just so I understand,
so if you have a blood level of 100, just to pick a number,
does that mean that 70 percent of that 100 is related to paint
exposure and 30 percent to another environmental factor or does
it mean that 70 percent of the children that have elevated lead
levels have it due to paint?
Ms. Cox. 70 percent of the children with elevated blood
lead levels, they are able to trace back that exposure to
paint.
Mr. Cassidy. So the 30 percent, is that those for whom no
point source can be identified or those for whom another point
source is identified?
Ms. Cox. In general, when there is a child with an elevated
blood lead level, there is a huge effort to identify the
source. So the number of unidentified ones is really small.
Mr. Cassidy. And so again, as I look at this concentration
among recent immigrants, it suggests to me that recent
immigrant status is a separate factor. I did my medical
residency in Los Angeles and we used to see all these diseases
from other countries in Los Angeles, very odd diseases that we
wouldn't see in Washington, D.C., for example, even though this
is also a place of immigrants. So I guess to what is the impact
of immigrant status? Is there exposure to lead that is
occurring south of the border that we are importing?
Ms. Cox. I am not aware of any statistics about immigrant
status and lead exposure. I do know that because the
deteriorating paint is a factor, you know, living in older
housing or housing----
Mr. Cassidy. OK, I got that.
Ms. Cox [continuing]. That is not well-maintained----
Mr. Cassidy. The 30 percent of folks for whom paint is not
a factor--and I should know this but I have been trying to
track it down and I apologize--what percent of those have a
point source identified and what are those point sources?
Ms. Cox. The point sources tend to be lead in soil, lead in
water, and then lead in various kinds of consumer products.
Mr. Cassidy. What, for example?
Ms. Cox. Examples of consumer products?
Mr. Cassidy. With lead that have been identified as a risk
for children.
Ms. Cox. Jewelry, toys, there is some lead-containing
makeup that has been a problem. There is lead-containing
foodware that has been a problem----
Mr. Cassidy. I assume that some of this, though, must be
older stuff. I mean I can remember playing with lead when I was
a kid. Obviously, my mother didn't care for me. I am assuming
that much of what is now available with or without these
regulations that lead is gone. Is that a fair statement? I am
looking at all of you all now because I can only imagine that
my pencil that I used to chew on in third grade probably had
lead in it.
Ms. Cox. The regulation of lead over the last 40 years has
been, you know, one of the country's greatest public health
successes. So removing lead from paint, removing lead from
gasoline, and then removing lead from other consumer products
has had a dramatic reduction in the number of children with
elevated blood lead levels. The goal of CDC was to get that
level to 0 by 2010. It hasn't quite happened but----
Mr. Cassidy. And if it is true that immigrants are the
cause of a lot of this, it will never happen. I just say that
because our tuberculosis problem will never go to 0 as long as
we have people immigrating from Mexico because it is just
endemic there. I am just trying to understand to what degree
can we attribute products, you know, toys for this as opposed
to everything else? Thank you for your time. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman and that concludes
the panel. And I would like to thank Ms. Cox and Ms. Millar,
Mr. Vitrano, and Ms. Jones for your time and testimony today.
And I am sure we will be working together in the future on
refining this legislation.
Mr. Butterfield. Madam Chairman, may I be recognized before
the panel leaves?
Mrs. Bono Mack. Yes.
Mr. Butterfield. Earlier Ms. Blackburn requested Ms. Cox,
if she would furnish financial information for her nonprofit
organization, and at first I had a little heartburn about that,
but after I thought about it, it is an appropriate request. It
goes to her credibility as a witness today. As a former judge I
guess I should know that. But I was wondering if it would be
appropriate to ask the other three witnesses if they would
similarly furnish the sources of their revenue for their
organizations that they represent.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Well, I will remind the gentleman that you
can submit any question you would like to any witness and that
you have 10 days to do so and remind the gentleman also that
Members of Congress are allowed to ask any question that they
would like of any witness and again remind you that you have
that prerogative to do that in writing to the witnesses. And
with that, again, if the gentleman will yield back.
Mr. Butterfield. He will. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the panelists again and would call
for the third panel if we can get seated. We are going to have
votes shortly on the floor so we would love to get started and
see how much progress we can make. So a short break and then we
will roll into the third panel.
Thank you. That was a quick transition. Thank you, staff.
So now the third panel, I would like to thank you all very much
for being here. We have the final four witnesses. First up, we
have Frederick Locker of Locker, Greenberg, and Brainin, P.C.
Our next witness is Charles Samuels of Mintz, Levin, Cohn,
Ferris, Glovsky, and Popeo, P.C. Also testifying will be Dan
Marshall, Vice President of the Handmade Toy Alliance. And our
fourth panelist today is Rachel Weintraub, Director of Product
Safety and Senior Counsel for the Consumer Federation of
America. Welcome everybody. You know the drill, 5 minutes, and
you know where the lights are so we are going to begin, Mr.
Samuels, with your 5 minutes. Thank you and welcome.

STATEMENTS OF CHARLES A. SAMUELS, MEMBER, MINTZ, LEVIN, COHN,
FERRIS, GLOVSKY, AND POPEO, P.C.; FREDERICK LOCKER, LOCKER,
GREENBERG, AND BRAININ, P.C.; DAN MARSHALL, VICE PRESIDENT,
HANDMADE TOY ALLIANCE, AND CO-OWNER, PEAPODS NATURAL TOYS AND
BABY CARE; AND RACHEL WEINTRAUB, DIRECTOR OF PRODUCT SAFETY AND
SENIOR COUNSEL, CONSUMER FEDERATION OF AMERICA

STATEMENT OF CHARLES A. SAMUELS

Mr. Samuels. Thank you, Chair Bono Mack, and members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I have
the privilege of serving as general counsel of the Association
of Home Appliance Manufacturers, as well as representing
companies on product safety matters.
I support a fully resourced, focused, and effective
Commission with the tools to protect Americans from unsafe
products. I supported the revamping of the federal product
safety laws and I respect the hardworking and dedicated
officials at the Commission. Unfortunately, parts of the law
are overreaching, over-prescription, and distort the Agency's
mission to the detriment of consumers and industry. The
discussion draft makes great strides towards remedying the
imbalances and deficiencies in the current law without doing
violence to the core public policies.
I will focus on the database provision. Technology should
be used to disseminate good and easily accessible information
to consumers about product safety. It makes no sense, however,
for so much of the resources of the Commission to be invested
in this effort unless it provides useful and accurate
information to the extent feasible. We cannot expect
perfection, but we now have a database that can be manipulated
for purposes other than that intended. Vague, useless, and
incorrect information can be placed online. This not only harms
manufacturers, retailers, and importers, but harms consumers
who receive bad information and cannot focus on truly unsafe
products. Discrete changes can be made to the law, which will
greatly improve the operation, utility, and fairness of the
program.
First, the intent of the law is that posted reports of harm
will come from those who suffer the harm, their family and
legal and medical representatives. The database should not be a
platform for manufacturers, trade associations, trial lawyers,
or consumer groups who are trying to make policy points or
enhance their economic status.
I support the tighter definition of ``consumers'' to
restrict it to the persons who actually suffer the harm related
to the use of the product and their representatives. I also
support revising the term ``public safety entities'' that make
clear that you are referring to public safety officials.
The requirement that the Commission ascertain the location
and availability of a product is important for the manufacturer
to evaluate the complaint or for the Commission to look further
at the allegations. The Commission also should know the
identity of the person who allegedly was harmed.
A major deficiency of the database is the agency decision
to publish the report regardless of whether a good faith,
substantial claim of material inaccuracy has been submitted but
has not been resolved within 10 days. This is unfair, a lack of
due process and absolutely not what we should be expecting from
our Federal Government. We have great freedom in this country
to blog and publicly report bout almost anything without much
legal restriction, but the government should show more prudence
and responsibility.
The draft properly provides that if a manufacturer claims a
material inaccuracy and the Commission determines that the
claim is ``potentially valid,'' the Commission must resolve
that inaccuracy before posting by communicating with the
reporter, investigating the incident, or providing the
manufacturer a reasonable period of time to investigate. This
does not need to be a lengthy process. It is likely the vast
majority of database reports will receive little or no response
and, at most, there will be a response suitable to be placed on
the database along with the consumer report. But in those cases
where a company has gone to the trouble to evaluate and provide
proof that a report is materially inaccurate, that ought to be
resolved before the report is posted. Once it is posted,
pulling it from the database later is of very limited utility
and great harm can be done.
The existing database also is deficient in that it allows
reports which are so unspecific as to a particular model that
the information is useless, even deceptive. I support the
language in the discussion draft that a manufacturer may
respond that the report is insufficient for determining which
of its products are the basis of the complaint and that that
must be determined before the complaint is posted.
The present 10-day limitation for companies to evaluate and
respond to a report and the Commission to resolve any issues is
extraordinarily short and unreasonable. Even well-organized
companies will have difficulty dealing with this time frame.
Therefore, I recommend that the 10 days be increased to at
least 15 days, which will have no material impact on the timing
of postings or the value of the database.
Also, there is an indication that the Commission may be
limiting its review of material inaccuracy only to those
situations where there has been a misidentification of the
product. That is definitely not the extent of material
inaccuracy. The Commission's regulations state that material
inaccuracy includes all relevant facts which significantly
impact a consumer's decision on whether to purchase a product
and that includes causation.
Congress should make clear to the Commission that second-
and third-hand reports do not constitute reports of harm
eligible for the database. And simple consumer complaints of
dissatisfaction about the quality or performance of the product
which are not safety-related should not be posted.
I hope that these comments are helpful. I would be pleased
to answer your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Samuels follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. Briefly, we are going to go
through Mr. Locker and then we are going to run to vote. So 5
minutes, Mr. Locker, please.

STATEMENT OF FREDERICK LOCKER

Mr. Locker. OK. Thank you. And I will try to make sure you
don't waggle the gavel.
Chairman Bono Mack, Vice Chairman Butterfield, members of
the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you on this important subject matter of practical,
commonsense solutions--and I emphasize ``solutions''--to
unintended consequences involved in the implementation of the
Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act of 2008, or as it has
been come to be known as CPSIA.
Now, our firm works as safety counsel to the Craft and
Hobby Association, Toy Industry Association, Juvenile Product
Manufacturers Association, Halloween Industry Association,
apparel makers, publishers and retailers. And for better and
for worse, we have had a lot of experience in the last 2\1/2\
years with the problems with implementation of the law.
Now, we have been involved in developing product safety
standards over many decades and we have also worked in
collaboration with many foundations and consumer organizations
to advocate the need for uniform product safety standards and
initiatives, both in the United States and globally. We keenly
recognize that sometimes in this rush to regulate, attention
may be focused on relatively small risks associated with
products while some very big risks remain unappreciated and
unaddressed. In a world where perception is reality, where
misinformation often drives perception, and where new, scary,
and uncertain hazards can receive enormous amounts of attention
very quickly, it is important to understand context for
managing children's risks and for regulating them.
We understand, however, that there is no more important
theme than protecting our population of consumers and in
particular our children. As much work as we all do, there is
always room for improvement in this regard. We may not always
agree with everyone appearing before you today on how to
achieve our common goals, but we always stand willing, ready,
and able to work with everyone for the betterment of children's
lives.
Now, in the past appearances before this committee, we have
supported the legislative initiatives, including the concepts
embodied in CPSIA. However, to the extent that implementation
of provisions have resulted in regulations that depart from
sensible risk-based decision-making, it has become clear to all
involved on both sides of the aisle that Congress needs to act
to restore a commonsense regulatory framework. The CPSC has
strained under the burden, but despite admonitions from
Congress that the agency was empowered with discretion to
implement practical commonsense regulations on at least five or
six separate occasions in the past, the Commission in a
bipartisan fashion has readily acknowledged, as it has today,
that its discretion has been limited without statutory changes.
CPSIA adopted an unduly prescriptive regime and as often
happens, Congress can act with a sledgehammer instead of a
scalpel when trying to deal with issues. CPSIA adopted a set of
absolute total limits on lead and phthalates. This House body,
I note, didn't even consider the phthalate legislation that was
grafted in the Senate and in conference. These wholesale limits
were coupled with an exemption process that we all had hoped
would work better but had proved to be impractical for lead and
phthalates regulation.
In effect as a result and direct result of that, the stream
of commerce and business suffered significantly as the
imposition of these requirements was further deemed to apply in
a retroactive manner to any previously produced goods entered
into commerce when the laws and step-down levels went into
effect. These confusing and burdensome testing schemes--which
have yet to be fully and clearly enunciated as we sit here
today--have resulted in additional marketplace confusion and
cost.
So let me share just a few of the comments and proposals on
the law that is before us today. Our comments are for the
record--but in terms of the budget, it is clear that an era of
restrained budgets and limited resources, the CPSC will need to
allocate funds based upon risk/hazard analysis and sound
scientific principles. In terms of lead, Congress recognized
this approach when they adopted as a regulatory requirement,
for example, the toy safety standard ASTM F-963 to which
Congressman Schakowsky referenced. That standard, by the way,
is a soluble migratable standard. It is not a total limits
standard and has proved to be remarkably effective both in the
United States--which is why Congress adopted it--Europe, and
the rest of the world.
Exemptions for certain materials have been adopted by the
CPSC but they have not gone far enough. So we favor the types
of processes that have been adopted and proposed in the draft
resolution in phthalates. In terms of phthalates, they need to
have an inaccessibility recognized. There needs to be action on
the Chronic Hazard Advisory Panel when they come to conclusions
that action has to be quick.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Locker follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. That is the red light and we have to run to
the floor for a vote. And we will recess and reconvene
immediately following the last vote in the series.
Mr. Locker. OK. Sorry.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I don't have the time. I tried last time
and I was off by 20 minutes. So immediately following the last
vote, we will return. We have a five-vote series.
Mr. Locker. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mrs. Bono Mack. We are ready to begin. So we left off with
Mr. Marshall and so we will recognize you for your 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAN MARSHALL

Mr. Marshall. Thank you very much. Hello. My name is Dan
Marshall. I am the founder and vice president of the Handmade
Toy Alliance. The HTA represents 644 small businesses affected
by the unintended consequences of the Consumer Product Safety
Improvement Act. I would like to mention also that we receive
no outside funding whatsoever. We are funded entirely by our
members and some small donations that folks have made along the
way. We are kind of a shoestring operation.
My wife and I own Peapods Natural Toy Store in St. Paul,
Minnesota. I am here today with my daughter Abigail and fellow
HTA Board members Rob Wilson of Challenge and Fun in
Massachusetts and Randy Hertzler of euroSource in Pennsylvania.
The HTA began in November of 2008 after I began to
understand how the newly passed CPSIA will decimate the small-
batch manufacturers who supply our store. Since then, I have
been working with hundreds of other small business owners to
save small-batch manufacturers from regulatory burdens of the
CPSIA, the greatest of which is the cost of mandated third-
party testing. These fixed costs, which are easily bourn by
mass-market manufacturers, who make tens of thousands of units
at a time, are simply impossible for small businesses that make
toys, children's clothing and accessories in batches of a few
dozen at a time, often in home-based studios.
These required tests are not limited to lead testing. Toys,
for example, will be subject to mandatory ASTM F-963 testing,
which requires the destruction of multiple units of each toy.
The CPSC's current schedule would mandate ASTM testing as soon
as this October. Unless the CPSIA is reformed, hundreds of
small American toymakers will not survive that date.
Unlike similar product safety legislation such as the Food
Safety Modernization Act, FDA food labeling rules, or
California's Proposition 65, the CPSIA makes no allowances
whatsoever for small businesses, nor does it allow the CPSC any
discretion in how it applies third-party testing requirements
to various types of products. Bicycles, books, hand-knit
sweaters, and wooden toy cars are all tested the same.
As a result, the CPSIA, as it stands now, is basically
unenforceable. Key provisions have been stayed numerous times.
The CPSC is slowly being transformed from a public safety
guardian into an enforcer of procedures and technicalities
dictated by Congress at huge cost. Congressional action has
dramatically undermined the CPSC, an agency which has
effectively protected the American public for almost 40 years.
Meanwhile, we have watched numerous trustworthy businesses
fold because of the CPSIA. Untold others have decided not to
pursue their dreams as toymakers or crafters. We have even
begun to see secondary effects such as the end of Mothering
Magazine, which closed this February after 35 years, citing
reduced ad revenues due to the CPSIA's impact on their
advertisers. If the CPSIA is not amended, hundreds more small
family businesses will perish for no good reason.
Thanks to the work of this committee, we have a way
forward. Our alliance endorses the draft amendment because of
the relief it provides to our members. This bill requires
either an exemption from third-party testing or alternate
testing procedures, such as XRF screening for lead in
substrates, for products that are produced in small quantities.
This is exactly what we have been asking for since the
formation of our organization. Small-batch manufacturers would
be given a safety valve which was originally left out of the
CPSIA.
We desire a thoughtful and measured reform worthy of
meaningful bipartisan discussions. These issues deserve a full
hearing to ensure that a high degree of consumer protection is
maintained. We do not wish to create loopholes that would
benefit the types of irresponsible companies that created the
toy safety scare in the first place.
We urge you to reach out to your colleagues in the Senate
to reach a bipartisan agreement. The CPSIA was the product of a
strong bipartisan effort in 2008 and its reform requires the
same effort. We believe this discussion draft is a suitable
foundation for that discussion. We urge both Houses of Congress
to set aside differences and find a way to see this reform
process through. Our family businesses are watching the process
closely and we are depending on you.
In conclusion, on behalf of our members, I would like to
thank this committee for addressing this important issue and
urge you to quickly pass meaningful reform of the CPSIA. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Marshall follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much. Ms. Weintraub, your 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF RACHEL WEINTRAUB

Ms. Weintraub. Chairman Bono Mack, Ranking Member
Butterfield, Representative Schakowsky, I am Rachel Weintraub,
Director of Product Safety and Senior Counsel for Consumer
Federation of America. I offer this testimony on behalf of CFA
as well as Consumers Union, Kids In Danger, National Research
Center for Women and Families, Union of Concerned Scientists,
and the U.S. Public Interest Research Group. I thank you for
inviting me to testify today.
The CPSIA institutes the most significant improvements to
the Consumer Product Safety Commission since the Agency was
established. The millions of recalls of toys for excessive lead
and tiny powerful magnets, children's jewelry because of high
lead levels, and cribs because of durability problems cause
consumers to question the effectiveness of our Nation's safety
net. The CPSIA has restored consumer confidence by requiring
children's products to be tested for safety by banning lead and
certain phthalates and toys and by creating a publicly
accessible consumer complaint database and authorizing
necessary resources to CPSC.
The consumer community has stated previously that any
changes made to the CPSIA must not weaken product safety
standards and must not weaken public health protections. The
current discussion draft fails this litmus test unfortunately.
This discussion draft is not narrowly tailored, but rather
carves gaping loopholes in the consumer protections created by
the CPSIA. It covers fewer children's products, undermines the
lead and phthalate standards, substantially weakens the third-
party testing requirements, and makes the consumer complaint
database vastly less useful for consumers. I will highlight
some of the most critical provisions of the discussion draft in
my testimony.
We oppose an effort to weaken the scope of the protections
of the CPSIA. The discussion draft implies that only those
products for children of some younger age, we presume, should
be afforded protections by the CPSIA. Congress embraced the
belief that there is a shared toy box, which we know reflects
the reality of what is true in many homes across this country.
School-age children are at risk from lead exposure and from
hazards posed by powerful magnets in toys, for example. If
those toys are not required to meet any lead limit or meet the
standard for magnetic toys, the potential for harm is large.
Further, the voluntary standard for toys, ASTM F-963, covers
toys intended for children under age 14 years of age.
The third-party testing provision of the CPSIA will be
eliminated almost entirely by the discussion draft. Third-party
testing is necessary to confirm compliance with safety rules
and prevents hazards before they enter the marketplace. While
the discussion draft preserves third-party testing for lead in
paint, full-size cribs, non-full-size cribs, pacifiers, small
parts, and children's metal jewelry, the fact that all infant
durable products other than cribs will not be subject to third-
party testing is untenable. And there is even ambiguity about
the crib standard.
The provision makes it very difficult for CPSC to require
third-party testing for other products. The rule-makings
required in this section require a cost analysis while ignoring
the benefits of lives saved, injuries avoided, or healthcare
costs reduced as a result of the testing requirement. And no
time frame is established for these rule-makings. This section
lists products that can never be required to undergo third-
party testing but fails to define them. While we understand
that a narrowly-targeted exemption for third-party testing
provisions may be the only solution for small-batch
manufacturers, the lack of definition and an alternative
testing mechanism to ensure safety makes it impossible to
determine the appropriateness of this relief.
The discussion draft puts babies at risk in childcare
facilities by allowing fixed-side cribs to remain in use if
there is required supervision. Slowly removing the drop-side
cribs misses numerous other hazards that the new crib standard
addresses such as hardware failures, material integrity
problems, mattress support failures, slat hazards, and corner
posts. This provision drastically weakens the consumer
protections of the CPSIA and will keep babies in known unsafe
cribs.
The consumer complaint database will give consumers access
to lifesaving information and will help CPSC to more nimbly
identify and act upon safety hazards. CPSC's rule is responsive
to the public interest needs for disclosure and protective of a
manufacturer's effort to protect their brand and confidential
business information. The database includes more checks on the
information and more opportunities for a manufacturer to
comment than other similar government agency databases.
The discussion draft tips the balance that the database
rule has achieved by limiting who can report to the database,
unnecessarily increasing the types of information consumers
must report before their complaint can be considered for
posting, requires consumers to unwittingly engage in a dialogue
with a manufacturer about the reported harm rather than simply
reporting the incident to the CPSC, stays the reporting of
information until final decisions about the sufficiency and
accuracy of the information are made, and will substantially
increase the time it will take for information to be posted
publicly. This will discourage reporting by consumers to the
database and decrease the utility of this important consumer
protection.
I thank you for your consideration and am happy to take
questions.
[The statement of Ms. Weintraub follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much. All right. The chair
recognizes herself for 5 minutes for the first round of
questions.
And I would like to ask Mr. Marshall, please, would you be
willing to register with the Commission in order to qualify for
this small-batch exemption to the third-party testing
requirements?
Mr. Marshall. I think that would be a fair tradeoff so that
the CPSC would know who the small-batch manufacturers are and
it would be consistent with how the FDA approaches food
labeling laws. So yes.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. And you also mentioned the other
laws that have provisions to accommodate the different
circumstances of small-batch manufacturers. Can you say more
about the approaches that you believe are the best?
Mr. Marshall. Well, the issue with third-party testing is
cost, so I think it makes sense to create exemptions based on
the number of units produced per year. That seems like the most
logical way to us to get at the cost versus the output of a
particular manufacturer.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. Ms. Weintraub, first of all,
your testimony--you and I have not read the legislation at all
in the same way--but you testified that the CPSIA became law as
a result of ``a period of record numbers of recalls of
hazardous products that injured, sickened, or killed
children.'' What I remember most are the lead-in-paint recalls
and no one here will ever argue that lead-in-paint restrictions
should ever be loosened. ``However, the most significant
problems with this bill relate to lead in substrate.'' Putting
aside metal jewelry, again, restrictions for which we do not
intend to loosen, were there any children injured, sickened, or
killed by lead in substrate, and if so, how many and can you
provide verified statistics of those injuries?
Ms. Weintraub. I can't provide verified statistics of those
injuries because many of those injuries are silent. They could
cause--and likely have caused but we just don't know--
neurological impairments, decreases in IQ----
Mrs. Bono Mack. You are saying they are all speculative
injuries that you----
Ms. Weintraub. No, I wouldn't say that they are
speculative----
Mrs. Bono Mack. But they are speculative?
Ms. Weintraub [continuing]. But they are very difficult to
document.
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. And--again, you and I read the
legislation entirely differently--contrary to what you said in
your testimony, the discussion draft does not deprive consumers
of third-party testing. It gives the Commission authority to
decide what should be third-party tested. You know, what I have
heard from the commissioners is that they need a little bit
more common sense, the ability to apply common sense. You
completely disagree with that notion and what I see in the
legislation and what you see are entirely different?
Ms. Weintraub. Well, I am not entirely sure what you see,
but what I see is a system where there is a list of products
that are subject to third-party testing, a list of products
that can never be subject to third-party testing, and then a
very rigorous rule-making without any timelines that is
required in order for other products to be third-party tested.
Mrs. Bono Mack. You are saying that there are products that
can never be tested?
Ms. Weintraub. My understanding was that there is a list in
this discussion draft that includes----
Mrs. Bono Mack. Have you seen the discussion draft?
Ms. Weintraub. Yes, I have seen it.
Mrs. Bono Mack. OK, but your understanding--I am sorry. You
confused me right there. You said your understanding is that--
--
Ms. Weintraub. Well, you are disagreeing with my
interpretation so----
Mrs. Bono Mack. Well, and you disagreed with mine so I----
Ms. Weintraub. Well, the way that I read the discussion
draft is that there are a list of products which are undefined,
products for children with disability, one-of-a-kind products,
works of art, and products manufactured by small-batch
manufacturers that would never be subject to----
Mrs. Bono Mack. Well, nothing is excluded from testing and
the Commission can decide to impose the testing. But just
moving on a little bit to Mr. Samuels.
You state that the Commission has made some unfortunate
interpretations in implementing the database. What
interpretations are you referring to and are they corrected by
this legislation?
Mr. Samuels. Thank you very much. Two very troublesome
interpretations is their unnecessary--in fact, I think really
improper--increase of the number of parties that can make
reports of harm. So that includes trial lawyers; it includes
consumer groups that may not be direct representatives of
someone that is harmed. It is totally improper and your draft
limits it to those people really harmed and their
representatives, which is what the database is supposed to be
all about.
The second thing is a very unfortunate interpretation that
even if a manufacturer has claimed a material inaccuracy in a
report that it isn't even their product, that if the 20-day
clock runs out, they are going to post it anyway, even if they
have failed to resolve it. That is unfair and unnecessary and
your draft does a very good job on dealing with that.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. I just want to finish my last 9
seconds by saying that I believe the database has room for
improvement and we can do all of these things. But I also want
to go on the record that I support the database. I think there
is some consternation from the other side that I don't. But I
think it is very flawed and we should make sure that it serves
both the public and make sure that we continue to make ``made
in America'' matter again. So with that I am happy to recognize
Mr. Butterfield for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Ms. Weintraub,
well, you are probably well aware that the existing law that we
passed a couple of years ago sets clear lines on total lead
content that becomes increasingly stringent over time. The
purpose of decreasing the amount of lead allowed in children's
products over time was to gradually get these products closer
to a total lead level that would not result in at least one
form of neurological damage, and that is the loss of IQ. Some
manufacturers, however, have been complaining ever since the
law went into effect, many of whom were at the table when the
law was being written, that there is no way they can make their
products without certain components that exceed the limits and
that those components don't put children's health at risk.
The discussion draft that we have seen and that you
acknowledge that you have seen attempts to give these
manufacturers relief from the lead content limits. However, it
does so in a very broad and far-reaching way that not only lets
those who claim they need lead for their products to function
properly to exceed the limits, but lets anyone who wants to
continue using lead to do so as long as they are willing to
play a game of risk with children's health.
The de minimis ingestion-based standard in the draft is
available for any component part so long as it isn't a small
part. And there is no consideration of whether lead needs to be
in that particular component.
My question to you is to the extent there is bipartisan
sentiment that Congress should grant manufacturers some form of
relief from the lead content limits, do you agree or disagree
that any such exception must, as a fundamental matter, consider
whether that product needs to have lead in it to function
properly?
Ms. Weintraub. I agree.
Mr. Butterfield. Let me skip over a couple of questions. I
will stay with you if you will. Tucked away at the very end of
the Republican discussion draft is a one-sentence section
regarding the effective date of the amendments in the draft.
Although that section is at the very end and only one sentence
long, what this section says is actually quite important. As I
understand it from my staff, what this sentence says is that
anyone who is currently in compliance with any part of CPSIA
gets a free pass. Would you agree or disagree with that and
would you elaborate for me, please?
Ms. Weintraub. I do agree. I think that provision that you
are referencing is truly retroactive provision of this law. I
think the term ``retroactivity'' as it applies to other lead
standards I think is legally not accurate. But in this case I
think this is true retroactivity. The one sentence actually
states that this draft will go back to the time that the CPSIA
was passed in August of 2008.
Mr. Butterfield. OK. I want to get to the database in the
few seconds that I have left and this is a rather long
question. This is going to be too lengthy for me to complete in
the time allotted, but would you speak to the database that we
rolled out a few weeks ago and tell us your conclusions on it?
Ms. Weintraub. Sure. The consumer complaint database is a
very important consumer protection. It is so important because
consumers have been in the dark about product safety. There is
many incidents that we know about and obviously others that we
couldn't possibly know where consumers were just completely in
the dark, that manufacturers had information about a safety
problem with the product. CPSC may or may not have known and
consumers continued to use the product. They were in the dark.
They were under a veil of ignorance and weren't able to make
the right choices for their families because they just didn't
know about incidents that sometimes were pervasive and affected
many, many people.
So what the database seeks to do is equal this playing
field a little bit. It still requires CPSC to go to
manufacturers outside of the database before they can release
information about particular products. But it requires a very
specific number of fields of information that really narrow the
information so that information has to be very targeted to the
type of harm, a description of the product, and really provide
useful information to consumers.
And unlike other government databases, it provides a place
where manufacturers can comment simultaneously. If you go on
the database today, you will see a consumer filed a comment and
then in the same page the manufacturer files a comment, which
is significant.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman. And the chair now
recognizes Mr. Olson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair, and I thank the witnesses for
your knowledge, for your patience, and your persistence.
And my first question is going to be for you, Ms.
Weintraub. What is more dangerous, a product of 10,000 parts
per million lead that does not leach enough lead to result in a
measurable increase in a child's blood lead level, or a product
that contains 100 parts per million lead that leaches enough
lead to result in a measurable increase in a child's blood lead
level?
Ms. Weintraub. I think it depends on a number of scenarios,
so I am not sure. I could get back to you.
Mr. Olson. OK. So you can't tell me between 10,000 parts
per million or 100 parts per million?
Ms. Weintraub. I think, you know, there is many factors
that go into that sort of analysis. So I would like to review
the information and get back to you if I could.
Mr. Olson. OK. Thank you. I would appreciate that. Is there
a mechanism to aid CPSIA to prevent these safe products to be
sold to children under age 12?
Ms. Weintraub. I am sorry. Can you repeat that?
Mr. Olson. I can, yes, ma'am. Is there a mechanism to aid
CPSIA to prevent these safe products to be sold for children
under age 12--safe lead products?
Ms. Weintraub. Well, I am not sure that I agree with
underlying assumption of the question, but products intended
for children 12 and under have to meet the current lead
standards, as well as the other mandatory standards that are
relevant to those products.
Mr. Olson. OK. Thank you for that answer. A couple more
questions. You testified that Congress took over a year in a
deliberate process to consider the implications of this law.
Unfortunately, as much as we would like to think we are, we are
not immune to error. We are not omniscient. I would bet the
vast majority, if not all the Members of Congress, had no idea
we would be essentially banning bicycles, jungle gyms, and golf
equipment--in a time of a child obesity crisis--banning science
equipment, like microscopes and organic geology sets--again, in
a time when students are falling behind in the sciences--or
banning musical instruments in a time when our students are
also falling behind in the arts. Did you know this law would
ban those products?
Ms. Weintraub. I think what is important to note is that
lead is not necessary to be in products. And if it is in fact
necessary, I think that should be part of any analysis that
would give flexibility for any type of exemption, because the
important thing to focus on from the consumer perspective is
that when consumers are purchasing a product for their child, a
toy, they don't expect that they will be exposing them to risk.
And especially when it comes to lead, it is impossible for a
consumer to identify whether there is lead in that product. So
the consumer is really relying on the manufacturer and also
relying upon Congress and the CPSC to make choices that will
protect consumers.
Mr. Olson. And we are doing that, ma'am, with all due
respect. And one final question. You testified that CPSIA
became law as a result of ``a period of record numbers of
recalls of hazardous products that injured, sickened, or killed
children.'' What I remember most are the lead-in-paint recalls.
And no one here will argue that lead-in-paint restrictions
should be loosened. No one. However, the most significant
problems with this bill relate to lead in substrate. Putting
aside metal jewelry, again, restrictions for which we do not
intend to loosen, were there any children injured, sickened, or
killed by lead in substrate? How many and can you provide
verified statistics of those injuries?
Ms. Weintraub. I believe I answered a similar question
previously and I will answer the same information that,
unfortunately, I am sure that there were injuries, there were
harms to public health, but it is very difficult to document
because these harms and these injuries occur as neurological
impacts to effects of behavior and decreases in IQ. So it is
very hard to document. But to say that there has been no harm
from lead in substrate I think is not accurate.
Mr. Olson. I appreciate those answers again. I would submit
to you that it is important we know those answers before we
take action. We should be able to document it. I yield back my
time.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Would the gentleman yield, actually, for
your final minutes? I would like to ask a follow-up question if
might to Mr. Locker and take the final minute. So you state the
regulations have departed from sensible risk-based decision-
making at the Commission and the law does not grant them the
ability to make commonsense decisions--there are those words
``common sense'' again--but commonsense decisions that has
resulted in banning safe products. How do you know the products
are safe?
Mr. Locker. That comment related to the ability of the
Commission to grant exceptions based upon data that was
available to them. I mean the Commission is not going to act to
grant exceptions if there was exposure--as Mr. Howell testified
under the Federal Hazardous Substances Act--to any hazardous
substance. So in that situation the problem is not that the
Commission can't make that determination. The problem has been
that the language in the statute, which you now seek to
correct, provides the Commission cannot make the decision if
there is any lead that comes from the product. And that creates
a Catch-22. So what we are saying is that when the Commission
can determine that there is no extractable lead from the
product that presents a hazard, the examples of the ATV fender,
the bicycle fender, brass latches on safety devices maybe in
car seats and strollers, when there is no actual human health
risk, they should be able to say that these are exempt or
excluded products. So far they can't and the way, you know,
many of our clients know they are safe is they do do testing.
They do do extraction testing. They do do formulations. They
avoid hazardous substances where possible because under the
Federal Hazardous Substances Act for children's products, they
have to.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. All right. The balance of the
time has expired. I will recognize Ms. Schakowsky for 5
minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I wanted to make
it clear particularly to Mr. Marshall that Mr. Waxman, who at
the time in April of 2010, who was chairman of the full
committee, released a discussion draft that gave targeted
relief to industry while maintaining important protections,
which I am sure you agree are important for the health and
safety of children brought about by this legislation. I was
very involved in it. At the time Mr. Rush wasn't here for
health reasons and I helped negotiate the bill and I worked
with Chairman Barton and afterwards, you know, things happened.
And you see some problems and so Mr. Waxman introduced this
draft that would make some changes.
And at the time the draft was supported by the National
Association of Manufacturers, the Retail Industry Leaders
Association, the Motorcycle Industry Council, the Handmade Toy
Alliance, and Goodwill Industries. And Chairman Tenenbaum wrote
that the Waxman discussion draft would provide CPSC with the
flexibility needed to implement the law. And then at that time
the Republican minority refused to support the legislation and
it didn't move forward in the 111th Congress. So I want to make
the point that we understand that there are some things that
need to be tweaked. We want to do it but we don't want to blow
up the bill.
This has been an issue so dear to my heart, and I did want
to ask Ms. Weintraub an important question. The draft bill
exempts most children's products, including durable nursery
goods--which I have been working on for many sessions--from
third-party testing but then says that cribs will be tested.
However, the current language remains ambiguous on cribs. Can
you talk about this ambiguity? If the bill were to become law,
could parents be assured that the crib they are using is safe?
Ms. Weintraub. Sure. Yes, I agree that there is ambiguity.
On the one hand, in the list of products that clarifies that
there is third-party testing, cribs and non-full-size cribs are
included, but yet there is a reference to a C.F.R. that seems
to have moved. So it is a little bit confusing. But then
further confusing there is another provision later on--I
believe it is in the third-party section--which says that this
would stay all standards having to do with third-party testing
that were passed since some date in 2009. So there is
definitely confusion about whether cribs would be required to
be tested to the new robust crib standard.
Ms. Schakowsky. There is another part. The bill would
eliminate the requirement that daycares and hotels in certain
states use newer, safer cribs. And I have subsequently become
friends with Linda Ginzel, mother of Danny Keysar, whose son
died a really tragic accident. And I had in my hand the letter
from her that I wanted to read just one paragraph.
``We founded Kids In Danger in 1998 after the death of our
beloved son Danny in a poorly-designed inadequately-tested and
recalled portable crib. Danny was 16 months old when the top
rails of the Playskool Travel-Lite crib he slept in at his
licensed childcare home collapsed around his neck, strangling
him. He was the 12th child to die in cribs of this design.''
So, you know, is it necessary to eliminate that
requirement?
Ms. Weintraub. No, it is incredibly problematic. In terms
of what the draft bill does for childcare facilities, it seems
to be allowing all fixed-side cribs and the new robust crib
standard does much more than eliminate drop-sides. It adds many
important provisions that ensure the durability of the crib so
that cribs can actually wear, reflecting how children use cribs
has to do with slat integrity, has to do with mattress support,
and the integrity of the hardware. So by just saying that all
fixed-side cribs can be used in daycares, it unfortunately
isn't capturing the universe of those cribs that we have reason
to be concerned about.
Ms. Schakowsky. Let me just say in the seconds I have left,
Madam Chairman, that I know that you care very much about the
safety issues and just I for one would love to be able to work
with you to address some of the problems that we are hearing
and to work to come up with some kind of a compromise.
Mrs. Bono Mack. The gentlelady yields. I thank her very
much for the spirit and I look forward to working with you and
I acknowledge your expertise and your passion over the years in
this and I can say, I think, just in listening to these past
few seconds, I think there is some misinterpretation of this.
But this is a draft discussion. Sometimes I feel it is almost
like a Mad Libs when we were kids. There are blanks in here for
this very reason. And I would never dream of doing this without
working with you. So I thank you very much for your comment.
And now the chair recognizes Mr. McKinley for his 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Ms. Weintraub, I
have got a couple questions for you. Apparently, the chairman
and others on the committee, they asked you about
substantiating the claims that children have been ``injured,
sickened, or killed'' by toys with lead in its substrate. And
you have responded that these injuries are, by and large,
silent and undocumented. How do we know they exist if they are
silent and undocumented? And could you provide us some
documentation that supports this, how many people have and with
names or circumstances?
Ms. Weintraub. We know that lead exposure to children
causes a range of neurological----
Mr. McKinley. I am looking for some specifics because you
made the statement. That is why I am just trying to----
Ms. Weintraub. Yes, so first, the----
Mr. McKinley. I don't want the generalities. That is what
happens around here. I am new at this game and everyone likes
to talk in the abstract. I am an engineer. I want to deal in
details. So when you make that statement, I want you to prove
it.
Ms. Weintraub. Sure. Well, first, the statement that I made
applied to a full range of products. And when I talked about
the injuries and deaths, I was also talking about magnet-toy
deaths, as well as injuries from other toxic chemicals.
Mr. McKinley. Can you document it?
Ms. Weintraub. It is very difficult to document if a
child----
Mr. McKinley. Well, then you shouldn't be making that
statement.
Ms. Weintraub. I can provide you with scientific studies
that will----
Mr. McKinley. Let me go on my second question for you. Last
week we had at the request, perhaps, or insistence of the
administration and the Congressman from California, we included
language in a broadband oversight bill to take care of the
false and erroneous claims against people for waste, fraud,
abuse, and precisely to protect these companies' reputations.
We used Congressman Waxman's own language that he had inserted
in a radio spectrum bill that he had produced last year. So we
were using specifics. And then last year there was a data
security bill that the Republicans were trying to put in to a
consumers' right bill to protect access to databases, protect
it for security for people's reputations. I have got a company
in my area that has cried out on this. He has already had legal
advice that is suggesting that he could be accused anonymously
by people using false names put up there against him and he
won't be able to clear his company name.
Shouldn't companies who manufacture consumer products not
be provided the same ability to protect their reputations from
erroneous or false claims as the companies who receive
broadband like we just did?
Ms. Weintraub. I think there are very similar protection
that is not identical. But first of all, on the consumer
complaint database, complaints cannot be anonymous.
Mr. McKinley. Would you work with us on that? Is that
something that you think we should be doing? Shouldn't we be
protecting everyone and not just certain people?
Ms. Weintraub. I think there are adequate protections
already. And already in order for a claim to be filed and
posted on the database, a consumer needs to verify that what
they are saying is true.
Mr. McKinley. Their counsel doesn't agree with you on that.
That is why we need to do this language. We need to have
something in there to be able to take care of that because we
are looking for something that is consistent with it. But the
last question I have----
Ms. Weintraub. Well, I am happy to take a look at----
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. Is, Mr. Marshall, if I could--
back to you. You know, one of the things we were looking for in
this hearing were some data because there are a lot of blanks.
And you heard the chairman talk about it.
And on page 11 it says the term ``produced in small
quantities means not more than 'blank' number of units of the
same product.'' What would you recommend is a number that we
should use in that?
Mr. Marshall. I think that could be a range of numbers. I
think on an outside I think 10,000 units per year would be the
highest we would like to see.
Mr. McKinley. One thousand?
Mr. Marshall. Ten thousand is the highest.
Mr. McKinley. Ten thousand?
Mr. Marshall. Yes. But it has to do with----
Mr. McKinley. And that maybe I am dealing more with your
company, what you all produce.
Mr. Marshall. Well, I own a toy store and my wife and I, we
buy from small-batch manufacturers.
Mr. McKinley. OK.
Mr. Marshall. But that is a number that we are willing to
discuss.
Mr. McKinley. Ten thousand.
Mr. Marshall. As a high number. That would be the highest
that we would want to see that number. It could be a range of
numbers below that as well.
Mr. McKinley. OK. I yield back my time.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman. And seeing no other
members present, I believe that we are now ready to wrap it up.
I ask unanimous consent that these 16 letters be made a part of
the record, all of which have been vetted previously by the
minority. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. And as we wrap things up again,
I want to thank our panelists for your patience today, your
indulgence certainly through those long series of votes. I
would like to thank you for your commitment to this very
important issue. I look forward to hearing your thoughts
further as we move this legislation forward.
But I would like to be perfectly clear. Our only goal is to
correct the unintended consequences of CPSIA. This draft does
not undermine the current law. Again, we are trying to fix the
problems that we know of in CPSIA, hopefully get some common
sense back into this thing. We are simply working to make it
better for all Americans and to provide the Consumer Product
Safety Commission with the flexibility that it is asking for.
As the mother of two children and three stepchildren, I am
completely committed--like everybody in this room is--to the
safety of children everywhere. So I hope we can put these
political differences aside and pass a bill that will make them
prouder and safer. The ranking member and I continue to have
discussions about our hope and willingness to work together to
get a good bill through Congress that not only we can be proud
of but the American people can as well.
So I remind members they have 10 business days to submit
their questions for the record and I ask the witnesses to
please respond to any questions they receive. And the hearing
is now adjourned. Thank you again.
[Whereupon, at 3:55 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]


