- PPACA'S EFFECTS ON MAINTAINING HEALTH COVERAGE AND JOBS: A REVIEW OF THE HEALTH CARE LAW'S REGULATORY BURDEN

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PPACA'S EFFECTS ON MAINTAINING HEALTH COVERAGE AND JOBS: A REVIEW OF

THE HEALTH CARE LAW'S REGULATORY BURDEN

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 2 & 15, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-56

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
71-723                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JIM MATHESON, Utah
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              Islands
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

7_____

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  officio)
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------

JUNE 3, 2011

Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Frank Pallone Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     7
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     9
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    10
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, prepared statement......................................   154
Hon. Edolphus Towns, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New York, prepared statement................................   156

Witnesses

Randi Reichel, Counsel, Mitchell, Williams, Selig, Gates and
Woodyard, PLCC, on behalf of America's Health Insurance Plans..    12
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Scott E. Harrington, Professor, Health Care Management and
Insurance and Risk Management, Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania...................................................    35
Prepared statement...........................................    37
Janet Trautwein, CEO, National Association of Health Underwriters    52
Prepared statement...........................................    54
Katherine Hayes, Associate Research Professor, Department of
Health Policy, George Washington University....................    62
Prepared statement...........................................    64
Ethan Rome, Executive Director, Health Care for America Now......    71
Prepared statement...........................................    73
Edward C. Fensholt, Senior Vice President, Lockton Benefit Group.    85
Prepared statement...........................................    87
Terry Gardiner, Vice President, Policy and Strategy, Small
Business Majority..............................................    96
Prepared statement...........................................    98

JUNE 15, 2011
Witnesses

Steve Larsen, Director, Center for Consumer Information and
Insurance Oversight, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services   121
Prepared statement...........................................   124
Answers to submitted questions...............................   158

Submitted Material

Statement, dated June 15, 2011, of Randel K. Johnson, Senior Vice
President, Labor, Immigration, and Employee Benefits, U.S.
Chamber of Commerce, submitted by Mr. Burgess..................   147

PPACA'S EFFECTS ON MAINTAINING HEALTH COVERAGE AND JOBS: A REVIEW OF
THE HEALTH CARE LAW'S REGULATORY BURDEN--DAY 1

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 2, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 12:05 p.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joe Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Burgess, Gingrey,
Lance, Cassidy, Pallone, Schakowsky, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Clay Alspach, Counsel, Health; Jim Barnette,
General Counsel; Paul Edattel, Professional Staff Member,
Health; Debbee Keller, Press Secretary; Ryan Long, Chief
Counsel, Health; Katie Novaria, Legislative Clerk; Heidi
Stirrup, Health Policy Coordinator; Phil Barnett, Minority
Staff Director; Alli Corr, Minority Policy Analyst; Tim
Gronniger, Minority Senior Professional Staff Member; Purvee
Kempf, Minority Senior Counsel; Karen Lightfoot, Minority
Communications Director and Senior Policy Advisor; and Karen
Nelson, Minority Deputy Committee Staff Director for Health.
Mr. Pitts. The committee will now come to order. The Chair
will recognize himself for 5 minutes with an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

I have here on the desk this giant stack of every
regulation, notice and correction that the Obama administration
has issued so far related to the recent health care law. By
count of subcommittee staff, 370 Obamacare-related items have
been issued. Over 3,500 of pages of rules, notices, and
corrections have been published, many of which were released as
interim final rules, bypassing the traditional public comment
period and giving them the force of law.
I would like to focus on just two: grandfathering of
existing health plans and the medical loss ratio, MLR.
``If you like what you have, you can keep it,'' was the
promise that President Obama repeatedly made on the campaign
trail and in the months leading up to the passage of PPACA in
March 2010. ``If you like your current plan, you will be able
to keep it. Let me repeat that: If you like your plan, you will
be able to keep it.'' That is President Obama with remarks at
White House on July 21, 2009. ``If you like your insurance
plan, you will keep it. No one will be able to take that away
from you. It hasn't happened yet. It won't happen in the
future.'' President Obama remarks in April 2010.
During the 2008 presidential campaign and the months
leading up to passage of the health care reform law, President
Obama, his administration, and Congressional Democrats made a
series of promises to the American people. Whether you
supported PPACA when it became law or not, it has become
abundantly clear that those promises have been broken.
According to the administration's own estimates of June 17,
2010, its regulations will force half of all employers, and as
many as 80 percent of small businesses, to give up their
coverage in the next 2 years.
The regulations state, ``After some period of time, most
plans will relinquish their grandfathered status,'' meaning
American workers will lose the coverage they have now and
become subject to PPACA's more costly requirements.
A May 2011 Price Waterhouse Coopers survey of employers
reveals companies' responses to the new health care law and how
many are contemplating eliminating coverage as a result. It
also echoes the administration's warnings. Of note, 51 percent
of employers surveyed did not expect to maintain grandfathered
health status, meaning their employees would forfeit their
current coverage and pay higher premiums due to the health care
law's mandates on their new coverage. The report also found
that ``84 percent of companies indicated they would make other
changes to their plans, that is, raising premiums and
copayments, to offset costs associated with PPACA.''
The regulations associated with grandfathering health plans
are just one reason Americans will lose the coverage they have,
even if they like it. The medical loss ratio is another.
Despite the fact that the MLR has been billed as a tool to
protect consumers from insurance companies, many States are
clamoring for waivers to exempt their citizens from these
``protections.''
Recently, the administration granted waivers to New
Hampshire and Nevada regarding the medical loss ratio
requirements in the health care law, on top of the waiver
already granted to Maine. Nine other States still have their
own waiver applications pending before HHS, Kentucky, Florida,
Georgia, North Dakota, Iowa, Louisiana, Kansas, Delaware, and
Indiana.
In an October 27, 2010, letter to Secretary Sebelius, the
National Association of Insurance Commissioners warned: ``We
continue to have concerns about the potential for unintended
consequences arising from the medical loss ratio. As we noted
in our letter of October 13, consumers will not benefit from
higher medical loss ratios if the outcome is destabilized
insurance markets where consumer choice is limited and the
solvency of insurers is undermined.''
Many companies have also applied for MLR waivers. Perhaps
the most publicized was McDonald's, whose 30,000 employees were
granted a waiver from the annual limit requirement on their
mini-med plans and yet were still in danger of losing their
coverage because they could not meet the MLR requirements.
The December 1, 2010, MLR regulation exempted mini-med
plans from the requirement for 1 year, after which HHS will
determine whether or not to extend the waivers for 2012 and
2013, meaning employees could still be in danger of losing
their current coverage.
The fact that so many Americans have had to be exempted
from the law's protections under waivers, or risk losing their
current coverage, should be alarming to every Member of
Congress.
And this stack, this giant stack, is just the beginning.
More regulations are due out in the near future, including the
establishment of the essential minimum benefits package, which
will increase premiums and put people's coverage at risk.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.003

Mr. Pitts. First of all, thank you to our witnesses today.
I would especially like to welcome a fellow Pennsylvanian, Dr.
Scott Harrington, of the Wharton School at the University of
Pennsylvania, and I will yield back my time.
The Chair recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Mr. Chairman, I really have to object today on
many levels. You know, this hearing has essentially become a
farce. There is nobody here, other than yourself, myself and
Dr. Burgess, and as much as I love to go back and forth with
you and Dr. Burgess, I think that it is important that other
members on both sides of the aisle be able to attend.
Now, I mentioned to you that because of the fact that we
had the full committee hearing this morning and then we are
going to have votes I understand as early as 12:30, and then
were the Democrats and the Republicans yesterday, but the
Democrats today are leaving at 1:00 to go over to meet the
President at the President's request, that it would be
virtually impossible to have a hearing today that members would
be able to attend. The fact that only the three of us are here
just lends credence to that.
You know, I was only asking you to postpone the hearing,
not because I didn't want to have it, although frankly, I
wouldn't want to have it because I think that the subject is a
little absurd, too. I will get into that. But just the fact
that I was concerned that no one would be able to attend, and
there isn't anybody here. We are all going to get out of here
at 1:00, and I guess then we are going to go back, reconvene
after the President, but then there is going to be more votes.
So I just think it is terribly disruptive to the witnesses and
to the process, and I wanted to postpone it because I wanted to
have everybody to be here and hopefully some come, but it
doesn't look like they are here.
Now, the second thing is, you know, again, we are talking
about repeal or either not the whole of the Affordable Care Act
in this case, but provisions of the Affordable Care Act. I
don't know how many times, it is now what, June 2, 5 or 6
months of just the same thing over and over again, repeal the
Act, the Act is bad, defund the Act, turn it from mandatory to
discretionary. I don't know how many times we are going to hear
over and over about the same thing. I don't hear really much in
the way of any kind of replacement or Republican alternatives
that would provide coverage or provide affordable coverage.
Again, today our focus is on repealing the provisions that
limit what the insurance companies can do, abundantly clear
that the Republicans are in the pockets of the insurance
companies and will do whatever the insurance companies want
them to do, even if it means at the expense of the public.
So anyway, I have 2\1/2\ minutes left. Let me get to some
of my prepared remarks, but I really am very disappointed in
the way this was set up today and the fact that we keep dealing
with the same thing to no avail.
The Affordable Care Act was the transformational law that
brought protection to patients across the United States'
healthcare system. We finally were able to put a stop to the
incendiary insurance industry abuses and reform the insurance
system. We expanded coverage, reduced healthcare costs and
reduced the federal deficit while building on the private
insurance system. We sought after and I believe accomplished
bringing better value to consumers and insurance plans and
promoting more affordable comprehensive healthcare to
Americans.
Some of the most important reforms made in the Affordable
Care Act that are meant to curb the insurance industry bad
practices are the same ones my Republican colleagues will
attack today. They include the medical loss ratio requirements
and rate reviews. Medical loss ratio requirements foster
transparency and accountable in how insurance companies spend
patients' premiums. They also force insurers to be more
efficient in delivering quality healthcare. I believe that
American patients deserve a guarantee they are getting good
value for their dollar. When that value is not met, insurance
companies should be required to refund consumers. In fact, HHS
estimates that up to nine million Americans could be eligible
for rebates starting in 2012 worth up to $1.4 billion, a clear
indication there is a real need to hold insurers accountable.
Today I expect to hear from some of our witnesses that this
requirement will disrupt the marketplace and limit choices for
consumers. They will say we need a transitional period in which
insurers can bring their products in line with these
requirements slowly and methodically. However, contrary to the
naysayers, the loss waivers were put in place for potential
disruptions, but it is the States who are in the best position
to examine their own markets and make these determinations. The
waivers are much better suited to be in response to a specific
State condition rather than a one-size-fits-all transition
policy.
Another important critical reform was the process of rate
reviews. Let me be clear. This is not a provision that
prohibits or restricts an insurance company from raising their
rates, but what it does is ensure that any large proposed
increases are based on reasonable cost assumptions and solid-
based evidence. And this step is meant to hold insurance
companies accountable and provide unprecedented transparency to
the healthcare market.
Now, while Congress was drafting and debating the
Affordable Care Act, the insurance industry was recording
record profits. In fact, this year the Nation's largest
insurers are entering their third straight year of huge
profits. According to the New York Times, insurance companies
have reported first quarter earnings that beat analysts'
expectations by an average of 30 percent. And I have got to be
honest across the aisle, you simply can't argue that the
insurance industry has been hurt by the Federal healthcare law.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you to the ranking member, and I yield to
the vice chairman of the subcommittee, Dr. Burgess, for 5
minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. I thank the chairman for yielding. I thank you
for having this hearing today. Goodness knows we could have had
this hearing in the last Congress, and we should have had this
hearing in the last Congress. It is well into a year since the
signing into law of the Affordable Care Act, so it is high time
we look at some of these things. Both sides of the dais will
talk about jobs and the economy. We talk about it, we demagogue
about it, but the big question is, are we going to do anything
about it. Unemployment is at 9 percent, and it begs the
question: Why are American employers hesitant to hire new
employees. Part of the reason might be, just might be, that in
the first year since the passage of the Affordable Care Act,
this is what a small business owner confronts when they want to
hire a new employee. Is it any wonder that they would stop and
look and say I don't think I can do that at this time? We will
make do with what we have.
Now, the burdensome regulations delivered by the United
States Congress stack up as you can see here to be almost
insurmountable by anyone who has ever run a small business that
looks at a stack like this, would say I don't think that is for
me. But here is the simple truth. You just cannot be anti-
employer and claim to be pro jobs. It doesn't equate.
Now, the Affordable Care Act, in my opinion, levies
unreasonable demands on employers, manufacturers, doctors, and
not only discourages hiring but encourages employers to drop
their employee health insurance. We certainly punish
physicians, and we tax industry off-shore and out of America.
Shortly after the signing of this Act a year ago, large
employers reported that the law would increase costs. In fact,
several large employers restated their earnings for the year.
That inflamed members of the then-majority, and a hearing was
called in the Energy and Commerce Committee, in the Oversight
Committee, to call these folks in and make them explain why
they were restating their earnings.
Document demands were made of these employers, and they
produced the documents. The documents were examined, and it
turned out that the employers were simply complying with the
Securities and Exchange Commission, but some of the information
contained within those documents made the then-majority, the
Democrats, to side not to hold the hearing after all because
what they found was large employers were looking at the data
and wondering how in the world it was going to be cost-
effective to continue to provide health insurance. No employer
wanted to be the first to drop this benefit, but there were
many who would likely be second, third or fourth.
The strict medical loss ratio regulations are another
provision that have proved to be overly burdensome, not only on
businesses but on the States. Currently three States have been
given waivers, another 10 are asking and are pending approval.
Now, a State realizes that their market can't comply with
the law. How in the world is the person who runs a lawnmower
shot going to be able to comply with these regulations?
The Affordable Care Act really ought to come with a boxed
FDA warning that says, Warning: The Affordable Care Act, when
used as directed, may be harmful to your health. It may reduce
your healthcare and increase your cost.
The overregulation incites a sense of uncertainty which
discourages hiring and hampers economic development. Every day
we get another announcement about another rule going into
effect. Far too many are coming out, and quite frankly, several
are coming out with the notice of final interim rules,
completely bypassing public comment. That is, they become, the
regulations have the force of law, without the period of public
comment.
Now, if my friends on the other side of the dais are
serious about getting Americans back to work, one of the first
steps should be to loosen the regulatory nightmares that had
been imposed by this law.
Again, I thank the chairman for calling the hearing, and I
will yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks to the gentleman and now
recognizes the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Waxman, for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank all
the witnesses for joining us to discuss the important insurance
reforms in the Affordable Care Act and their implementation. I
want to say a special thanks to Steve Larsen who has become a
regular fixture at the Energy and Commerce Committee, and we
may even have to get him a permanent name plate.
This hearing is intended to cover all of the regulations
issued under the Affordable Care Act and those yet to come. It
is an ambitious hearing that gives us the chance to review
important new consumer protections being implemented by the
department, including rate review, the grandfathering rules and
the medical loss ratio provision.
Provisions such as rate review and medical loss ratio
provide consumers with protections from insurance company rate
hikes and help them receive a good value for their premium
dollars. Rate review requires transparency so that insurers are
required to justify why premiums continue to increase. Premium
increases are a hardship for consumers facing a tough job
market and a struggling economy, and they are hard to
understand given that insurer profits have risen by staggering
amounts.
Over the last 10 years, the premium cost of family health
insurance has increased 131 percent. This has led to soaring
profits. In just the last 3 years, the profits of the Nation's
largest insurers have risen over 50 percent. Rate reviews gives
consumers protections against this kind of abuse. Contrary to
the claims of critics, the law works to review rates based on
existing State authorities. Some States have more authorities,
including the right to review rates and deny unjustified
increases while others merely have transparency requirements.
The Federal Minimum Rate Review provision provides some
consistency across the country and offers an easy-to-understand
explanation of premium increases and their justification for
consumers. The healthcare reform law's new minimum medical loss
ratio requirement is aimed at protecting consumers and ensuring
that their hard-earned dollars are spent on benefits and
quality improvements and less on insurer profits and CEO
salaries.
A number of States have medical loss ratio rules, and the
new federal law standardizes the calculations and sets a
minimum of value for consumers wherever they live. The
calculation allows for quality improvements, innovation and
fraud detection to be counted as medical expenses.
Today we will hear from the association that represents
brokers and agents, that the medical loss ratio calculations
exclude their commissions. Many brokers and agents provide a
valuable benefit for their consumers, but exempting their
commissions for the medical loss ratio in effect means
increasing premiums and overhead expenses for the consumer. It
is time to hold insurance companies accountable, particularly
in markets such as the individual and small group markets where
they--for years, weakening rules that require them to provide
better value to the consumers moves us in a closer direction.
The Affordable Care Act provides a series of popular
insurers' reforms that have already gone into effect, such as
allowing adult children up to the age of 26 to stay on their
parents' insurance, eliminating lifetime limits and prohibiting
rescissions of insurers when someone gets sick. These apply to
all plans 6 months after enactment, overriding the
grandfathering rules because of their importance to families.
The dependents up to 26 policies have been immensely helpful in
responding to the downturn in the economy. The prohibition of
rescissions is responsive to the insurance company abuses and
has received bipartisan support, and the prohibition on
lifetime limits of benefits is necessary protection for a
person with cancer or hemophilia who has nowhere left to turn
when he or she has exhausted lifetime maximums. In 2014, these
benefits will be greatly expanded, truly reforming the
insurance marketplace in the United States. The market will no
longer reward companies that avoid risk and leave some of our
sickest with no options. It will be inclusive, accessible,
affordable, built on the notion of individual responsibility.
It is important that we understand the implementation of
these rules, but we need to do so in a constructive manner that
serves our constituents' needs. We all want a future where the
insurance marketplace is healthy, competitive and providing
quality care.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
opening statements. We will go to the first panel.
At this time, I would like to thank the witnesses for
agreeing to appear before the committee, and we will introduce
them.
Randi Reichel is a counsel at Mitchell, Williams, Selig,
Gates & Woodyard, PLLC, and is testifying on behalf of
America's Health Insurance Plans.
Scott Harrington is the Professor of Health Care Management
and Insurance and Risk Management at the Wharton School at the
University of Pennsylvania.
Janet Trautwein is the CEO of the National Association of
Health Underwriters.
Katherine Hayes is an Associate Research Professor at the
George Washington University School of Public Health and Health
Services.
Ethan Rome is the Executive Director of Health Care for
America Now.
Edward Fensholt is the Senior Vice President for the
Lockton Benefit Group.
And Terry Gardiner is Vice President for Policy and
Strategy at the Small Business Majority.
Your written testimony will be made a part of the official
record. We ask that you please summarize your testimony in 5-
minute opening statements, and we will go in the order that our
witnesses were introduced.
Ms. Reichel, you are recognized for 5 minutes' opening
statement.

STATEMENTS OF RANDI REICHEL, ESQUIRE, COUNSEL, MITCHELL,
WILLIAMS, SELIG, GATES AND WOODYARD, PLLC, ON BEHALF OF
AMERICA'S HEALTH INSURANCE PLANS; SCOTT E. HARRINGTON, PH.D.,
PROFESSOR OF HEALTH CARE MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE AND RISK
MANAGEMENT, WHARTON SCHOOL, UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA; JANET
TRAUTWEIN, CEO, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF HEALTH UNDERWRITERS;
KATHERINE HAYES, ASSOCIATE RESEARCH PROFESSOR, DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH POLICY, GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF PUBLIC
HEALTH AND HEALTH SERVICES; ETHAN ROME, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
HEALTH CARE FOR AMERICA NOW; EDWARD FENSHOLT, SENIOR VICE
PRESIDENT, LOCKTON BENEFIT GROUP; AND TERRY GARDINER, VICE
PRESIDENT, POLICY AND STRATEGY, SMALL BUSINESS MAJORITY

STATEMENT OF RANDI REICHEL

Ms. Reichel. Thank you, Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member
Pallone, and members of the subcommittee. My name is Randi
Reichel, and I am an attorney with the law firm of Mitchell,
Williams, Selig, Gates & Woodyard. I am here today as outside
counsel to America's Health Insurance Plans, and I thank you
for the opportunity to testify today about the unintended
consequences and the regulatory burdens of the medical loss
ratio requirement under the ACA.
I think it is really critically important to examine this
provision and the Department of Health and Human Services'
regulation that implements the MLR provisions. The
requirements, the way they have been implemented, impose an
unprecedented new federal cap on administrative costs of health
plans and strictly micromanages the plans' abilities to invest
in initiatives and innovations to benefit their members and
enrollees.
There likely will be a number of unintended consequences
for individuals, families and employers, and there are a number
of reasons for this. The first is a lack of a uniform
transition period. Most States today either don't have medical
loss ratio requirements in the large group, small group or
individual markets or the ones that do have medical loss ratio
requirements that are crafted to incorporate existing actuarial
practices in order specifically to avoid any type of market
disruption.
Without the time to make the adjustments and the changes
that are needed to comply with the MLR provisions, some of the
health plans in the marketplace today have no choice but to
exit the market. And you know, we know that we are not crying
wolf about this, and the reason that we know that is HHS has
already acknowledged in its letters to Nevada, in its letters
to New Hampshire, when those two States asked for a waiver of
the MLR requirements, they conceded that the MLR standard
could, in fact, lead to a destabilization of the individual
market in those States.
While the MLR is problematic across the board for all types
of health insurance coverage, I think it is important to look
specifically at the impact that this may have on access to
high-deductible health plans. There is a reason for this. On a
per-enrollee kind of basis, fees options are intended to have a
much higher deductible and they are lower cost to the
individual. So as result, the--ratios are higher because the
administration of these plans doesn't cost us any less.
So the premium is lower, the administrative costs are
higher, and the MLR, by not taking the kind of differences or
special circumstances of these plans into account really
provides a significant challenge to the companies that write
this business and make it really questionable whether or not
the individuals who have this very popular, very affordable
option are going to be able to continue to either obtain it or
maintain the policies that they have going forward.
Even more than that, one of the things that we are really
concerned about right now is that the MLR requirements do in
fact turn back the clock on any kind of efforts to prove
quality and prevent fraud and abuse, and they do this for two
reasons. One is they only permit dollar recoveries from fraud
programs to be counted toward the MLR, but they penalize
companies for actually preventing fraud in the first place. And
they don't recognize as quality the expenses of transitioning
into the ICD-10 coding system that is intended for disease
eradication and quality.
By having only four categories that qualify as quality
categories, the MLR requirements inhibit any kind of--by
capping expenses for real quality programs that may fall
outside the very guardrails of those four quality categories.
The way the regulation is structured, I think it is going to be
very problematic moving forward.
And the most telling thing is that while the MLR is
intended to put a cap on administrative costs, indeed the MLR
itself is going to increase administrative costs. There are a
host of new reporting requirements that companies have to
undergo in order to comply with the new regulations. The
companies are going to have to have new data collection, new
accounting, new auditing and the staff and the ramp-up for all
of these things.
We have talked to AHIP members, and preliminary estimates
from at least some of the larger multi-State plans have put
some of their preliminary compliance costs at more than $20
million.
Mr. Pitts. Would you wrap up, please?
Ms. Reichel. I don't want to repeat what else is in our
testimony. We do have some recommendations to mitigate the
harmful impact of the medical loss ratio. With that I will
thank you for the opportunity to testify and present our
perspective.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Reichel follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.023

Mr. Pitts. Thank you. Dr. Harrington?

STATEMENT OF SCOTT E. HARRINGTON

Mr. Harrington. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone, Mr.
Burgess, I am pleased to testify on rate review and minimum
medical loss ratio regulation under PPACA.
These regulatory schemes entail costly, complex
bureaucratic interference with insurers' legitimate business
decisions and with State regulatory prerogatives. They are not
going to increase competition or improve the availability and
affordability of health insurance. The rate review scheme will
not enhance consumer choice or significantly lower premiums. It
will increase insurers' costs and risk, reducing their
willingness to expand coverage or offer new products and
ultimately undermine their financial soundness.
The minimum medical loss ratio scheme is going to distort
insurers' legitimate operating decisions, including some
actions that would help reduce costs. Without significant
waivers, it will destabilize some States' markets. It
represents a significant move toward government micromanagement
of health insurers.
It is desirable to replace the rate review and medical loss
ratio regulations with pro-competitive forms including State
option of policies that promote thoroughly informed competition
and consumer choice.
In my remaining few minutes, I want to focus on rate
review. The Act does not authorize HHS to explicitly approve or
deny proposed rate changes but it requires individual and small
group health insurers to justify ``unreasonable'' rate
increases, either to State regulators if the States pass muster
with HHS for having reasonable effective review, or otherwise
to HHS. The complex HHS regulations initially specify a 10
percent threshold for determining whether or not a rate
increase is potentially unreasonable and requiring additional
justification. State-specific thresholds will likely begin in
2012. Any insurer that goes ahead and tries to implement a rate
increase that is held to be unreasonable will be publicized and
most likely publically condemned. It also can be excluded from
participation in the exchanges.
The law grants monies to States to enhance their rate
review. It grants monies in the future to States that have
prior approval rate regulation or adopts such regulation,
further promoting direct price controls on health insurance.
These provisions reflect the views that competition and
prior State regulation did not adequately discipline health
insurers' expenses and profits, but health insurers' expenses
and profits are not significant drivers of high and rapidly
growing health insurance costs. According to the National
Health Expenditure Data, for example, the estimated annual
private heath insurance medical loss ratio, the ratio of
medical cost to premiums, including self-funded plans, has
averaged about 88 percent since 1965, ranging from 85 to 90
percent with little or no trend over time. Now, there is a lot
of variation across companies. Health insurers' profit margins
typically average 3 to 5 percent of revenues, lower for not-
for-profit insurers. Administrative expenses average 11 to 12
percent of premiums.
Market concentration is often relatively high at State and
metropolitan levels, but it varies widely across regions, and
that does not imply adverse effects on consumers.
State oversight for individual and small group health
insurance of rate changes is very diverse and in many respects
similar to automobile and homeowners' insurance regulation. The
Act's rate review provisions establish significant federal
authority over rate increases, and those State review process,
these provisions and their implementation will further
publicize insurance pricing without enhancing consumer choice,
increase in quality or lowering cost.
Research has not provided detailed evidence on health
insurance rate regulation, but the adverse consequences of
binding rate controls, politicization of insurance pricing,
have been aptly documented for automobile insurance, workers'
compensation insurance and more recently, homeowners' insurance
in catastrophe prone regions. There is no reason to believe
that requiring prior regulatory approval or tighter review of
health insurance rates will be any different.
A large body of research indicates that rate regulation
cannot and does not lower insurance rates without reducing
coverage availability or causing exit by insurers. Analyses of
automobile insurance, for example, found no consistent
difference over time in premiums relative to loss costs in
States with and without prior approval, but prior approval rate
regulation has been associated with less coverage availability,
short run rate suppression, increased market volatility and
increased insurer exits.
In short, the rate review and MLR provisions are
unnecessary and counterproductive. It would be better to repeal
these provisions and replace them with pro-competitive
regulation and disclosure at the State level.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harrington follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.038

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
Ms. Trautwein for 5 minutes for her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JANET TRAUTWEIN

Ms. Trautwein. Thank you. My name is Janet Trautwein, and I
am the CEO of the National Association of Health Underwriters.
NAHU is the leading professional trade association for health
insurance agents, brokers, and consultants representing more
than 100,000 benefit specialists nationally.
I am here today to tell you about a desperate economic
situation that has developed over the past 18 months. It has
caused real people to suffer real harm. This dire situation was
triggered by the issuance of the Interim Final Rule on Medical
Loss Ratios. Since the rule was issued by the Department of
Health and Human Services on December 1, 2010, health insurance
carriers across the country have been forced to cut
administrative costs to comply.
One of the first places that was hit was agent commissions.
Now, in reality, agent commissions being considered an insurer
expense is really not even accurate. The consumers who purchase
health insurance coverage are the ones who hire and can fire
their brokers, not insurers. Independent agents pay 100 percent
of their own business expenses. Whether accurate or not, the
Interim Rule categorizes commissions as an insurance expense
largely because these commissions were not specifically listed
as an item that could be carved out of the MLR calculation as
were taxes, and as a result, our members report that most
health insurance carriers changed commission rates as of
January 1, 2011, the date the MLR rule became effective.
These commission changes have already decreased many of our
members' incomes by 20 to 50 percent. About 3/4 of the members
of my associations are principals of their own small businesses
and employ multiple individuals from their communities, operate
in every State and in every community, large and small. As a
direct result of the new law provisions, these individuals are
reporting that they are being forced to reduce services to
their clients, to cut benefits to their employees and eliminate
jobs just to stay in business. In some instances they are
reporting they are just closing their doors. This means that in
the future, unless something is done, there will be far fewer
health insurance agents to provide for consumers' needs.
Now, some of you have probably have never had the good
fortune to work with a broker, and you may not understand what
this really means or consumers. So I would like to tell you a
story that illustrates what I am talking about. This is a story
that I know well, and I know it because I personally
experienced it. I am here today not just as the head of an
association but as someone who knows the people who have been
affected. And before I came to NAHU, I was an insurance broker
myself for almost 20 years in Texas. And I had a large number
of clients that I built up over many years, and I did that by
providing them great service and benefits at the lowest
possible cost. I promised them that I would help them with any
issue that came up relative to their plan, and I am proud to
say that during the 20 years that I was in business, not a
single one of my clients or a single one of their employees or
dependents ever had to go to appeal on a claim and that is
because we took care of issues before it required that type of
action.
And I want to tell you quickly about one situation that I
remember in particular, and it is hard to forget a situation
like this. This particular employee had AIDS, and his health
plan had already paid out hundreds of thousands of dollars for
traditional types of treatments, and none of these had really
been effective in preventing the progression of his disease.
He came to me in desperation because his doctors had given
him 6 months to live, and he said, look, I have done some
research, and I found this one treatment that I really want to
try, but he wasn't able to go through with the treatment
because it was considered experimental by his plan.
After a lot of work negotiating with his health plan as
well as the providers for his treatment, we got that treatment
covered because we knew how to do it, and he never would have
been able to do that on his own. It was difficult to do, but we
managed to make it work.
You might think that this kind of service would be very
expensive. The fact is that most agents and brokers just really
don't make a lot of money. The Bureau of Labor Statistics says
that the average for agents and brokers is $45,000 to $62,000 a
year. Entry-level agents only make about $25,000 a year, and
this is before the cuts that occurred on January 1.
So you can understand the desperation of the situation that
we are in, and none of us would find it very easy to take those
types of cuts.
There is a simple solution. As many of you are aware,
Representatives Mike Rogers of Michigan and John Barrow of
Georgia, both of whom serve on this committee, have introduced
H.R. 1206, the Access to Professional Health Insurance Advisors
of 2011. Currently it has 85 bipartisan co-sponsors, 21 on this
committee.
And I realize that I am out of time, but I would like to
ask for your immediate consideration of this legislation. It is
a reporting change, but it something that would provide
immediate relief to many, many people across this country.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Trautwein follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.046

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady and recognizes
Ms. Hayes for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KATHERINE HAYES

Ms. Hayes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me the
opportunity to be here today and also members of the
subcommittee.
The last time I was in this room was 20 years ago as a 20-
something health staffer for a member of the Health
Subcommittee, Mickey Leland, from Texas. And knowing that
Mickey was first a Texan and second, a Democrat, it is nice to
see that Texas is still well-represented on the subcommittee.
Today I am here to talk to you about insurance market
reforms, generally the impact on individuals and small
businesses. I am a Professor at George Washington University,
and my research focuses on implementation of the health reform
bill.
This committee and subcommittee has a really long history
of working to protect not only low-income individuals but
individuals in the small group and individual non-group health
insurance market. Chairman Bilirakis, former subcommittee
chairman, and Chairman Tom Bliley put together the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act which laid the
foundation for the Accountable Care Act. What it did was
preserve McCarran-Ferguson and allowed health insurers or
allowed States to regulate health insurance with certain
minimum standards. And the reason Congress stepped in and did
that, it was after health reform failed back in 1993 and 1994,
was they saw the burden and the dysfunctional markets in the
non-group or individual and small group health insurance
markets and wanted to step in to do something. And the
Affordable Care Act insurance markets reforms really build on
that.
And it is important to recognize, too, that both parties,
when the debate began in health care reform, were supportive of
these insurance market reforms, although their views of it were
different. Both were very concerned about individuals and small
groups.
The problems in the small group market are well-documented.
Although health insurance plans are prohibited from denying
coverage for small groups, for small businesses, they can
charge whatever they want; and quite frankly, although some
States have implemented rate bans to limit that, generally, in
some States small businesses can pay a 100 percent surcharge
because of the risk, the high-risk individuals that they
employ.
The Affordable Care Act was really laid out in two phases
if you look at the statute itself. One, there was envisioned a
transition period that began with date of enactment, ending in
2014 when most of the insurance market reforms went into place.
There were a number of experts, insurance experts and
regulations, came before Congress and told Members of Congress
that yes, it is very important to reform these markets, but you
need to be careful. You need to phase in things slowly. You
need to build in protections, and the Affordable Care Act does
include that. Some examples of the protections and the
transition rules that were put in to the Affordable Care Act
include grandfathering of health insurance plans. They include
high-risk pools, small business tax credits and the insurance
market reforms which include the immediate reforms, annual
limits on coverage and coverage of dependent children, as well
as medical loss ratios.
In a review of the--it is easy to see the administration is
following the pattern that was set out in the Affordable Care
Act, which is namely to get through the transition period to
full implementation in 2014.
Ultimately, small businesses have quite a lot to gain under
the Affordable Care Act. They will be able to purchase health
insurance coverage through exchanges. They will have options.
And they will be able to pool both risk and some of their
administrative costs. And finally, even though small businesses
that choose not to provide health insurance coverage for their
employees, because for the smallest businesses, it isn't a
requirement to provide coverage at all, their employees will
benefit from the tax credits and in the Affordable Care Act and
can purchase through the exchanges. At the end of the day, this
will benefit small businesses because their employees will be
ensured, they will have less absenteeism, and ultimately, those
with health insurance coverage have better health outcomes and
better health status.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, and members of the
subcommittee, the Affordable Care Act has tremendous potential
to lower costs for small business and to make their health
benefits competitive with large businesses, an important factor
in recruiting and retaining a workforce.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hayes follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.053

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady and recognizes
Mr. Rome for 5 minutes for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ETHAN ROME

Mr. Rome. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, thank
you for giving me the opportunity to testify today.
Healthcare for America Now is the Nation's leading
grassroots advocacy organization on healthcare and a strong
supporter of the Affordable Care Act.
The ACA includes many sorely needed market reforms,
consumer protections, extended coverage provisions, and cost
savings already benefitting millions of Americans.
While much of the country is still struggling in this tough
economy, health insurance companies have posted record profits
with premiums that are crushing America's families, seniors and
businesses. That is why the provisions of the law that hold the
insurance industry accountable and the worst abuses incurred by
unreasonable rates are so critical.
Thanks to the law, we have a new MLR rule that has been
discussed that requires that insurers must spend on actual
medical care a specific amount instead of on wasteful overhead,
excessive profits and bloated executive compensation. The MLR
combats the long-term downward trend and ensures insurers'
spending on medical care as a percentage of premiums. While the
MLR was about 95 percent back in 1993, it is 80 percent or less
among large insurers today. That is thankfully changing
already. The new rule is already cutting rates for some
consumers like Aetna subscribers in Kansas, an intended
consequence of the MLR and it promises up to 2 billion in
rebates nationwide if insurers fail to meet the standard.
We also have the rate review regulations that have been
discussed which will substantially reduce rates as well. We
have seen over the last year several examples where the
intervention of insurance commissioners have already reduced
rates.
Aggressive rate review is imperative given the sharp rise
in premiums, as has been discussed, 114 percent of the last 10
years for families with unemployment-based insurance, three
times greater than wage growth. And while insurers blame these
increases on the rising cost of medical care, premiums have
been going up at double the rate of medical inflation.
The big driver is profits. The Wall Street-run health
insurance companies, their profits jumped 51 percent from 2008
to 2010. In 2010 alone, their combined profits were 11.7
billion, up from 9.9 in 2009, despite a 4 percent decline in
enrollment. New data indicate they are on their way to record
profits in this as well.
But reported profits tell only a fraction of the story.
Insurers have also amassed a capital surplus that vastly
exceeds the Nation's major for-profit and non-profit, what they
are required. According to CitiGroup analysis, the Nation's
major for-profit and non-profit health insurance companies held
an astonishing 90.3 billion in total risk-based capital to
cover unexpected medical claims as of December 31, six times
more than necessary. And virtually unnoticed by many, the for-
profit insurers have steadily moved billions of dollars of cash
off their balance sheets to buy back their own shares on the
New York Stock Exchange. This increases profits and share
prices. It does nothing to improve patient care or the quality
of their programs.
The profits are astonishing. Their CEO pay is breathtaking.
But what is galling and unacceptable is that the insurance
companies impose double-digit premium hikes on America's
families and businesses year after year to pay for these--and
they do so at a time when our families and businesses simply
can't afford to pay more. And it is clear these rate hikes are
not justified. They could reduce rates by dipping into their
capital surpluses. They could reduce rates given that
utilization is going down.
Two final quick things. We should not be spending our time
talking about how to undermine the Affordable Care Act. For
example, taking broker commissions out of the MLR equation.
What that will do is jeopardize 1.4 billion in rebates for
consumers, and as rates have gone up 100 percent over the last
10 years, so, too, have the commissions of brokers.
We can also increase rate regulation by expanding rate
review by enhancing the Health Insurance Rate Review Act
sponsored by Representative Schakowsky and Feinstein which will
give HHS greater power to review rates.
America's families and small businesses desperately need
relief. With aggressive implementation of the ACA, the days of
health insurance price gouging will come to an end. Thank you
very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rome follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.065

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
Mr. Fensholt for 5 minutes' opening statement.

STATEMENT OF EDWARD C. FENSHOLT

Mr. Fensholt. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone and
members of the committee, my name is Edward Fensholt and I am a
Senior Vice President with Lockton Benefit Group headquartered
in Kansas City, Missouri. Lockton Benefit Group provides
employee benefits consulting services primarily middle-market
employers, about 2,500 of them from coast to coast. Most of
them self-insure their healthcare coverage, that is, they pay
claims out of their general assets. Fewer than half buy group
insurance from insurance companies.
Mr. Chairman, that stack of papers to your right has been
my life for the past year. My day-to-day job is to run Lockton
Benefit Group's Health Reform Advisory Practice where we steer
our clients through the maze of regulations and rules. And I
might add, Mr. Chairman, that that stack of regulations and
rules is not only a burden on small business, it is a challenge
to our clients in the middle market and to large employers as
well.
If I could sum up the views of our clients in a couple of
words, those words would be frustration and bewilderment. The
men and women who run these companies and supply jobs in their
communities provide valuable health insurance benefits to their
employees, but they struggle to do that. They struggle with the
financial aspects of that coverage and with the dazzling array
of federal rules and regulations they must navigate in order to
provide that coverage.
For example, today, as we speak today, there are more than
50 separate notices, disclosures and reports to the Federal
Government that a health plan sponsor must make just for the
privilege of sponsoring a group health insurance plan, never
mind their notices on their 401(k) plans, their OSHA notices,
their EEOC notices, EPA notices, whatever, a simple healthcare
plan has north of 50 notices, disclosures and reports it might
be required to supply under federal law alone. Nineteen of
those have been added by the health reform law so far.
These obligations impose additional hassles, headaches and
costs to our clients and subject them to all these penalties
for failure.
The health reform law adds a variety of new benefit and
coverage mandates that add additional costs and complexities
the sponsorship of a group health insurance plan. Our clients
understand why Congress would act to supply access to health
insurance for those who do not have that access or cannot
afford it, but they simply do not understand why, in a time
when everyone agrees that health insurance and healthcare is
too expensive, why Congress would act to make the provision of
employer-sponsored insurance, to which about 150 million of us
obtain, more costly and particularly more hassle prone.
We recently finished a 12-question survey of our clients on
the impact of healthcare reform on them and the plans they
sponsor. Over and over we received the same responses we have
been hearing literally from them for the last year, comments
such as these, taken verbatim from our survey results. We
currently provide healthcare coverage to our employees. The
reform Act will do nothing but add cost and add administrative
requirements. The law is burdensome with little benefit to
employer or employee. In the long run, the law will reduce
access to healthcare services and dramatically increase the
cost to both the employer and the employee. What they, meaning
the Congress, are planning is only going to penalize the
employers and employees who actually are hard workers and are
trying to make a living for themselves and not relying on the
government to take care of them.
The law includes a grandfather clause ostensibly intended
to shield existing group plans from the law's costly mandates
and other provisions. But it is a poor shield indeed. It
supplies no protection from several requirements such as the
obligation to eliminate lifetime and annual dollar maximums the
plans have used for years as--cost containment measures or the
obligation to supply coverage to adult children, even if
married, even if non-dependent upon the employer or living
apart from the employee and spouse or even if the child is
gainfully employed himself or herself.
The grandfather shield does protect plans from other
mandates, but the grandfather protection is so easy to lose as
a result of routine plan design changes that the vast majority
of our--grandfather status immediately.
In our survey, 18 percent of our respondents said they
would consider eliminating group coverage in 2014. To be fair,
few have said they will do it for sure. Few have said they will
definitely maintain coverage. Mostly they say we will wait and
see. We may not be the first to cancel our group plan, but we
will not wait to be third, either.
In closing, let me say it simply seems to us and our
clients that if Congress were inclined to attempt to address
health insurance access issues, it should not punish employers
in the process. Our clients are not the bad guys. They don't
understand why this law makes the provision of group health
insurance more burdensome and more costly, rather than less so.
Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fensholt follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.074

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
Mr. Gardiner for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF TERRY GARDINER

Mr. Gardiner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon,
Chairman Pitts, and Ranking Member Pallone and members of the
subcommittee. My name is Terry Gardiner. I am working with the
Small Business Majority, and we are a non-profit national group
advocating for small business owners out there. We represent
the 28 million small businesses which many of those are self-
employed and businesses from 1 to 100 employees. We do
scientific opinion polls and economic research to try to
understand what the problems and the solutions that small
businesses need.
I myself started as a self-employed commercial fisherman
for many years in Alaska until I got one of those
entrepreneurial ideas to--a bigger company called Silver Lining
Seafoods in 1981 and spent the next couple decades as an owner
and CEO of that company growing it from start-up to $100
million with a thousand employees selling globally in 22
countries. So I have been through this as many of the other
people in Small Business Majority have been of being out there
and dealing with healthcare and access to capital and all these
issues that all small business owners have to navigate to
survive and be successful and create jobs.
So we are well aware that many times there are regulatory
burdens, lots of reports to fill out there. I think with
healthcare, we have also watched for decades and endured while
it only got worse. And so we felt that something has to be
done, and there is a legitimate role for government to step in
when things are only getting worse, as we have seen over the
decades with costs going up and less availability, and over
half our small businesses don't even offer anymore.
So when we survey small business owners, what we find is
that cost is really the biggest concern. Our research showed an
average of 86 percent of small business owners cite cost as
their biggest barrier. A major economic study we did found that
small employers would pay $2.4 trillion in increased healthcare
costs through the next decade if nothing changes. And in fact,
we would lose 178,000 jobs and $52 billion in profits with no
reform. This is why we have the Affordable Care Act, because
that was the status quo. We needed to do something.
One aspect that we are here to talk about today is the
medical loss provision, and certainly insurance companies and
brokers have a stake in this. You have heard about that, but I
think you need remember that employers are paying the bill.
Small employers are paying the bill in the small group market.
Self-employed people are generally purchasing in the individual
market, and all of these dollars and costs we are talking about
passed through. And so whether the MLR is effective or not is
really going to come out of the bottom line of small
businesses, and whatever small businesses pay and more and more
cost is really going to reduce their ability to expand their
company and create jobs, and if we want small business to
continue to create 70 percent of the jobs, then we need to be
thinking about this.
So we need to, you know, work out some of these problems.
We need to make sure that the MLR is protecting the small
businesses because what we hear in meeting after meeting is
small business owners standing up saying I got a double-digit
increase this year on top of one last year. That should really
be our focus. What are we doing about that? You know, in
general, these small business owners are paying 18 percent more
than the larger business owners. So I think the other thing we
are here to talk about today is the rate review, and really
what we are talking about here is transparency. As has been
pointed out, there is no real hammer of the Federal Government
to do anything about it, but again, this is something that, as
a small business owner, you never get an explanation of why the
premiums have gone up double-digit. You are just told this is
the way it is by your broker, and we certainly support brokers.
I always used the broker. Everybody I know used brokers. They
are an integral part, and we believe they will be a very
important part in the exchanges going forward.
But again, somebody has to pay the bill, and if we just
continue to shrink and shrink the number of small business
owners because of double-digit inflation, that will be a
reason, you know, that insurance companies' business shrinks
and brokers' business shrinks.
So I would just like to conclude by saying I think these
are important parts of overall health reform. We need to get on
with the show and implement the exchanges and the tax credits,
and if anything expands those tax credits along with these
regulatory reforms so we can bring the cost down of health
insurance for small businesses.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gardiner follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.085

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
the openings statements. We are presently in a vote on the
floor. There are seven votes scheduled, so with the appointment
at the White House at 2:00 for the Democratic members, we will
recess for questions of this panel until 4:00. If you can stay,
we would like to ask that you can do that, and we will
recognize the ranking member, who wants to express himself.
Mr. Pallone. Well, Mr. Chairman, I mean, you know, this is
the same thing that I said at the beginning. I told you so, I
think the way we are proceeding is just not good. I mean, there
is almost nobody here other than, you know, the three of us and
I see that we were joined by one colleague on either side of
the aisle, but I just think that most of the members have been
discouraged from being here because the panel has now spoken,
the questions are going to come later, we are going to have a
second panel after that. I don't know what time. And I don't
know what you are supposed to do now. I guess you have no
choice.
But I just want to again object to the fact that we are
proceeding this way. I think it is not good for the witnesses
because they have to wait around for us to come back 4 hours
later, and the result is that the members are not here to
participate. So I don't know what to say. I mean, I keep saying
the same thing over and over again. I just hope this is the
last time that we proceed in this way because it is just not
conducive to a good debate, frankly.
Mr. Pitts. I regret it is unfortunate we have to postpone
the hearing. We will make a call to all the members to be back
in 3 hours at 4:00 and ask the indulgence of the witnesses if
they can return at that time.
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Chairman, can I ask what we are going to
do about the second panel?
Mr. Pitts. I think perhaps on the second panel we are going
to have to delay the second panel for another day.
Mr. Pallone. Well, again, I don't see why if he--
Mr. Pitts. He is limited on his time constraints at the end
of the day.
Mr. Pallone. I understand that, but we knew that from the
beginning and now we are going to end up having the hearing
when we come back after recess. My original request was that we
postpone it until then anyway. So now we are going to have to
postpone it. It just seems like the whole thing could have been
handled better. We could have just had it when we came back,
and everything would have been straight through and members
would have been here. Now we are going to have a second hearing
when we come back. I just, you know--it just seems like--let us
just hope that this doesn't happen again.
Mr. Pitts. Unfortunately, we have got to work around the
President's schedule, and I regret that. But we will reconvene.
We will recess until 4:00.
[Recess.]
Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order, and I will
now begin questioning and recognize myself for 5 minutes for
that purpose.
Let me start with Ms. Trautwein. You talked about the dire
situation facing brokers across the country. Do you believe the
reduction in income and employment for agents and brokers as a
result of the MLR rule will make more Americans dependent on
Medicaid and the health coverage subsidies from PPACA? If so,
would you elaborate?
Ms. Trautwein. Yes, thank you. Well, certainly as I
testified earlier, if you look at what the average income of
agents and brokers are today already, it is easy to see that
many of them would be in the category where they would, if they
were not insured through an employer-sponsored plan, already be
eligible for subsidies and certainly with a reduction of 20 to
50 percent, that absolutely would put many of them down into
the Medicaid levels, particularly when you consider the
expansion of Medicaid that is associated with the law.
So yes, I would say that many of them probably, no doubt
would definitely qualify for subsidies, and many of them would
also qualify for Medicaid if this is not turned around.
Mr. Pitts. Now, some argue that insurance agents add no
value to the system and are simply overhead in the system that
can be eliminated at the stroke of a pen or regulation.
Elaborate a little bit on the role agents play in the
healthcare system please.
Ms. Trautwein. Well, the first thing I would like to say
there is that, you know, agents and brokers have been used for
100 years to help people purchase health insurance coverage,
and they have been used by insurance carriers for a reason, and
it is because it is efficient. And from time to time, and I
have been in the industry 30 years, I have seen carriers say
look, we are going to try to get lean and mean here, and we are
going to use our own people. And invariably it doesn't last
very long. Usually it is a year or less, and they are back to
using agents and brokers because it is more efficient, because
they get a larger number of people enrolled, and they are able
to do it at a lower cost.
Then you have the service aspect which I talked about
earlier, and I gave you one example. But those types of things
happen all the time, every sort of claims situation that you
can imagine. And this is all at a time when it is taking much
more time for them to do their jobs because they have so many
questions about the new law, particularly from their employer
clients, and for their small employers, they often serve as
their HR department. You would be surprised all the things that
they actually do.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. On the issue of fraud, Ms. Reichel, a
``60 Minutes'' episode last year pegged the amount of fraud and
abuse in the Medicare program at more than $60 billion a year.
Some have estimated that it might be closer to 100 billion. Do
you agree? Does anyone disagree that the amount of fraud and
abuse in the Medicare program could be as high as $60 billion
as ``60 Minutes'' reported?
Ms. Reichel. I have seen that number on the ``60 Minutes''
report, yes, and I know that that is accurately what they have
reported.
Mr. Pitts. Now using that small number of 60 billion that
is about 12 percent of Medicare spending per year. Using the
higher number of 100 billion, the percentage is about 21
percent. Would a private plan be able to stand--12 percent or
21 percent of its claims were a result of fraud and abuse?
Ms. Reichel. I think it would be quite difficult for them.
Mr. Pitts. Will the MLR rule hinder Plans' ability to stop
fraud before it happens and if Plans are forced to pay more
fraudulent payments, will premiums increase?
Ms. Reichel. You know, that is really an excellent
question. The way the MLR is structured, Plans are not going to
be able to get credit for preventing fraud. Fraud prevention
activities are categorically excluded from the medical loss
ratio, and the only thing that Plans can get credit for is the
dollar amount that they have actually recovered after the
payments have already been made and services that are
potentially fraudulent have already been rendered.
Mr. Pitts. I only have 30 seconds left, but Dr. Harrington,
I watched your reaction when someone else was testifying about
the excess profits. Would you care to comment on your reaction
to the testimony of the excess profits insurance companies
make?
Mr. Harrington. Two quick things, I think. Whenever I look
at profits, I tend to look at profit margins because this is a
big country with a big industry, and if you look at dollar
amounts, they can be big dollars on a small percentage of total
premiums.
I apologize for my reaction. My reaction was really to the
issue of insurance companies' allegedly holding all this
capital in excess of what is required by regulation. I have
done a lot of work on insurance company capital requirements,
regulatory requirements are the very bare minimum to keep
regulators from taking over the company, and to me it really
makes no sense to start comparing the amount of capital the
company holds compared to that regulatory requirement as some
measure of how much money it could disperse to--the leadings
health insurers typically have financial strength ratings from
rating agencies in the neighborhood of A to A-minus. They are
not A-plus, they are not A-plus-plus. So certainly the rating
agencies that are evaluating their solvency do not regard the
amount of capital they are holding as excessive relative to
their responsibility to meet unforeseen contingencies to their
policyholders.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. My time is expired. The Chair
recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to ask Mr.
Rome, your testimony notes that from 1999 to 2009 health
insurance companies raised premiums 131 percent, three times
the growth of wages and four times the rate of overall
inflation. One of the regulations that Republicans are
attacking here today is the so-called rate review regulation,
which I think requires very little of health insurers. It only
asks that they provide a justification to HHS for any premium
increase of 10 percent more. Insurance companies with that
amount of rate increase will be identified on a public Web
site. It seems to me that this is the least we can do to try to
stop excessive premium increases. So I just wanted to ask you,
what more can you tell us about the state of profitability of
the insurance industry today? Is rate review going to be an
impossibly onerous burden for the insurance companies to meet?
Have you seen an impact from rate review on premiums in any
States in which it has been implemented so far?
Mr. Rome. Rate review does a couple of very important
things. One is it brings transparency to this process, and if
insurance companies are selling a good product with good
rates--there ought to be no problem taking a close look at.
Rate review, which just today the California Assembly passed
and it--Senate, the good example there is auto insurance. They
have had rate reviews since--prior rate approval, there is a
robust and competitive market. But it has brought down rates.
In just the last year-and-a-half, aggressive intervention by
regulators has reduced rates in multiple places with health
insurance. And so anytime you see rates getting reduced in
Massachusetts from 18 to 10 percent, et cetera, you know that
those rates have some room, and regulation helps find it.
Mr. Pallone. The second question was mentioned I think or
someone said that Aetna recently announced in Connecticut they
will reduce premiums in the individual market there by 5 to 20
percent or 10 percent on average beginning in September. That
is certain a welcome change to hear premiums go down instead of
up.
But are you aware of why Aetna of Connecticut reduced its
premium? And I know your testimony talks about large insurers
having a significant amount of built-up reserves, so they
should be able to afford some premium reductions. Is that what
is happening with Aetna of Connecticut or is there some similar
actions in the near future that we might see form other
insurers?
Mr. Rome. Aetna is an example of the MLR in action. In
order to avoid paying the rebate that they would have been
required to pay as a consequence of not meeting their MLR
target, they lowered rates. And they wouldn't have lowered
rates if they weren't in a position to do so.
Mr. Pallone. OK, and are we likely to see that with other
insurers?
Mr. Rome. I think so, and I think what is important is that
while we along with others point out the importance, $2 billion
in rebates could come to consumers. The fact is that the MLR is
not designed to produce rebates. It is designed to more--
industry and lower premiums.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Mr. Gardiner, I think I have time
to ask you a question. As you know, the experience of small
business with unrelenting health insurance rate increases is
not surprising nor uncommon. Since 2000, premiums from
employer-sponsored insurance have grown three times as fast as
wages. These increases are crippling America's small businesses
in my opinion, not health reform.
Over half of the small businesses in the country can't
afford to offer health benefits to their employees which means
the majority of uninsured Americans are small business owners,
their employees or their families. In your testimony you talk
about a small business owner who was quoted 160 percent premium
increase from his carrier last year forcing him to change
plans. So my question is can you talk about how different
insurance reforms and the exchanges, you know, in the
Affordable Care Act, will help lower premium increases over
time, with regard to small businesses?
Mr. Gardiner. I think that one of the special problems that
small businesses have faced, while everybody sees medical
costs, premium costs, going up in the country and it is very
well documented--small businesses are much more subject to a
very much annual volatility. You know, every time we have a
meeting, there is always somebody standing up talking about
what their premium went up and other people chiming in. And a
lot of times they can't even find out why their premium went
up. And you know, we talk about people in the small group
market. It is even more volatile if you are self-employed. If
you are one of 22 million self-employed, you experience even
more premium volatility. And I think we are not really going to
see that premium volatility come down until the exchanges are
up--and combined with the insurance reforms. At that point we
are going to see an ability to level them out.
So I think the main thing we hear from small business
owners, can we get these exchanges going sooner because, you
know, we are going to have to bring those elements together of
the exchanges and the insurance reforms before we will decrease
that volatility on a year-to-year basis.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from Louisiana, Dr. Cassidy, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Cassidy. By the way, I enjoyed all the time we had
together. Now I am intrigued that you brought up Massachusetts,
because frankly, Massachusetts concerns me. If you will, that
appears to be the prequel, as someone described it, the beta
version of Obamacare. Massachusetts appears to be the prequel
or beta version of Obamacare. And their small group market has
the highest premiums in the Nation. Now, they started off with
an uninsured rate of about 10 percent. Now it is about 4
percent. And the economic drag or something has been
incredible. Maybe it is not this, but they have actually had a
negative--I did see that they had a crackdown on their MLR, but
those are non-profit insurance companies. If you talk to the
providers and the insurance companies, they say effectively,
this is like the Soviet Union, that they are being ignored in
terms of their true expenses. It is just arbitrarily being
decreased. Clearly you disagree with that, so I just would like
your response to those kind of ascertations.
Mr. Rome. I mean, I don't want to spend a lot of time on
Massachusetts itself because I was citing it as an example of
rate reductions that have come about because of prior rate
approval or because of insurance regulators stepping in.
And so you see that in multiple cases. Certainly California
had very large rate increases, 39 percent that went to 14
percent in 2009, looking at North Dakota recently, 27----
Mr. Cassidy. Can I ask you then, knowing that those exist
but obviously we may differ in terms of it, I am also
concerned, I am still a practicing physician in a public
hospital, and it has always been my observation that
politicians overpromise and underfund. And there is this
populace pressure to do something about climbing premiums. Do
you see any risk that in the future some DHH secretary,
whatever she is secretary, will say no, thou shalt not increase
your premium. We are going to disregard this cost structure
because frankly, it is a political pressure. It is the year
before presidential reelection, for example, and there is--
increase. Do you see no risk in that?
Mr. Rome. I don't see any risk in that because there isn't
any demonstrate that that has occurred to date. There is 22
States that have prior rate approval. I mentioned the
California example of auto----
Mr. Cassidy. Now, wait a second. I think we can look at
property and casualty rates in Florida and see that there was a
political response to something which, you know, people
objected. You are raising our premiums. The actuaries for the
P&C companies said no, this is reasonable. We have huge
exposure here.
Now, you may argue whether Citizens in Florida was a good
thing or a bad thing, but clearly, that was a political
response to an outcry which actuaries say is fiscally unsound.
So there does seem to be precedent for this.
Mr. Rome. Again, I don't think that there is any
significant precedent. What there is is a substantial history
of regulators taking, whether it is on both sides of the aisle,
taking a cool look at rate hike requests and making judgments
based on the merits.
Mr. Cassidy. Let me ask you----
Mr. Rome. It is an important----
Mr. Cassidy. I have limited time, so I am sorry to be rude.
Dr. Harrington, you see where I am going with my line of
questioning. What are your observations?
Mr. Harrington. We haven't had detailed statistical
analyses of the relationship between regulation and health
insurance and performance metrics like--and the like.
There have been dozens of studies of the impact of rate
regulation and workers' compensation insurance and automobile
insurance. You can have environments where an insurance company
is in an environment of rapid claim cost growth will ask for 10
or 15 percent in a politicized environment. Maybe they can
negotiate a rate increase of 8 or 9 percent. That can go on for
a period of time. It reduces the company's incentive to write
new business. It reduces their incentive to provide good
quality. It reduces their financial strength. But it cannot
persist.
The studies that have looked at long periods of time show
that basically there is no difference by type of regulation in
these markets, automobile and homeowners' insurance. Now, I
can't attest to that in health insurance because people haven't
looked at the data, but I don't think you can look at anecdotes
for what happened in Massachusetts, for example, because in the
short run, companies will take a rate increase less than the
actuarial projection if the alternative is enormous legal
fees--or having to leave a marketplace.
I would also just like to say we need to keep our facts
straight. The California situation was highly publicized.
Thirty-nine percent was touted all over. The weighted average
increase was 25 percent. It eventually was only 14 percent, and
there was--dispute about the numbers and so on. But it is not
right to compare 39 percent to 14 percent, and it is also not
right to assume as I said in a particular year if you get a
lower rate increase because of some regulatory action, that
that is really consistent with the underlying cost of the
business in the long run viability of the company.
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you very much. I am out of time almost.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from California, Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Hayes, Republicans
have repeatedly claimed that the administration's rule on
grandfathering plans will lead to people losing their plans. Is
that true?
Ms. Hayes. Is it true that Republicans have claimed that?
Is that the question? I am sorry.
Mr. Waxman. No.
Ms. Hayes. Is it true that they will actually lose their
plans? No, Mr. Chairman. I am sorry, Mr. Chairman. That was a
slip.
Mr. Waxman. I won't hold it against you.
Ms. Hayes. OK. And I apologize, Mr. Pitts, for that slip.
No, the grandfather rules were established to provide a
transition for health insurance, and first of all, you know,
starting with the premise that an individual can keep their
health insurance, with all due respect to the administration,
is a false premise to begin with because any day an insurance
plan could decide that they are no longer going to offer it in
that market. And it is not so much that an individual I believe
is so much attached to an insurance policy to begin with or an
insurance carrier in particular, they are worried about whether
or not they can continue to see their healthcare providers,
they are worried about whether or not it is affordable, they
are worried about what benefits are covered.
And under the grandfather rules, plans are required to
meet--but frankly, if the plans change their policy so that
they no longer meet the grandfather provisions, that is not the
same policy anymore, either, because if they are losing
grandfather status, they have made a significant change in
their benefits. There has been a significant increase in cost
sharing for beneficiaries, there has been a reduction in
benefit coverage generally.
So the grandfather rule protects individuals and they can
continue to keep the plans they have so long as the carriers
keep the same----
Mr. Waxman. Right. Would you say employers won't drop
coverage just because they may not qualify as for the
grandfather?
Ms. Hayes. Oh, absolutely not. I think clearly every
employer group that I have heard has said that they want to
continue to offer healthcare benefits because it is an
important tool for recruiting and retaining personnel. At the
same time, there are provisions in the Affordable Care Act.
Mr. Waxman. Let me move on to some others in the limited
time I have----
Ms. Hayes. Sure.
Mr. Waxman [continuing]. Because I wanted to ask Mr.
Gardiner, Republicans continue to say, and this isn't a
question of whether they continue to say it, I am asserting
that they have said over and over again that the Affordable
Care Act will cost small employers too much. However, we know
this is not the case. The ACA contains multiple provisions in
directly at reducing healthcare costs for small businesses and
ensuring the small businesses, their employees will have access
to affordable and quality health insurance. In your testimony
you discuss some very important provisions that are already
helping millions of small businesses. For example, you talked
about the small business tax credit that offers a credit of up
to 35 percent of their health insurance costs. Four million
small businesses--with the small business tax credit, and early
evidence suggests that many are already benefitting from it.
According to a survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation, the
percentage of small employers offering health coverage has
risen from 46 percent in 2009 to 59 percent in 2010, in part
due to the reform's new tax credit. Can you please elaborate on
how the healthcare tax credit for small business is helping
create jobs and health security?
Mr. Gardiner. The direct linkage between the healthcare tax
credit and any tax credit is that the more money is flung into
the treasury of a small business, then they have more money to
invest--for jobs is the fact that over the last decade 70
percent of the net new jobs have come from small business, and
you know, there is a lot of other industries out there, and
they invest in a lot of mergers and acquisitions and increased
dividends and go offshore and everything. But really, you know,
small businesses are there because somebody was an
entrepreneur--that, and they pour their lives and their money
back into growing their business.
So when we say that they can get a 35 percent tax credit
that is going to reduce their cost, that is going to stay, you
know, in the treasury of their company, and they are going to
be looking at how to expand their business. And very much like
this is last year Congress provided the tax equity for self-
employed, the 22 million self-employed, which reduced their
cost when they purchase healthcare by 15.3 percent. And we
should keep that in mind as one of the benefits of the overall
health reform that needs to be retained also.
Mr. Waxman. I see my time is expired.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Lance, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon to
the panel. A similar vein of questioning as suggested by Mr.
Waxman, Mr. Fensholt, in your testimony you state that many of
your clients may lose their grandfathered status, due even to
modest or routine changes, and I would like to suggest several
examples and if you would comment on them please, sir.
Mr. Fensholt. Sure.
Mr. Lance. A plan increases co-insurance from 5 percent to
6 percent, and a family believes the plan still provides good
value for the family. In your judgment, would the plan remain
grandfathered and could the family keep that type of plan?
Mr. Fensholt. Well, the plan loses grandfathered status,
and the issue in my space, in the middle market, large market,
is that when a plan loses that grandfathered protection,
additional benefit mandates and requirements drop down on top
of that plan, and those carry costs. And so the problem as we
see it with the grandfathered rule, it is--grandfathered rule,
very modest changes. I think here is where Ms. Hayes and I part
company. It does not take a significant change in plan design.
Mr. Lance. So for example, another situation, a co-pay is
increased for prescription drugs from $5 to $10 or perhaps an
owner asks her employees to increase their share of health
premiums from 2 percent to 8 percent. In your judgment, what
would happen in those situations?
Mr. Fensholt. In those situations, the plan loses
grandfathered protection. The additional mandate dropped down
the plan. The plan incurs the additional cost.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much. Ms. Reichel, in your
testimony you mentioned that the administrative and regulatory
burdens of the medical loss ratio requirements will put
significant challenges to employers and health plans.
In New Jersey where I live, there is a history of
administering MLRs and overseeing administrative rebates,
although one--PPACA, we have the situation but not as strict as
PPACA. I would be interested in your thoughts on what effects
the stricter MLR and would a State like New Jersey's insurance
market be challenged in this regard, recognizing that what we
have in New Jersey is not as strict as what is in PPACA.
Ms. Reichel. What is in the ACA now I think is going to be
a real burden on small businesses, and here is why we think
that. Assume if you will that there is going to be a rebate
owed to a small business. The insurance company has to do much
more than simply determine that a rebate is owed to the
employer and provide that back to the employer. What the small
employer now, and large employer, too, needs to do in order to
get that is to provide data to the insurance company that all
the premiums that the employer has paid, he needs to determine
what the premiums are that the individuals he employs pays. He
also has to determine what the percentage of the rebate is
coming back to the employee, and he has to provide
documentation to the insurance company that he actually gave--
so the reporting requirements on small employers is much
greater than it ever was before.
Mr. Lance. And as a follow-up to that, what if a State has
never had to deal with the MLR? It seems to me it might face an
even more significant effect on this market?
Ms. Reichel. I would think that that would be absolutely
true, not only from the small employer but also from the
carrier point of view where a State that has no MLR currently
in effect, effectively what the companies are doing, he is
going from zero to 60 immediately, or I guess zero to 80 or 85
overnight.
If the State has no medical loss ratio now, then it, in
effect at the federal level for policies that were in effect
before the statute was effectively signed. So there is a
retroactive application of the medical loss ratio. In a State
where there hasn't been an MLR, I think that that climb is
really steep for the carriers.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. I conclude from the questioning and
from the testimony that it is unlikely that the President's
promise that Americans can keep their health plan if they like
it is not accurate, and I think we have to move in the
direction to making that possible in the greatest number of
situations.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. We will begin a
second round of questioning here. Mr. Fensholt, in your
testimony you state that employers' biggest concern about PPACA
is the massive administrative burden imposed by the law. Do you
believe that the healthcare law's administrative burden is
merely a short-term issue for employers as the law's
implementation has begun or will the law present additional
administrative headaches for job creators down the road?
Mr. Fensholt. Oh, it will definitely be the latter, Mr.
Chairman. This is an ongoing trend at the federal level with
regard to health insurance and the administrative burdens.
There are federal rules put on plan sponsors, and I might add,
by 2014, for example, employers are not only going to have to
comply with the panoply of existing obligations but they will
begin reporting to the insurance exchanges the various levels
of coverage they are offering their employees, what they are
charging for it, who is eligible for it, who is enrolled in it
and do this on a regular basis, along with a variety of other
reports and obligations.
The irony about these reporting and disclosure obligations
is that if you look at any one of them individually, they may
not appear all that onerous. But in the aggregate, none of
these obligations is a sword thrust to the heart. But in the
aggregate, you are asking an employer to supply more than 50
disclosures, notices and reports to the Federal Government. I
mean, over time this is death by 1,000 cuts to employers. And I
will tell you, sir, that we have clients who are at the end of
their rope. Their view is this is just becoming too hard, too
complicated. The--of the axe hanging over our head is too
severe. We are not going to want to do this much longer. And
rather than making that burden easier, health reform makes it
harder, more complicated and more cumbersome.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. Ms. Hayes, in a December 14
editorial, Secretary Sebelius and Attorney General Holder
wrote, ``It is essential that everyone have coverage. Imagine
what would happen if everyone waited to buy car insurance until
after they got in an accident. Premiums would skyrocket,
coverage would be unaffordable and responsible drivers would be
priced out the market.'' Yes or no, do you agree with Secretary
Sebelius and the Attorney General that if the individual
mandate is unconstitutional, would premiums skyrocket?
Ms. Hayes. If it is struck down, would premiums skyrocket?
I believe that if the individual mandate were not a part of
this law, it would be more difficult for insurers to continue
to operate, yes.
Mr. Pitts. So it is fair to say that you believe that if
the individual mandate were not in the bill, that would impact
other parts of the law?
Ms. Hayes. Yes.
Mr. Pitts. Anyone. Medicare's plan to prevent fraud and
abuse has often been described as a pay-and-chase model. Can
anyone describe how pay-and-chase anti-fraud efforts work? Ms.
Reichel?
Ms. Reichel. I have seen people looking down at my end of
the table. What pay-and-chase means is that once a service has
been provided, the bill has been sent to the insurance company,
the insurance company has paid it, there is a retroactive
application if you would or an attempt to get the money back
that somebody finds out after the fact has been provided
fraudulently for a service that didn't occur, for a service
that shouldn't have occurred, so somebody who wasn't there.
That is pretty much what a pay-and-chase is as opposed to
preventing the fraud from occurring in the first instance.
Mr. Pitts. All right. I am going to at this time yield 5
minutes to the ranking member for his questions because we are
voting.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Have we started the vote?
Mr. Pitts. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. OK. I will try to be quick. I wanted to ask
Ms. Hayes about the waivers. You know, Republicans, they spend
a lot of time complaining about the inequities in the waiver
process for annual limit requirements. They have made
allegations that favored political allies of the democratic
party, particularly unions who were being exempted from all the
health reform bills, consumer protections and insurance
regulations. And I think these claims have been wildly--they
need a lot of consideration here, but for instance, union plans
were more than five times more likely to be rejected for annual
limit waivers than were other kinds of applicants--for annual
limits of policies affect only a small number of people and are
just one consumer protection of the law.
Your testimony describes the waivers as a kind of
transitional policy from today's world to a much more rational
insurance regime in 2014. Would you just elaborate on that a
little bit?
Ms. Hayes. Yes, sir. I have seen no evidence to suggest
that the administration is granting favors to anyone when it
comes to waivers. Clearly, Congress anticipated and were warned
during debate that there were going to be transitional issues,
and that is built into the law itself. So I don't find it
particularly surprising that waivers have had to be granted and
particularly in the area of some of the mini-med plans that you
have seen out there which I don't think anyone would argue are
allies of the current administration.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you. I want to ask Mr.
Gardiner and Mr. Rome, this is about the Affordable Care Act
creating jobs because I obviously believe that it creates
hundreds of thousands of jobs. But the opponents make strong
claims that the law will kill jobs. They argue that requiring
employers to offer health insurance and to improve their
benefits will increase cost of labor. I don't think that is
true because I think the ACA is in fact helping to create
thousands of jobs in the public and private healthcare sectors.
In June 2010 funds were allocated to train more than 16,000
new primary care providers including physicians, nurses. It
seems logical that the newly insured 30 million people will
need doctors, nurses and other healthcare personnel to meet
their medical needs. I know that the Republicans have said that
the country may not have enough doctors and hospitals to serve
these people, but the answer to that is to grow the workforce
to create more jobs.
So I just wanted you to comment, one or both of you. Can
you describe for us how the ACA is a job creator, not a job
killer, and talk about some of the other factors, just to
comment on that. I will start with Mr. Rome, I guess.
Mr. Rome. OK. I would just say two things before Mr.
Gardiner. I mean, one is that one of the best things that we
can do to help create jobs is reduce the expenses that
employers face, and reducing healthcare costs is an important
and significant part of that. And that is why the MLR, for
example, which makes insurance more efficient and more
affordable is an incredibly important part of job creation.
The second thing is when we do talk about medical
personnel, simple example. Over the next 10 years, community
health centers are going to go from treating 20 to 40 million
people, and that is a substantial change in treatment, and that
will obviously create jobs in the health sector, as just one
example.
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Gardiner?
Mr. Gardiner. Where we start from is what if we don't have
healthcare reform? That is what we see as the job killer, and
that was the study that we had done by MIT to start with. So we
start from the premise if we don't do something about the ever-
escalating, we are going to lose jobs. And we documented that
as 178,000 jobs, but I think that is a very conservative
number. But if we go forward with health reform and reduce
costs, then firms can invest that money. And in fact, the other
part that we have to look at is job loss. You have got 42
million employees at small firms under 100 employees, and it
has been well-documented in the literature out there that
people can't leave because they are worried about getting the
benefit. Of course, this would be any size firm because they
don't know if they are going to have healthcare where they go,
especially when we have half of the small employers not
providing it, and that is a shrinking base.
So employees can't move. They are unhappy. Everybody who
has been an employer knows that that is not a good thing, that
when an employee wants to move, they ought to be able to move.
But it also applies to people starting companies,
entrepreneurs. Why is somebody going to take the risk to leave
a good job with good benefits and go out there and be a self-
employed person, a start-up company, and then find out how
expensive and how unattainable healthcare might be for them. So
there are several ways that having healthcare available and
having it more affordable and less volatile is going to help
small businesses grow and make it easier for people to start
companies.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
our first panel. The Chair thanks the witnesses for their
testimony, for their patience. Despite the interruption, it was
an excellent panel, excellent testimony.
The subcommittee will take testimony from the second panel
at a date to be determined. The subcommittee is now in recess.
[Whereupon, at 5:17 p.m., the subcommittee was recessed.]

PPACA'S EFFECTS ON MAINTAINING HEALTH COVERAGE AND JOBS: A REVIEW OF
THE HEALTH CARE LAW'S REGULATORY BURDEN--DAY 2

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 15, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:00 p.m., in
Room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Michael C.
Burgess presiding.
Present: Representatives Burgess, Rogers, Gingrey, Latta,
Cassidy, Guthrie, Pallone, Towns, Capps, and Waxman (ex
officio).
Staff present: Brenda Destro, Professional Staff Member,
Health; Paul Edattel, Professional Staff Member, Health; Julie
Goon, Health Policy Advisor; Jeff Mortier, Professional Staff
Member; Katie Novaria, Legislative Clerk; Debbee Keller, Press
Secretary; Alli Corr, Minority Policy Analyst; Tim Gronniger,
Minority Senior Professional Staff Member; Purvee Kempf,
Minority Senior Counsel; Karen Lightfoot, Minority
Communications Director and Senior Policy Advisor; Karen
Nelson, Minority Deputy Committee Staff Director for Health;
and Mitch Smiley, Minority Assistant Clerk.
Mr. Burgess. The committee will come to order. This is a
continuation of a hearing that actually began 2 weeks ago. The
opening statements have already been given by the members on
the committee, and so today we will conduct our hearing on the
regulatory burden of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act.
We do welcome our only witness today, Steve Larsen,
certainly no stranger to the committee. We welcome you back,
sir. We are always glad to have you.
He is the Director of Consumer Information and Insurance
Oversight for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Once again, we want to thank Mr. Larsen for agreeing to
appear before our committee and the willingness to accommodate
changes in schedule. We understand you, sir, have some other
considerations today. There is likely to be a set of votes on
the House floor sooner rather than later.
So with that, why don't we proceed directly to your opening
statement in the interest of time.

STATEMENT OF STEVE LARSEN, DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR CONSUMER
INFORMATION AND INSURANCE OVERSIGHT, CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND
MEDICAID SERVICES

Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Pallone, members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to discuss CCIIO's progress in implementing the
Affordable Care Act, and I have submitted my full written
statement for the record.
I am pleased to have the opportunity to describe the new
programs that CCIIO has implemented under the ACA, programs
that have been implemented in an open, transparent and balanced
manner.
When fully implemented in 2014, the ACA will expand access
to affordable quality coverage to over 30 million Americans. By
increasing competition among private health insurers and
reducing barriers to coverage, individuals will have coverage
when they need it most. In the meantime, the reforms in the
Affordable Care Act we have already implemented provide a
critical foundation of patients' rights in the private health
insurance market. Now, for example, consumers can get better
information about available health care options in their State
on healthcare.gov, and based on provisions which allow
dependents under age 26 to have coverage under their parents'
policies, over 600,000 young adults now have access to care.
CMS has worked to manage different statutory implementation
schedules for these and other provisions, while still seeking,
considering and accommodating public input and comment. CCIIO
received and considered input from consumers, industry, States
and other stakeholders through formal requests for comment and,
in some cases, public forums, as we prepared our regulations
implementing these programs.
Importantly, in each regulation issued, we seek to secure
the protections intended by Congress in the most economically
efficient manner possible, and we undertake a careful balancing
of costs and benefits and examine regulatory alternatives.
As a result of these processes and the feedback received by
CMS, the regulations that we have issued to implement the
Affordable Care Act have been strengthened by the views and
opinions expressed by stakeholders and, again, reflect a
balanced approach to implementation.
For example, CMS issued the final rate review regulation in
May after reviewing and considering more than 60 comments
received on the proposed rule issued in December. The final
rule includes several changes to the proposed rule that reflect
the comments that we received. For example, based on public
input, the final rule clarifies that CMS will work actively
with States to develop State-specific thresholds beginning in
September 2012 for the rate-review process, and this ensures
that the rate-review process is based on the insurance and
health care cost trends in each particular State.
We also extended the startup date for the new rate-review
process until September. We also modified the requirements for
what constitutes an effective rate-review process in the States
based on comments that we received from the industry and State
regulators.
Another program that reflects our balanced approach to
implementation is the medical loss ratio regulation. In order
to ensure consumers receive value for their premium dollars,
the ACA establishes minimum standards for spending by insurance
companies on clinical services and quality-improvement
activities for their members. In December of 2010, we published
an interim final regulation with the 60-day comment period
implementing the MLR provisions of the ACA.
The interim final regulations certified and adopted the
recommendations submitted to the Secretary by NAIC. And,
importantly, the NAIC process included significant input from
the public, from States and other key stakeholders, and was
widely praised for its openness and transparency.
The MLR regulation we issued struck a balance among the
interests of many affected groups and took into account the
potential costs and benefits of the regulation on affected
parties. Some of the provisions that may have been burdensome
on small plans or new health plans were modified, and pursuant
to specific provisions in the ACA, we established a process to
allow States to seek a modification to the MLR standard in the
individual market in order to allow an orderly transition for
health plans to the new MLR standards. And this process
provides flexibility to the States in how they implement the
ACA.
In implementing the provisions of the Affordable Care Act
in the future, CCIIO will continue to work closely with all
interested stakeholders and to use the transparency of the
regulatory process to ensure the new law serves the American
people in an economically efficient manner.
We are proud of all that we have accomplished over the last
year and look forward to 2014 when Americans will have access
to more affordable comprehensive health insurance plans. And
thank you for the opportunity to discuss the work that CCIIO
has been doing to implement the Affordable Care Act.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Larsen, for your testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Larsen follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.094

Mr. Burgess. We will now, as is customary, take questions
from the dais. We will alternate between Republicans and
Democrats. Without objection, I will begin.
Now, you have been here in our subcommittee before, and the
last time you were here, I asked and you agreed to provide a
detailed budget. To date, I have only received some net totals
for your obligations, such as the amount spent on the early
retiree reprogram.
What we have discussed was a detailed budget that included
all of your sources of funding and how those dollars were
spent, and I have had both your word and Secretary Sebelius'
word that this would be forthcoming, and I think I have been
more than patient. When could the committee look forward to
seeing action on this request?
Mr. Larsen. Well, thank you for your question. I think we
have submitted, I think, two responses, and I apologize if you
don't feel they are fully responsive. I think we submitted kind
of our spending to date, I think, as of March, and then our
2011 and 2012 budget.
But we would be happy to provide you with more detail. I
don't know if you have provided--your staff has provided us
with the specific level of detail that you would like, but if
they have, I will certainly, after this hearing, talk to them
to make sure we get you what you have asked for.
Mr. Burgess. Well, just to refresh your memory a little
bit, during that first hearing that we had, there was some
concern--and I believe Mr. Engoff appeared with you at that
hearing--and the questions were surrounding how did you know--
in February of 2010, a month and a half before the bill was
signed into law, how did you know what your startup expenses
were going to be?
In other words, there was money written into the bill--when
the legislative product was still a bill, there was money
written in. And it almost seems like people were hired prior to
the bill becoming law. So we were interested in how those funds
were allocated, what they have been used for, what amount of
money that was allowed for that initial allocation for startup
costs remains unspent, just trying to get some finer detail on
where the dollars came from and where they have ended up.
So, again, I apologize if we have not provided you that.
Mr. Larsen. I apologize if we have not been responsive, and
after this hearing we will convene and determine how quickly we
can get that information to you.
Mr. Burgess. Very well.
On the issue of the high-deductible health plans, I noticed
in one of the publications that comes out here on the Hill
every morning, yesterday's Politico Pro talked about how the
number of people signing up for high-deductible health plans,
HSAs, if you will, has increased. And I don't remember whether
the number was 14 or 18 percent, but it was a significant
increase.
Now, many of us are concerned, as the rollout of the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act becomes
established--these programs, high-deductible health plans, are
extremely popular. In fact, President Obama himself, when the
Republicans were down at the White House a few weeks ago, told
us a little vignette about some dermatologic preparation he had
been prescribed during the campaign. It worked a little bit,
not all that great, so he got it refilled. He had a little
prescription card. It cost him 5 bucks for every prescription.
But when he was out on the road, he ran out, went to the
pharmacist, explained his difficulty. The pharmacist called the
doctor; they got everything straightened out as to what
prescription he needed. The pharmacist bagged it up and handed
it to him and said, ``That will be $400.'' And the President
said, ``You know, this rash is not that bad.'' And at that
point, the President became an informed consumer and responded
to a very clear market signal that the rash wasn't that bad,
and $400 was not a necessary expenditure.
That is why so many of us really like the concept of people
being able to control their own money for health care
expenditures. Mitch Daniels, in Indiana, allowed that.
Something magic happens when people spend their own money for
health care, even if it wasn't their own money in the first
place. That is, his State employees, where he funded a high-
deductible health plan and funded the health savings account
part of that, people tended to be very cost-conscious
consumers. And as a consequence, he held down costs for his
State employees by 11 percent over 2 years at the same time
regular PPO, Medicare, Medicaid were increasing at 9 percent to
double-digit increases every year. So it is something worthy of
our consideration.
So what kinds of assurances can you give me, to those
millions of people who have high-deductible health plans, that
they will still have access to this as a health coverage
option?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I guess I would respond this way. I
suspect there are a number of different reasons why people
elect those plans. One is that I think it demonstrates the
manner in which the current market is broken and, for many
people, unaffordable, so that the only way they can get, you
know, catastrophic-type coverage is to pay out of pocket up to
particular limits.
I think many people end up purchasing these types of
policies because, frankly, that is maybe what they can afford.
It may not be what they want. I am not sure many people want to
have to pay out of pocket the thousands of dollars that they
may have to for a high-deductible plan. But in the current
health care environment, prereform pre-2014, that may be your
option. But we find that most people actually want
comprehensive coverage for their cost.
Mr. Burgess. Actually, the reason to have a high-deductible
health plan and spend your own money and control your own money
through a health savings account is to be in control of health
care. When I spend money off of Visa debit cards that I have
for my health savings account, no one in the government, no one
at Aetna, no one at CIGNA tells me what to buy and where to buy
it. I make those decisions myself. So I would also argue that
there is an issue of control.
Can you just briefly tell me under the medical loss ratio
rules that you are doing, are those contributions to the health
savings account, are those counted as actual clinical expenses?
Mr. Larsen. I would have to confirm that back with you,
because that is a level of detail for the reg that is escaping
me for the moment.
Mr. Burgess. I would appreciate you getting back to me.
I will yield now 5 minutes to the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Pallone of New Jersey.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was listening to
you, though I am not sure that I agree that it makes sense for
people to forego treatment because it costs them more. But
whatever, I am not going to get into that today.
I want to ask Mr. Larsen, one of the witnesses, I guess, at
the previous hearing characterized the medical loss ratio
regulation as ``costly bureaucratic interference with insurers'
legitimate business decisions.''
And yet Consumer Reports calls the rate review rules a big
win for consumers because insurers are going to have to start
spending more on health care due to this new medical loss ratio
that requires every insurance company to have a medical loss
ratio of no less than 80 percent for individual and small group
plans and 85 percent for large group plans. I don't understand
how anyone could accept a situation in which insurers spend
one-half or one-third of their health insurance premiums on CEO
salaries, profits and administrative costs, and yet we have
seen that situation in the private market.
So my question is can you tell us what benefit you see from
setting some restrictions on what portion of the premium
insurance companies are able to spend on overhead and
administrative costs? Have you seen any benefits to date as
insurers implement these new rules? And what about the process
through which the MLR rules were adopted; what was the role of
the National Association of Insurance Commissioners?
Mr. Larsen, I have to tell you, and, you know, we are
continuing the previous hearing, I don't really understand how
anyone could argue that these medical loss ratios are not a
good thing. But in any case, if you could answer those
questions.
Mr. Larsen. Sure, I would be happy to. And I think that is
a good example of a regulation and a program where the benefits
so far outweigh the costs. I mean, first of all, when we looked
at the economic impact of this as a percent of the premiums
that health insurers issue, it is a very, very small
percentage. They are already preparing this type of information
for the NAIC filing. So it was a very small incremental
portion.
Compare that with, for example, the estimates that both the
NAIC and, I think, many Wall Street analysts have issued
regarding the potential for rebates to consumers if this law
had been in effect in 2010, which, depending on the estimate,
is either 1.5- or $2 billion. And that dollar amount reflects
the value that will go back to consumers when this law is in
effect in terms of a rebate for 2011. So when you weigh the
costs and benefits of that, I think it is so clearly to the
advantage of the consumers and not burdensome to the industry.
And in terms of the process that was followed, you know, we
adopted the recommendations of the NAIC. And I think, as we
have testified to before, the NAIC followed a very open,
transparent, thoughtful, thorough, considerate process, which
is why we were comfortable adopting their recommendations.
Mr. Pallone. All right, thank you.
Now, the other regulation the Republicans are attacking in
this hearing is the rate-review regulation that requires that
insurance companies explain and disclose publicly any premium
increase over 10 percent for a given year. Last year, before
the new rate-review process went into place, several State
regulators had success in challenging insurance on rate
increases and actually reversing them. I won't give you the
examples, although we have several.
Again, Consumer Reports' Health News calls the rate-review
rules a big win for consumers because insurers who want to
raise rates by more than 10 percent have to say so to the
public. Even in States where regulators can't deny insurance
premium increases, this transparency gives consumers the
ability to make better decisions.
So can you tell me about how Federal rules will relate to
these ongoing State review efforts? I am sure you have heard
the Republicans' charges the new Federal rules are duplicative
of State efforts. Do you agree with that?
Mr. Larsen. I don't. We think, and I think the NAIC agrees,
that the rate-review regulation is really a supplement to
existing State laws. And, as you know, I am a former
commissioner, the Secretary is a former insurance commissioner.
We are particularly sensitive to the role that States play and
historically have played in regulating rates. So the rate-
review regulation is really a supplement to existing processes
to ensure that really in States where there isn't a robust
rate-review process, the consumers can get that process where
they might not get it today. But we are not taking the place of
what States are doing today.
Mr. Pallone. The last thing, I don't have much time here,
but--you know, but we heard charges again from the Republicans
on the committee about the waivers to the--you know, bias in
granting waivers to the annual limits on essential benefits
coverage, particularly with regard to unions, you know,
favoritism and all of that. And I know the GAO report that came
out said that that simply wasn't true. So I just--I have a few
minutes. If you could just comment on these allegations that
have been made of cronyism with regard to the waivers.
Mr. Larsen. Well, I am happy to do that. As you know, I
have testified here and other forums previously, including
under oath, that we have applied the regulatory criteria to the
waivers in a manner without regard to politics or favoritism in
any way, shape or form.
As you indicated, I think the GAO report confirmed in the
sampling that they took and the data that they looked at that
when we reviewed these applications, we applied the criteria
that we have published on our Website and that are available to
applicants.
So, you know, again, I don't know how else to say it. There
are no facts that support that, they have no merit, and I think
that I have said it, and I think the GAO came to the same
conclusion.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman's time has expired.
We will recognize now Mr. Guthrie from Kentucky. Five
minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Guthrie. Thanks for coming. I would just ask you a
question based on you just said you were an insurance
commissioner. I forget which State.
Mr. Larsen. It was Maryland.
Mr. Guthrie. Maryland, oK. And then also the Secretary. And
waivers, sort of the kind of theme that I was going to ask you.
On the loss ratios, I know that Kentucky is a State that has
asked for a waiver.
Mr. Larsen. That is right.
Mr. Guthrie. And I know that it is what, 80 percent for
small plans----
Mr. Larsen. And individuals.
Mr. Guthrie. And individuals; 85 percent for large
companies.
Mr. Larsen. That is right.
Mr. Guthrie. Some States are lower. I think Maine has a
waiver, or Nevada----
Mr. Larsen. That is right.
Mr. Guthrie [continuing]. Has a waiver with changes. And
one other. Delaware. Not Delaware, they are asking----
Mr. Larsen. New Hampshire.
Mr. Guthrie. New Hampshire.
In, I guess, the deference to State insurance
commissioners, because I know our insurance commissioner is
asking for the waiver believing that it would be disruptive of
the market if we have to go to 80, 85 percent, and so as a
former insurance commissioner, why is there more deference
given to that instead of the Federal 85 percent, 80 percent?
Mr. Larsen. Well, you know, the Affordable Care Act set up
kind of a baseline of the 80, and the 85 for the large group. I
think that the statute specifically recognizes the possibility
that an immediate transition in some States to the 80 could be
disruptive. And so the statute provides for this modification
process. I have to say it is not really a waiver because we can
set a new number, but you are not--companies aren't waived from
the general MLR requirements.
But I guess my point is that the Affordable Care Act
specifically recognizes that there may be individual cases
where flexibility is needed. And so, you know, I think we set
up a process that was fairly straightforward for the
commissioners to apply. You know, every State is different, and
we have got, you know, 10 or so pending applications, and I
think we are pretty close to moving on Kentucky.
Mr. Guthrie. Yes. I think in the final rule, or the interim
final rule, I can't think--the individual market can be--if a
State has to say I have a reasonable likelihood to disrupt the
market, they can--not a waiver but----
Mr. Larsen. Right. A modification adjustment, just for an
individual market.
Mr. Guthrie. And would that not--you don't think that
supplies the small--we have a lot of problems in Kentucky with
individual markets and even small markets where people
purchase. The ERISA plans and larger, of course, are separate.
Mr. Larsen. Yes. I know that--I mean, I am aware that there
has been concern expressed about the impact on the small group
market. I mean, we haven't read the ACA to kind of permit the
same type of adjustment in the small group market.
Mr. Guthrie. But the same negative effects could happen to
the small group that would happen----
Mr. Larsen. Personally I think it is much less likely, and
I am presuming that is why the ACA didn't provide for the same
type of accommodation to the small group market. The individual
market is typically very fragile. A number of States have gone
through disruption in their individual market. And so I am
assuming that is why that provision was put in.
Mr. Guthrie. I have got a couple minutes, and why don't I
get to one more. The loss ratio, the agent's fee is part of the
loss ratio?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Guthrie. And we have had the National Association of
Health Underwriters survey. Agents are seeing income losses
from 20 to 50 percent, and 20 percent of agents have said they
have downsized their business in response.
And my question is the decision of including the agent's
fee into the--I think that was an administrative decision, not
in the ACA.
Mr. Larsen. It was not.
Mr. Guthrie. The negative impact on jobs.
Mr. Larsen. Yes. I mean, the manner in which the MLR is
calculated, we took almost 100 percent our guidance from the
very deliberative process that the NAIC conducted.
And although they expressed some concern about the
potential impact on agents and brokers, they did not--in their
recommendations to us did not recommend that the commissions be
pulled out. Now--and so we adopted their recommendations, and
that is in the interim final rule.
We certainly, as part of the administration--and we
recognize the important role that agents and brokers play in
the community, we acknowledge that. As we sit here today, my
understanding is that the NAIC has taken up this issue, and
they have done some preliminary work on that. So we are
monitoring the type of work that we are doing, and we look
forward to seeing whether they ultimately make recommendations
to pull or make changes.
Mr. Guthrie. So I understand you are actually engaging
agents and brokers now to try to----
Mr. Larsen. We have met with them.
Mr. Guthrie. I am into the high-risk pool, so----
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Guthrie. You see the value of what they do.
Mr. Larsen. Yes. We are moving towards paying commissions
to agents and brokers for the high-risk pool, and I do want to
point out, not to belabor it, but the modification process that
we were talking about early, one of the criteria for whether a
market is destabilized that we took at the suggestion of the
NAIC was whether there was going to be diminished access to
agents and brokers. And some States have asserted that that
might be the case if we were to apply the 80 percent, it is
part of their application. So we are looking at that issue.
Mr. Guthrie. I appreciate that. I appreciate that answer.
Thanks.
I yield back my 5 seconds.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you.
The chair recognizes the ranking member of the full
committee Mr. Waxman. Five minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Larsen, good to see you again. I think you have
attended this subcommittee--I think you have a better
attendance record than I do, so good to see you again.
Republicans, some Republicans, have repeatedly claimed that
the grandfathering rule issued by HHS will result in tens of
millions of people losing their health care. That is, of
course, contrary to the spirit of the Affordable Care Act, that
if you like what you have, you can keep it.
Is it accurate to say, as some are saying, that the
grandfathering rule will result in people with employer-
sponsored coverage being denied or losing their health
insurance coverage because of HHS or by their employer?
Mr. Larsen. No. We don't see that happening.
Mr. Waxman. So where would Republicans get the idea that
tens of millions of people are losing their health care?
Mr. Larsen. I don't know. I think the only point is that
there are, you know, estimates that we have made about the
transition from some health plans that may decide to make
changes to the provisions, and they may not continue to be
grandfathered health plans. But that doesn't mean that people
won't be able to continue their coverage under those plans.
Mr. Waxman. Well, it appears to be another case where
Republicans are inventing problems allegedly caused by the
Affordable Care Act. And even if plans do lose grandfathered
status, that doesn't mean a person loses his or her health
insurance. In fact, they gain some consumer protections like
rights to external appeals and coverage of preventive services.
In any case, these requirements will not be prohibitive for
employer plans because they usually already meet the rules. In
fact, one employer benefits consultant noted that, quote,
``Large companies realize they already comply with many of the
requirements of nongrandfathered plans, so the changes they
will need to make aren't likely to add a significant cost or
administrative burden,'' end quote.
Opponents of the Affordable Care Act, there was a recent
study, Mr. Larsen, from McKinsey & Company that claims that a
significant number of employers will stop offering insurance to
their workers in 2014. However, other well-respected
organizations have examined whether employers will continue to
offer coverage, and they have come to different conclusions.
The RAND Corporation, the Urban Institute, and Mercer all
conducted studies and found that the percentage of employees
offered insurance will not change significantly. In addition,
nonpartisan experts, including CBO, have predicted that
employer coverage will not be affected significantly by the
Affordable Care Act.
What is your take? Are employers likely to drop coverage
once exchanges and tax credits are available?
Mr. Larsen. Well, we certainly don't think they will and
expect--we don't expect that they will. As you have pointed
out, I think it was the RAND study that, in fact, predicted
that the number of small businesses and employees of small
businesses that would have coverage would increase
significantly thanks to the efficiencies of the Affordable Care
Act, and I think Mercer, you know, concluded in many respects
it was a little early to tell, but ultimately also said that
they did not expect plans to stop offering employer-based
coverage.
Mr. Waxman. On June 2, 2011, Ms. Reichel testified on
behalf of the America's Health Insurance Plans, or AHIP, during
the first part of the hearing and suggested that HHS adopt a
one-size-fits-all for the 3-year transition to the 80 and 85
percent standards for medical loss ratios for all health plans.
Currently HHS has in place a State-by-State waiver process set
forth in law to respond to situations in specific States where
an individual market is highly concentrated and the MLR could
destabilize the market. HHS has approved waiver requests from
three States for modifications of the MLR standards and is
considering several more.
Can you tell us what goes into the decision as to whether
to grant a waiver for a State's individual health insurance
market from the MLR requirements?
Mr. Larsen. Sure. And I, you know, will say to start out
that, you know, every State is different. And I think that is
why this system works well, because some States don't need a
waiver. It is obvious that some States haven't requested a
waiver.
So the idea of having a national waiver would deprive a lot
of consumers of the value of the law when a modification,
excuse me, wasn't necessarily needed.
But to answer your question, the basic test is whether a
market is likely to be destabilized if the 80 percent were to
be applied to the individual market, and really we look at
whether it is likely that a small insurance company that might
be running substantially below 80 would decide to leave the
market. And then we look at whether there are other coverage
opportunities if that insurance company were to leave the
market. And as you mentioned, we agreed with the application
from Maine and made, I think, minor modifications to the other
two applications.
Mr. Waxman. So these decisions are more nuanced from place
to place.
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Waxman. Some States will need a transition; some States
won't. We shouldn't prejudge the waiver application by
instituting a national transition policy.
Mr. Larsen. That is right.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize the gentleman from Michigan. Five minutes
for questions, please.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Although I am not surprised that the gentleman from
California makes the argument that people who are grandfathered
won't lose their insurance, and, in his words, all this is a
little nuanced, but what you will have is you will have
millions of Americans who don't get to keep the health plan
that they like, as was promised; will get a health plan that is
far more expensive and they don't want, courtesy of the Federal
Government.
To say that that is nuanced is ridiculous. And to say that
we are not going to have companies make the choice not to
provide insurance is not based on any reality, and certainly
isn't by anybody who actually owns and works and operates a
business anywhere in America.
I am just shocked that the conclusion is, oh, they are just
going to do it. I just talked to a restaurateur today, a woman
who has been in the business for 15 years, who hits the 30-
employee threshold not with full-time employees, but because
she has so many part-time employees in a restaurant, who said,
if this were put into place, my business is gone. I have no
choice but to stop health care for the five people that I
provide it for today. And you will see that again and again and
again. I mean, she was literally in tears talking about what
this bill does to her and the people she cares about that she
considers her family.
So what you, sir, would call nuanced, I call a disaster,
and it is happening today.
And I want to talk about the MLR. It gets my blood pressure
up because I know these people, and they are absolutely in a
state of panic about how they are going to do this. And their
only other real option is to drop health care coverage; say,
good luck, go buy it at the Federal exchange. I hope it works
out for you. Man, just an incredible outcome that we would be
so callous toward these--in this case she is a single woman,
business entrepreneur, trying to make it happen. Apparently
those people don't count anymore.
Before I get to my questions, I did want to say a couple of
things on the MLR and why it has created such a desperate
economic situation for health care agents and brokers. And, by
the way, these small businesses who count on these brokers to
navigate what is already a complicated system now are losing
this option on something that will even be more complicated
with hundreds of thousands of pages of rules and regulation and
law that they don't understand, and that is why they hire
brokers and agents to try to get them the best deal that they
can.
But what should raise some red flags with every member of
this committee, a regulation from President Obama's health care
law is single-handedly crippling an entire segment of our
economy. And this isn't myth, this isn't speculation, it is
happening today.
Let me tell about these people. Most health care agents are
small business owners, and their average income is $50,000 a
year. I don't know about you, sir, but I don't consider that
wealthy. They help other employers navigate complex health
insurance markets and essentially serve as the HR department
for small business owners. They provide incredible value to our
health care system and the employer community, especially the
small business community.
These agents are brokers. They are very real people. They
are business owners. They are small. They tend to be
independently owned. They are in our communities, and they are
losing jobs today, today, because of this rule, and HHS knows
it, I know it, and thousands of agents and brokers who have had
to close their doors certainly know it.
Yet HHS has refused to address this issue. They have
ignored the job loss, turned a blind eye to real families who
are suffering under the weight of this regulation. This is
unacceptable, and this committee should take action to protect
these jobs and protect an industry that provides a service. The
fix is simple, and HHS could do it today, and I am baffled they
have ignored this problem for so long.
I have a bipartisan bill which would force change in the
MLR rule that would protect these agents and brokers from this
job-killing regulation. It has 90 cosponsors, including 15
Democrats and 23 members of this committee. I hope we can take
action on this legislation soon. It is an immediate jobs crisis
in our communities for thousands of hard-working small business
owners who are already being crushed by the weight of this new
health care law.
I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having this hearing.
I just want to ask you, sir, there was a letter; you
mentioned the NAIC and their effort here. One of the
provisions--and I have a letter here that was directed to
Secretary Sebelius, and I just want to quote from this letter:
The role of insurance producers, agents and brokers will be
especially important--as we move forward. We encourage HHS to
recognize the essential role served by the producers and
accommodate producer compensation arrangements in any MLR
regulation promulgated.
We have heard again and again that you are going to do
something for these people who are getting crushed right now.
We see nothing. Can you help me understand where we are at and
what you are going to do to protect these jobs and these people
who are providing these services?
Mr. Larsen. Sure, and I appreciate your concern. And as I
indicated earlier, we also believe that agents and brokers play
an important role in the health care market today, and they
will in the future when we have exchanges in 2014.
The NAIC originally did not make any recommendations to
pull the commissions out of the MLR calculation, and we adopted
their recommendations, but also adopted recommendations to
permit the State modification application for the MLR to flag
this issue of diminished access to agents and brokers.
As we sit here today again, the NAIC, I think, is doing
what they do best and what they did for the MLR, which is
conduct an analysis and a study of the data that is available
on agent and broker commissions and look at possible solutions.
And we are monitoring that, and we look forward to
recommendations that they make--they may make based on the data
that they collect.
Mr. Rogers. Just, lastly, let me just get this last point
in, if I may. Seventy percent of health insurance agents and
brokers have lost income today. Twenty percent have been forced
to lay off workers today. Fifteen percent have closed their
doors today.
We don't have time for nuance. We don't have time for
looking at it and studying it and being calm about it. We need
you to get as upset as the rest of us for real Americans are
losing their jobs today.
I would hope that you would take a little urgency here,
sir. You are going to have your job tomorrow and at least for
the next 18 months. I would encourage you to worry about the
rest of Americans who have to get up and innovate their way to
their livelihood for their families.
And I would yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from New York is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me begin by saying, first of all, you have talked to
the stakeholders, and they have been involved in terms of this
process, and I raise that question because of, you know, the
comment was made by the gentleman from Michigan. You talked to
stakeholders and referenced it as you moved forward; am I
correct?
Mr. Larsen. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Towns. Right. What has HHS done to assist States in the
establishment of health insurance exchanges?
Mr. Larsen. We provided assistance in any number of areas,
first of all with different types of implementation grants, for
them to do the types of studies they need, whether it is IT,
you know, plan qualification. So planning and implementation
grants, innovator grants to a small number of States that are
particularly progressive on the exchanges.
And then I can't tell you how much technical assistance and
dialogue we have back and forth with the States, both
individually and collectively, at events like the NAIC and NGA
meetings and other forums that we have pulled together. So it
is a continual dialogue with the States to help them as they
make the decisions that they need to make to implement
exchanges by 2014.
Mr. Towns. You know, I am still thinking about the comments
that were made on the other side. Did you incorporate any of
the feedback coming from the stakeholders?
Mr. Larsen. We did. We do that on a continual basis. We put
out, I think, either an RFI or RFC initially to get feedback
from the States, and we have incorporated many of the comments
that we got from the States in our subsequent guidance, both
general guidance and technical guidance. We put out some IT,
information technology, guidance as well. So I think it has
been a very collaborative and iterative process with the
States.
Mr. Towns. Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield to the
gentlewoman from California because I understand we have a
vote, and I just want to share my time with her. I saw the
expression on her face.
Mrs. Capps. Well, thank you very much. I thank my colleague
for yielding me time, and I will try to repay the courtesy one
day.
I am going to switch gears just for a minute because there
are so many criticisms that we have been hearing which ignored
the state of the health insurance market before the Affordable
Care Act was passed. I think we need sometimes to remember what
it was like.
As you remember, as most of us remember, consumers would
think that they were covered for things like emergency room
care, prescription drugs or lab tests. But then when they tried
to use it, they found they weren't covered. The phenomenon was
``I like my health insurance until I have to use it.'' But what
were we paying high premiums and out-of-pocket costs for?
One area that I found particularly appalling is the lack of
maternity care coverage to women who need it. Unfortunately
maternity coverage was largely unavailable in the individual
market. In fact, in 2009, according to a study conducted by the
National Women's Law Center, barely 1 in 10 individual market
plans available to 30-year-old women across the country
provided maternity coverage. Most people didn't know that until
they got pregnant, despite the obvious fact that more than 1 in
10 women are likely to want or need maternity coverage. This is
all while women were charged more for their health plans for no
reason except for her gender, and most Americans didn't realize
that either. They just paid their premiums and didn't realize
that women were getting charged more than men because they were
women.
To me, this is a perfect example of why we need an
essential benefit package, and I am happy to report that thanks
to the ACA, starting in 2014, women will be able to get the
coverage they need.
So would you use 1-1/2 minutes to explain more about the
importance of the essential benefits package, and how will this
provision protect consumers?
Mr. Larsen. It is a very important provision that, as you
point out, many people believe that they have coverage.
Insurance policies are complicated, they are complex. Many
people don't understand them. Transparency is also one of the
goals of the ACA. But by providing a basic core set of
important protections, including maternity coverage, people,
when they are paying money for their coverage, they can know
that they are actually going to have coverage for, you know, a
range of conditions that they might have to deal with. And it
is a very important provision in the Affordable Care Act.
Mrs. Capps. I thank my colleague for yielding, and I yield
back the balance of my time.
Mr. Burgess. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from Georgia, Dr. Gingrey, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Larsen, are you aware that Secretary Sebelius told the
American people on February 8, 2010, that, quote, ``with health
reform, premiums will go down between 14 percent and 20 percent
just by passing the bills''?
Mr. Larsen. I am not. I can say I am not familiar with that
particular statement.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, let me ask you this: Do you agree with
her, Secretary Sebelius, that Obamacare, which, I guess, will
passed the next month, March 23, 2010--do you agree with her
that Obamacare has, in fact, decreased insurance premiums for
Americans between 14 and 20 percent?
Mr. Larsen. When fully implemented, I believe that it will
lower premiums for Americans.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, we are talking about right now, you
know, since this became law. You say when fully implemented.
Are you talking 2014, 2016, 2018?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I think as we gradually get to health
insurance exchanges, which I think CBO and many others have
said will lower administrative costs, create a number of
efficiencies for small groups and individuals----
Mr. Gingrey. I understand what your hopes are. I absolutely
do. But the reality is something quite different, at least at
this point in time. Can you name one instance where an
insurance premium went down between 14 and 20 percent since
Obamacare became law?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I do know that as a result of, for
example, I think the rate review law, as well as the medical
loss ratio law, that insurers have already said and have
reported publicly, some of them publicly traded companies, in
their earnings calls that they are moderating their rates based
on the MLR standard and the potential for rebates. And I think
we know that the rate-review process in a number of instances
has resulted in lower premiums for consumers.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Larsen, are you aware that President Obama
promised the American people on the campaign trail that his
health care reform bill would bring down premiums about $2,500
for the typical family when he was campaigning?
Mr. Larsen. I assume that if you are telling me that, he
said it.
Mr. Gingrey. Yes.
Mr. Larsen. That he said it.
Mr. Gingrey. He did. You assume correctly.
Let me just hold up this poster for you, ``Rhetoric Versus
Reality on Premiums.'' Looking at the far right of the chart,
2008, going forward to our current time here in the middle of
2011, the rhetoric in showing these premiums going down from
the baseline by $2,500 a year for the average family, just the
opposite, in fact, has occurred. The reality is it has
increased by $2,500 a family.
So, you know, when we asked you these questions--and I know
you have been before the committee a number of times, and we do
appreciate that, and I appreciate your responding. But Mr.
Rogers from Michigan, in talking about this MLR issue, you
know, that would be a pretty easy fix, I think, in regard to
the brokers and agents, you know. We want to create jobs, we
are about to destroy a segment of the economy and put many of
these hard-working men and women out of business. They provide
a great service.
Why isn't there an easy fix to that? I don't want to--I am
not going to ask you to answer the question. I ask it
rhetorically because I did want to yield the balance of my time
to the gentleman from Louisiana, and I will do so at this
point.
I yield to Mr. Cassidy for the balance of my time.
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you.
Mr. Larsen, consumer-driven health plans are really cost
savings, and people use them. Now, I am concerned that the MLR
requirement will be very difficult to achieve if you have a
high-deductible health plan with a $5,000 deductible, maybe an
HSA beneath, but your MLR is going to be on that amount which
is 5K and above. That is really going to be very difficult for
these plans to comply with.
Are we just trying--do you have a prejudice against them,
or what is the idea about that?
Mr. Larsen. No, we are not prejudiced against them. I think
that, as I indicated before, I will have to go back and kind of
check the exact applicability. I think we have gotten comments
on the interplay between the MLR standard and the kind of high-
deductible policies, and next time I am before the committee, I
would be happy to address that.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, is there a potential for a perverse
incentive, because it is my understanding that if these are
qualified on the exchange, it will be at the bronze level. But
don't I know that the subsidies don't kick in on the bronze
level, they only kick in for silver and above?
Mr. Larsen. I am not sure if that is the case. I would have
to double-check.
Mr. Cassidy. Yes, we are both a little rusty on the details
of a complicated bill.
Now, then, let me ask you, would there be interest in
giving a different MLR for a book of business which is
predominantly consumer-driven health plans?
Mr. Larsen. I would be happy to look at that. I mean, I
know certainly the dynamics are somewhat different for higher-
deductible policies, because obviously you are not paying for
first-dollar coverage for the types of health care benefits
that, you know, the recipient of one of these policies might be
getting.
Mr. Cassidy. So will the rule--do you have latitude within
the rule to make this, or will it require a statute?
Mr. Larsen. I have to look at that.
Mr. Cassidy. OK. So are we going to have another hearing
because there are a lot of kind of unanswered questions about
something which is really benefiting people's pocketbooks and
their health, but it seems as if we need to have a second
hearing on that.
Mr. Burgess. Well, Mr. Larsen, if I understood you, you are
going to get back to me with some detail on the tax
implications or the medical loss ratio implications as to the
health savings account portion of a high-deductible health
plan. And I think the questions, Mr. Cassidy, if we will put
those in writing, can we ask you to respond to those questions
in writing as well?
Mr. Larsen. Yes, I will.
Mr. Burgess. We may very well have another opportunity, but
I don't know how long that will be.
Mr. Larsen. OK. We will do that.
Mr. Burgess. Bill, if you don't mind getting those in
detail for him, there have already been some things that we
have asked to have addressed.
Mr. Cassidy. OK. I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. Does that conclude your time, or do you want
additional minutes?
Mr. Cassidy. No. I think we have to vote.
Mr. Burgess. Just a housekeeping detail. I am going to ask
unanimous consent that we insert the statement of the United
States Chamber of Commerce into the record. Without objection,
so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.098

Mr. Burgess. Let me just ask you one quick follow-up while
we are getting ready to go vote.
On the issue of fraud--and everyone talks about being able
to pay for more health care because we are going to eliminate
fraud, waste and abuse. But on the issue of fraud--and this
committee has had hearings about antifraud efforts in both
Medicare and Medicaid, and you stated fighting fraud in
Medicare was a key goal in the Obama administration--but the
medical loss ratio regulation excludes health plan investments
and initiatives to prevent fraud from those activities that
improve health care. So is there a--do you dissect that out to
that degree?
Mr. Larsen. The MLR regulation, I think, strikes a middle
ground that we adopted from the NAIC, which permits the
inclusion of fraud recovery expenses up to the amount of
fraudulent claims that are recovered, and that was the middle
ground that, again, that the NAIC struck. And they spent a lot
of time looking at this, I think, struggling with the fact that
the statute allows for claims expenses and then quality-
improving expenses to be included in the formula, but I don't
think anyone wanted to provide disincentives for investment in
detecting fraud.
Mr. Burgess. So with all due respect, then a company is
going to have to make a decision that, hey, if we go after this
money and recover it, that it comes off of our medical loss
ratio calculation. But if we are not successful in recovering
the money, then it is money that is calculated outside so that
it actually works against us.
And we do know that--I mean, I know from my time in the
practice of medicine, Medicare and Medicaid, SCHIP functioned
under a different system than private insurance in this
country. Medicare, Medicaid and SCHIP predominantly pay the
bills as they come in, as they are required to do. And then
they go--if they find something that looks questionable, then
they go after it, so-called pay-and-chase formula; whereas the
private companies do run on preauthorization and
precertification, which also has its set of problems.
But are you now instructing the private sector that these
expenses that are related to precertification will be
calculated outside the medical loss ratio, so we really need
the private sector to develop a pay-and-chase scenario or a
pay-and-chase template? That doesn't seem like the correct
direction to go, because we all hear these terrible stories
about people getting things they shouldn't have gotten in the
health care system, but they are always on the public sector
side. They are always on the Medicare and Medicaid side. You
rarely hear a news story about one of the private insurance
companies bemoaning the fact that they sent a wheelchair to
someone who didn't need it.
Mr. Larsen. Well, I don't think we are creating incentives
for pay and chase. I know I was the CEO of a Medicaid HMO in
Maryland, and I think we had a pretty good sense of what
investment we could make in fraud detection and what the kind
of return on investment was going to be. So we had a pretty
good sense of that, and it didn't incentivize us to do pay and
chase.
Again, I think we have struck a middle ground, as did the
NAIC, of trying to encourage that. You know, just nothing
prevents companies from doing the right thing, which is
investing beyond--investing in fraud-prevention activities
beyond where they can actually include in the MLR formula. They
still have headroom within the other 20 percent to make that
investment, and we would hope they would continue to do that.
Mr. Burgess. Well, this is something I hope you will
continue to look at, because I do believe it needs to be part
of the discussion, and we need to keep a focus on it.
Let me ask you one final question on the issues of taxes in
the MLR calculation. Section 1001 of the Affordable Care Act
states that Federal and State taxes should be excluded from the
calculation. Your interim final rule seems to exclude some
forms of taxation. Can you give us a little bit of insider
direction on that?
Mr. Larsen. Sure. There was a lot of time and energy spent
in the NAIC public process trying to interpret what was meant
in the ACA by the reference to----
Mr. Burgess. With all due respect, it is fairly clear.
Congressional intent was abundantly clear State and Federal
taxes would be exempt.
Mr. Larsen. Well, the only thing I can say is I am not sure
everyone felt that it had the clarity that you believe is
there. And, again, there was a lot of discussion around what
that language meant.
Mr. Burgess. Well, I mean, that is what it says in the--a
health insurance insurer offering group/individual health
insurance coverage shall, with respect to each plan year,
submit to the Secretary a report concerning the ratio of the
incurred loss, plus the loss adjustment expense to earned
premiums. Such report shall include the percentage of total
premium revenue after accounting for collections of receipts,
adjustment--paragraph 3--on all known claims costs, including
an explanation of the nature of such costs, and excluding
Federal and State taxes and licensing or regulatory fees.
I mean, that is pretty clear, isn't it?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I think the issue for us was when we were
read that in combination with a couple of the other sections,
not necessarily--I am not sure the one that you cited. So, yes
I realize it said Federal.
Mr. Burgess. Would further legislation help clarify that
for you? Do you need--I mean, congressional intent--and I
didn't even vote for this thing. This is a Senate bill. I
didn't write it. The Senate Finance Committee staff wrote this
bill, as you are well aware. But I think even their intent was
pretty clear. Do you need additional legislation to give you
direction on this?
Mr. Larsen. Well, again, I think we tried to make a
reasonable interpretation of what we saw. So if Congress
doesn't believe that we have interpreted this appropriately,
then I guess it would be up to you to make changes if you felt
that we had not done what was intended.
Mr. Burgess. Well, we are up against a hard deadline with
votes, and I know you are up against a hard deadline with your
time here. I appreciate, again, your coming back. You heard
from Dr. Cassidy that there may be the need for further
opportunity to discuss, because a lot of this is complicated
stuff, and people are having a hard time understanding it. When
Mr. Waxman's complaints notwithstanding, the overall popularity
of this law is sort of stuck in neutral. It is about the same
place where it was a year and 2 months ago. So it seems like
this committee could do the country a favor by at least talking
about this stuff that is included in the bill.
But this will conclude today's hearing, and I will remind
Members on both sides that they have 10 business days for
questions for the record, and I will ask all witnesses
appearing over the course of this hearing to respond promptly
to those questions.
This committee now stands in adjournment.
[Whereupon, at 3:55 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71723.107


