- FIELD HEARING ON THE IMPACT OF MEDICAL DEVICE AND DRUG REGULATION ON INNOVATION, JOBS, AND PATIENTS: A LOCAL PERSPECTIVE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE IMPACT OF MEDICAL DEVICE AND DRUG REGULATION ON INNOVATION, JOBS,
AND PATIENTS: A LOCAL PERSPECTIVE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 26, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-90

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
74-079 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JIM MATHESON, Utah
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  officio)
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Brian P. Bilbray, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California, opening statement.........................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     6
Prepared statement...............................................     8
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, prepared statement..............................   114

Witnesses

Bill Walton, Executive Chairman, CONNECT San Diego Sport
Innovators.....................................................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    15
David L. Gollaher, President and Chief Executive Officer,
California Healthcare Institute................................    27
Prepared statement...........................................    29
Sharon Stevenson, Director, Okapi Venture Capital, LLC, on behalf
of the National Venture Capital Association....................    41
Prepared statement...........................................    44
Steven J. Mento, President and Chief Executive Officer, Conatus
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., on behalf of Biotechnology Industry
Organization...................................................    57
Prepared statement...........................................    59
Donald M. Casey, Chief Executive Officer, West Wireless Health
Institute......................................................    72
Prepared statement...........................................    75
Joe Panetta, President and Chief Executive Officer, BIOCOM.......    82
Prepared statement...........................................    85
Kevin T. Larkin, President and Chief Executive Officer, TherOx,
Inc............................................................    91
Prepared statement...........................................    94

Submitted Material

Statement, dated September 26, 2012, of Hon. Darrell E. Issa, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California,
submitted by Mr. Burgess.......................................    26
Letter, dated August 4, 2010, from Mr. Waxman, et al., to
Kathleen Sebelius, Secretary, Department of Health and Human
Services, submitted by Mr. Waxman..............................   115

FIELD HEARING ON THE IMPACT OF MEDICAL DEVICE AND DRUG REGULATION ON
INNOVATION, JOBS, AND PATIENTS: A LOCAL PERSPECTIVE

----------

MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 26, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:28 a.m., at
the Scripps Seaside Forum, Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
8610 Kennel Way, La Jolla, California, Hon. Michael C. Burgess
presiding.
Members present: Representatives Burgess and Bilbray.
Staff present: Clay Alspach, Counsel, Subcommittee on
Health; Carly McWilliams, Legislative Clerk; Allison Corr,
Minority Policy Analyst.
Mr. Bilbray [presiding]. Let's go ahead and move it a
little earlier. In the tradition of George Marshall, we will
start the proceedings 5 minutes early. Those of you who don't
understand that can pull up your history books and find out
about the Supreme Court Justice.
I want to thank everybody for being here. Let me say,
clearly, we want to thank Dr. Burgess for showing up. The
Congressman took a long flight to come out here. I think we all
owe him a real thanks for not just caring but acting on his
concerns, bringing his expertise in.
And I want to thank you very much, Doctor, for taking the
time to come over here. Next time, we will try to arrange these
hearings during February, where you might appreciate it a
little more.
[Laughter.]
And I bet you the turnout will be much larger, too.
I think that one of the things that we want to point out is
that San Diego, obviously, is not just the land of sun and sea
and sand. It is definitely a generator of major medical
breakthroughs and a major employer; 40,000 people in the life
sciences here.
I think, though, too often, those of us in Washington take
a look at the life sciences and medical research and see it as
an abstract. And this is not just an issue, again--and I will
say this again and again--we are not just talking jobs. We are
talking lives.
And this is an industry that needs to be addressed from
both sides. But we always have to remember, the endgame is to
save lives, and not just an elderly mother or grandmother, but,
more importantly, make sure that, in the future, our
grandchildren can have their most prosperous and healthy life
possible, because we did the right thing.
One of the biggest challenges I want to point out is that
getting a team to work together--and Tony? Where is Tony? Did
he leave?
Mr. Burgess. He is making a phone call.
Mr. Bilbray. OK, I always love to thank the guy who allowed
us to come hang out in these digs, so we will get to him.

OPENING STATEMENT OF BRIAN P. BILBRAY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

But let me just start off, right off, that what we need to
talk about here is what are the opportunities and the
challenges of making sure that we not only maintain a research
capability in this country that creates jobs, but one that
can--we can change our operations to be able to make sure of
those breakthroughs.
And one of the biggest frustrations I have had is that
everybody thinks medical research is all about spending money,
and that in Washington, it is easy for us to write checks and
throw money at a problem. And I think some of the latest
scandals you have seen coming out of Washington, directed at
certain assumptions, was thinking just spending money will cure
a problem. And I really want to go back to the fact that in our
lifetime, we saw a major success for the AIDS epidemic, and too
many people think it was just because we threw money at the
problem, don't go back and realize the changed regulatory
oversight. We made the bureaucracy in Washington approach it
differently.
And I don't think, in our lifetime, we have seen such a
dramatic breakthrough in health benefits. In fact, I think
somebody was calling me down that it was not just 37 but
probably 50 times longer life expectancy than what they had
before once we get into it.
Imagine if we can do that for diabetics, do it for cancer
patients, do it for people with MS. That kind of breakthrough
may be possible. But we will never know if we don't change the
way Washington handles these issues.
And I don't think this is a Democrat or Republican issue.
Sick children do not carry a party affiliation with them. They,
basically, all have the right to be able to have the same
access to medical breakthrough as anybody else. And that is a
big challenge I think we need to talk about.
First thing we need to do is remember, though, too,
especially those of us who are on our side of the aisle, there
is a place for regulation. There is a place to regulate.
What we are worried about is there is a big difference
between regulating and strangulating. And I think that is the
one frustration that I get through. And I think that if we look
at the people who will testify today, good research, good
health, knows no party affiliation, knows no political lines.
And, hopefully, we will be able to address those issues.
I think the California Healthcare Institute talks about the
delays that the FDA has put out and the mindset. I have to
remind you though, too, this is not just an FDA challenge.
Hopefully, a lot of people here can look at what we are trying
to do in Washington and make sure you guys in the private
sector not only have the basic research that government pays
for, not only has the regulatory reform that makes it easier
for you to create the miracles that we take for granted, but
also that we take a look at how Washington operates, and make
sure that we bring in capital into this country that you can
use to stay in business, so that we see the next generation of
miracles.
And I just worry that the American people take you for
granted, take medical breakthrough after medical breakthrough
for granted. And I think that it is important for us to make
sure that that doesn't happen anymore.
Let me just close by saying, again, we are here today not
just to talk about something that is very important during one
of the most critical economic downturns in the history of this
country. We are not just talking about jobs. We are also
talking about lives. And it is not very often that you can talk
about something that is good for the economy and good for the
environment that humans live in. Too often we have these tough
choices of, is it good for the economics, or is it good for
public health? This is a proposal that is good for both. And it
is one we want to build on.
So I would like to throw it over to my colleague, Dr.
Burgess. And it is yours.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bilbray follows:]

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Brian.
Now, was that your opening statement or was that just a
filibuster?
[Laughter.]
Why don't we go ahead and call the subcommittee to order,
and I want to thank our witnesses for being here with us here
today. I, obviously, want to thank the University for opening
up this very stunning facility for us to use today.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

And let me begin by making an opening statement, and first
state, for the record, that I am not just happy but I am
thrilled to be here today, talking about a very important topic
and the impact of the medical device industry in the United
States. It is more than just what we do for patients. It
affects commerce, technology, as well as the economy by
providing quality jobs to Americans, which range from highly
skilled technical to those involved in the manufacture of those
devices.
Unfortunately, the jobs are slipping away. And with these
jobs, new technologies and innovations are being driven
overseas, and our economy is suffering, and, most importantly,
our patients are denied access to these devices.
In a recent study conducted by PricewaterhouseCoopers,
United States consumers are already being shown as not being
the first to benefit from medical technology. And without
change, the process could eventually--we could eventually be
last. In fact, innovators are already going first to the
European market, and, by 2020, will likely move into other
emerging economies.
And I hear about this literally every week in my office.
Because I am a physician by background, someone is in my office
with a perplexed tale of woe about what their difficulties have
been in trying to get a drug or device approved through the
FDA, an FDA that seems to consistently discourage innovation
and leads to American job loss. Innovators cite their inability
to facilitate a predictable process as reasons to move
overseas.
And this was no more evident than a few weeks ago when we
had a hearing in our subcommittee back in Washington, and I
just reference, I spent a lot of time on the plane this
morning. I got to read every word of the Wall Street Journal.
And on page three is an article about a new device that has now
received provisional approval by the Food and Drug
Administration, the MelaFind device.
Now, just a few weeks ago, it was denied. And the Journal,
I think, correctly cites--they don't correctly identify Brian
Bilbray and myself, but they correctly cite:
``The case was a focus of a House of Representatives
hearing this summer at which the FDA's top device regulator,
Jeffrey Shuren, acknowledged the agency had mishandled the
MelaFind application. Dr. Shuren mentioned the Food and Drug
Administration's decision to hold a meeting of its advisers on
MelaFind after the agency had already decided to reject the
device, the reverse of the usual order.
"'The staff made the wrong call,''' said Dr. Shuren.
Now the United States is currently exporting over $34
million a year in medical devices, and those industries employ
more than 27 million people. No, it does not take a rocket
surgeon to understand that in this current economic
environment, this is the type of stimulus that is needed by our
economy.
The Food and Drug Administration's failure to ensure a
reliable and consistent approval process not only creates a
disadvantage for current devices, but signals their inability
to handle the advancements of technology in the future.
The United States has always led the way in innovation and
technology. As we customize medicine, it is imperative that the
Food and Drug Administration have the ability to thoroughly
examine these devices in a timely manner.
Brian is right. We do not want to sacrifice patient safety.
That should be the number one priority when looking at devices.
However, the long and arduous process that is frequently
ambiguous adversely affects everyone, including those patients
who desperately need the device.
In addition, the United States medical device manufacturers
will also be hit with a 2.3 percent tax on revenues due to new
requirements in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
For many smaller businesses, this tax be detrimental and cause
many to shut their doors, effectively stifling technological
advancements.
President Obama, in the State of the Union Address,
advocated for America to lead the way on technology and
innovation. In that, there is complete agreement with this
Member of Congress. Unfortunately, his signature legislation
coupled with the Food and Drug Administration's confusing and
somewhat disjointed approval process has instead encouraged the
off-shoring of business and brought medical discoveries to a
halt. It is essential that the Food and Drug Administration
process becomes more transparent for all involved.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess follows:]

Mr. Burgess.Now, I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses. Again, I want to thank all of our witnesses for
being with us today. We are going to hear from each of you, in
turn.
We will begin, I think, with Mr. Walton, and then we will
hear from Dr. Gollaher, who is the president and chief
executive officer of the California Healthcare Institute. We
have Dr. Sharon Stevenson on behalf of the National Venture
Capital Association. We have Dr. Steven Mento, who is the
Biotechnology Industry Organization representative; Joe
Panetta, president and chief executive officer of BIOCOM; Kevin
Larkin, the president and chief executive officer of TherOx,
Inc.
Did I leave anyone out? Mr. Donald Casey--where did you go?
Oh, there you are. Chief executive officer of the West Wireless
Health Institute, who of course is very familiar to me, us
having met in Washington on more than one occasion.
I would like to now recognize our first witness, Mr. Bill
Walton, for his opening statement.
You are recognized, sir. Five minutes.

STATEMENTS OF BILL WALTON, EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN, CONNECT SAN
DIEGO SPORT INNOVATORS; DAVID L. GOLLAHER, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, CALIFORNIA HEALTHCARE INSTITUTE; SHARON
STEVENSON, DIRECTOR, OKAPI VENTURE CAPITAL, LLC, ON BEHALF OF
THE NATIONAL VENTURE CAPITAL ASSOCIATION; STEVEN J. MENTO,
PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, CONATUS PHARMACEUTICALS,
INC., ON BEHALF OF BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION; DONALD
M. CASEY, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, WEST WIRELESS HEALTH
INSTITUTE; JOE PANETTA, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
BIOCOM; AND, KEVIN T. LARKIN, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, THEROX, INC.

STATEMENT OF BILL WALTON

Mr. Walton. Thank you, Congressman, and good morning. My
name is Bill Walton, and I am here today as a patient advocate,
proud, honored, and privileged to have the opportunity to give
back with my duty, obligation, and responsibility for those
people, like me, who are suffering in extreme pain, and who
were, at one point, hopeless that their lives could ever return
to normal.
Now in addition to sharing with you the patient perspective
regarding the impact medical innovation can have, I also want
to ask you, and urge you, to cultivate a statutory and
regulatory atmosphere with clear rules and guidelines in the
medical innovation field, so that we can continue here in the
United States to lead the world in the creation of lifesaving
medical devices, drugs, and health care.
Now, while the U.S. continues to maintain its global edge
in groundbreaking, game-changing medical technology, much of it
occurring right here in my hometown of San Diego, the rest of
the world is closing in on us fast. The world, they have copied
what we have done here in America. And they are using our
techniques and our talents to achieve our unmatched success
story.
However, while U.S. companies struggle with longer wait
times for regulatory approval in an increasingly uncertain
regulatory approval process, our global competitors are
streamlining their regulatory systems, which attract capital
and companies to their shores from ours.
You, as our congressional leaders, you have the ability to
recognize this problem, and create laws and regulations that
protect our innovation edge, which means that more patients
will have life-changing stories to tell, like the one you will
hear today.
My UCLA college basketball coach, John Wooden, he used to
tell us all the time, ``Don't measure yourself by what you have
accomplished, but rather by what you should have accomplished
with your ability.''
America's history of great innovation is not enough to be
satisfied with. There are many more brilliant scientists and
doctors who want to help people and cure diseases. But they can
only accomplish up to their ability, if our Nation's medical
innovation ecosystem continues to encourage discovery and
reward risk.
My story of disability and pain, which has turned to
healing because of what these emerging companies are creating,
is why I am here today. My college basketball career took me
all over this great country, but it was a frigid night in
January 1974, more than 37 years ago, when our UCLA Bruins
traveled to Washington State University at Pullman, Washington,
the southeastern part of that great State, and the Bruins, we
were riding our 84-game consecutive winning streak, for a big
Pac-8 conference showdown.
During the game, I was making a play at the ball, and a guy
on the other team, he came from the other side of the court and
took my legs out from underneath me and I flipped over, came
crashing down, and landed on my spine on a synthetic floor.
That night, I fractured two bones in my spine, and things were
never the same for me again.
Throughout my NBA game career, I worked as hard as I could
to stay in shape and to stay healthy, but that pain was always
with me in my spine, the discomfort, the limitation, the
restrictions.
After another nearly 20 years in the broadcast business,
200 nights a year on the endless road, in airplanes and through
a manmade world ill-suited for a 6'11'' body, the back pain
ultimately became unbearable. My spine simply could not hold me
up anymore.
The pain was debilitating, excruciating, and relentless.
Visualize yourself being submerged in a vat of scalding acid
with electrifying current running through it, and you could
never get out, ever.
My life was over. I had nothing. I ate my meals on the
floor face down. I couldn't get any sleep. I couldn't get
dressed. Nothing eased the devastating nerve pain radiating
throughout my body, coming from my spine. It got to the point
where my life wasn't worth living. I was standing on the edge
of the bridge, knowing full well that it was better to jump
than to go back to what was left of my life.
I was lucky. I was saved. I came across medical innovators
that reconstructed my spine and gave me my life back.
I had no idea what life was like without back pain. They
saved my life. Dr. Garfin, here at UCSD, the head of the
orthopedic spine clinic. NuVasive, a company here in San Diego.
They combined on a new surgical technique operating on my spine
by entering through the side and deploying NuVasive's medical
devices to rebuild my back. I underwent 8 1/2 hours of XLIF
surgery. I was amazed by the relief that came at the end of the
relentless, excruciating pain that ran constantly through my
entire body.
After I started to get better, I began to do things I
hadn't been able to do in years, like put on my own shoes and
socks, to be able to bend over and pet the dogs.
It was right around the seven-month mark after my surgery
when I really turned a corner and found freedom one more time,
pedaling my bicycle with no limitations. Riding on the open
road, the wind and the sun in my face, the film of sweat on my
body, that was the greatest outcome in the world for me.
I had lost everything. But now I am back in the game of
life and climbing to the top of the mountain one more time.
The story of NuVasive is one of those high-growth, job-
creating companies that Washington wants to replicate all over
the country, but which sadly faces substantial challenges
because of the uncertain and prolonged regulatory approval
process. NuVasive is a public medical device company focused on
developing minimally disruptive surgical products and
procedures for the spine.
The company has grown from a venture-capital-backed startup
company 10 years ago to one with more than $500 million in
annual sales in just 10 years.
NuVasive is now the fourth largest spine company in the
U.S. and the fifth largest worldwide. This industry-leading
growth has propelled the company to a global presence employing
over 1,100 people.
From a technology perspective, NuVasive's sole focus is to
advance spine surgery by developing new products and procedures
that provide superior surgical outcomes and improve patient
health. NuVasive's innovation in surgical technique and devices
have great benefits for the patient, including reduced
operative time, reduced blood loss and minimal scarring,
reduced post-operative pain, reduced hospital stay, and rapid
return to normal activities.
Despite NuVasive's innovative techniques and technologies,
their future faces serious obstacles because of the uncertain
U.S. regulatory approval process and a new tax on medical
devices past in last year's health care reform law.
Over the past 18 to 24 months, NuVasive has experienced
longer delays related to FDA product clearances and approval in
510(k) and premarket approval applications. Longer FDA approval
times will potentially result in significant revenue loss
estimated at up to $70 million over the next 2 years, increased
operating expenses of over $2 million, and hundreds of new jobs
eliminated.
Historically, NuVasive has launched at least 10 new
products per year. Because of the stifling regulatory climate,
that number is being reduced by half.
It is becoming far more efficient and faster to innovate
outside the United States, in places like Europe. Non-U.S.
systems have more timely, more predictable, and more
transparent processes, and that is not acceptable for us as
patients or as Americans.
This means that instead of creating new American jobs,
those jobs, manufacturing plants, distribution networks,
related innovations, and profits have a substantial likelihood
of moving overseas.
As a result of costs associated with protracted approval
and clearance processes, NuVasive has committed to fewer R&D
projects in 2011 and '12. This results in less innovation and
this has caused them to reduce hiring by at least 15 percent,
with 150 fewer new jobs versus their 2011 projected headcount.
For many reasons, we can't have a regulatory framework that
hinders job creation. NuVasive does not believe a major
overhaul of the current FDA process is needed. Instead, they
need process predictability and timeliness from the reviewers,
and to ensure that approvals are being efficiently processed
under the current high safety standards.
Now, as part of the 2010 health care reform legislation,
medical device manufacturers will be required to pay a new 2.3
percent excise tax on all FDA-approved devices sold in the
United States. This tax is punitive in nature and will likely
raise costs throughout the health care system.
In response to the new tax, it is expected that the
industry will reduce R&D spending and jobs domestically while
pressure will increase to invest overseas. This will not only
harm the economy, but, most importantly, it will harm patients.
This tax is based on revenue, causing successful, rapidly
growing companies like NuVasive to be hit the hardest, making
it more difficult to invest in growth and innovation.
Wall Street estimates that large-cap companies will have up
to a 5 percent decrease in profitability while small to mid-cap
companies see a 10 to 15 percent decrease. Using 2013 Wall
Street revenue projections, NuVasive would be required to pay
almost $15 million in pretax dollars, equating to an
approximate 13 percent reduction in profit.
This type of increased tax burden will potentially result
in over 100 new highly skilled jobs being eliminated.
It is puzzling to me why congressional leaders would target
an industry that is so fruitful and productive. The medical
device industry creates nearly 2 million high-wage jobs
nationwide, with wages approaching 40 percent higher than the
average national wage. Approximately 1.5 million additional
jobs are created in manufacturing, suppliers, and service
providers.
In California alone, our home State, the industry employs
over 80,000 individuals with $5.5 billion in payroll, and $26
billion in revenue. This results in almost 210,000 additional
jobs driving an additional nearly $7 billion in payroll and
over $31.5 billion in revenue.
The tax penalizes an industry that is innovative and that
achieves the main goals of health care reform: lowering costs
while improving patient care.
The tax should be repealed. And I want to commend
Congressman Bilbray for his leadership in introducing H.R. 734
to repeal this punitive tax.
Now, I have been most fortunate in my life to have learned
from many great innovators: John Wooden, Jerry Garcia, Larry
Bird, Bob Dylan, Tchaikovsky, Maurice Lucas, Dr. Garfin,
NuVasive, and my current interactions with the inspirational
innovators like Duane Roth at CONNECT, and the founders of all
the new companies that are trying to make it with the help of
our new organization, San Diego Sport Innovators, the newest
division of CONNECT.
I have been able to help these sport innovators in the
organization grow but only because, as a patient, I am the
beneficiary of medical innovation.
Now as a patient, we see risk and benefit a bit different
than regulators sitting in historic buildings in Washington.
When I was face down on the floor with extreme pain coursing
through my nerves, I desperately needed the treatments that
NuVasive was creating, in conjunction with the skill and
precision of a master surgeon like Dr. Garfin.
What the regulatory system needs is a balanced approach to
create the incentive needed for investment in innovation,
coupled with a predictable and prompt regulatory process that
still provides reasonably safe and effective medical devices
and drugs. I worry that the regulatory process is so focused on
perfection, which does not exist, that it thwarts important
creations from reaching the marketplace and saving other people
that are on that bridge just like I was.
Coach Wooden also tried to teach us a most applicable
lesson here: Don't let what you cannot do interfere with what
you can do.
Maybe you can't solve all the problems, but that shouldn't
dissuade you from doing what you can to move the medical
innovation ecosystem toward more discovery, more reward, and
more jobs, which will result in more patients living a healthy
life.
Here's to a full and pain-free life with lots of jobs for
everyone. Thank you, good luck, and please realize that one day
everybody in this room, including yourself, will be facing that
moment when you need help, when you need that medical practice,
device, technique, company to be right there. Act today, so
that you can enjoy tomorrow.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walton follows:]

Mr. Burgess. Well, I certainly want to thank our witness
for the compelling testimony.
I do want to remind panelists, we do typically try to keep
our opening statements to 5 minutes, and your full statement
can be inserted into the record.
So we will ask to try to stick to the 5-minute timeline and
give plenty of time for questions. But your full statement will
be part of the record.
Mr. Walton. I believe, Congressman, that mine came in at
4:52.
Mr. Burgess. That was my time.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bilbray. Mr. Walton, whatever you say the time was.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Burgess. Yes, I was not going to blow the whistle. I
promise.
[Laughter.]
I do ask unanimous consent that the testimony of the
chairman of the Oversight and Government Reform Committee,
Darrell Issa, be submitted as part of the record. I also want
to include Mr. Bilbray's statement as part of the record as
well.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Burgess. Dr. Gollaher, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID L. GOLLAHER

Mr. Gollaher. Thank you. Vice Chairman Burgess, Congressman
Bilbray, welcome to San Diego. My name is David Gollaher, and I
am president and CEO of CHI, the California Healthcare
Institute. And I appreciate the opportunity to speak today
regarding the current regulatory environment for medicines and
medical devices, and its impact on biomedical innovation.
CHI is a public policy and advocacy organization
representing California's innovative biomedical research and
development sector. Our membership includes the State's leading
research universities and private biomedical research
institutes, along with venture capital firms and biotechnology,
pharma, device and diagnostic companies.
All told, California is home to 2,200 biomedical companies
employing some 270,000 people, making our industry one of the
leading high-tech employers in the State.
This morning I would like to address two things. First, I
would like to provide an overview of recent trends industry has
encountered that the FDA. And, second, I would like to briefly
cover one of the problems in FDA performance that CHI believes
should be a focus of efforts to get things back on track.
History shows that a strong science-based FDA, and a well-
articulated, predictable, and consistent regulatory process,
these things are essential to bio, pharma, and medical
technology investment, innovation, and patient care.
Recently, however, the number-one policy issue raised by
our biotech and medical device companies has been frustration
with regulatory processes and communications at the FDA that
have become increasingly uncertain, unpredictable, and
inefficient.
There is a widespread sense in our industry that things are
getting worse at the FDA. And this is confirmed by data
reflecting a recent slowdown in product review times and
approvals documented in a recent study that CHI did with Boston
Consulting Group, called ``Competitiveness in Regulation: The
FDA and the Future of America's Biomedical Industry.'' This was
published in February.
Our report shows a few things. Particularly comparing today
to the 2003-2007 timeframe, drugs and biologics review times
have increased by 28 percent, 510(k) device clearances have
slowed by 43 percent, and PMA--premarket approval--device
approval times have lengthened by 75 percent. That is comparing
today to the 2003-2007 timeline.
Now, no single factor explains this decline, but the most
important contributor to recent trends appears to be a shift in
FDA culture. Faced with accusations that it was too lax and
failed to protect the public from safety problems with devices
and drugs, the FDA has shifted emphasis in product reviews from
the benefits of new products to an increasingly weight on their
possible risks.
And from the perspective of an FDA reviewer, it is easy to
understand. After all, an individual reviewer has little to
gain by approving a product, much to lose by approving a
product that has a problem in the future.
In our view, reforming the FDA is about strengthening the
agency. CHI and our membership support is strong, appropriately
resourced on science-based FDA, and we support strong, science-
based safety and efficacy standards. But we do not believe that
slower processes mean safer or better. We can have both high
safety and effectiveness standards and efficient, predictable,
consistent, and transparent processes to get new medicines and
technologies to patients who need them.
With this in mind, I would like to turn briefly to one of
the main issues we believe needs to be addressed to get the FDA
back on track. My written statement covers others, and CHI
looks forward to working with Congress and your committee and
other stakeholders to find and act on the best solutions. But
given the time this morning, I would like to focus on a single
issue.
Many of our members point out that a major problem with the
FDA is in the period shortly before or shortly after product
submission, when discussions and negotiations over the types
and amount of clinical data the agency wants to see in its
submission are growing lengthier and more difficult, and are
seen as less predictable, less transparent, and sometimes
unreasonable.
Now certainly, as science progresses, the information the
agency considered sufficient yesterday may no longer be
adequate, but what is important is that the agency processes
promote early upfront communications that clearly convey not
only what the agency expects but why they expect it.
Clarity about what is necessary to approve a product is
key. Innovators need to know what the agency says it wants and
needs is really what it wants and needs, and that requirements
won't change midstream.
Let me skip ahead, in the interest of time.
What we have seen in particular, and this is an important
focal point for medical devices, is that when the agency issues
guidance documents, which change the standards for product
approval, and given the agency's current thinking on a given
topic, a preliminary analysis of our work has shown that for
in-process devices, when the agency issues a new guidance
document, the process takes 60 percent longer to approve than
average. This is preliminary data, but we suggest that it shows
a real opportunity for improvement at the agency in the
guidance document process.
I think in the interest of time that I am going to stop
there, and I thank you for enabling our testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gollaher follows:]

Mr. Burgess. Great. We will probably get to some of these
things during the question-and-answer time as well.
Dr. Stevenson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SHARON STEVENSON

Ms. Stevenson. Thank you, Representative Bilbray, Dr.
Burgess. I am Sharon Stevenson, cofounder and managing director
of Okapi Venture Capital, which is based in Laguna Beach. It is
one of a handful of venture firms located in Southern
California.
Today I am testifying on the behalf of the National Venture
Capital Association, the national trade association for the
venture capital industry. Thank you for the opportunity.
For the past several decades, venture capital firms such as
Okapi have served as the primary source of risk capital,
playing a central role in prospering the development of medical
technologies and therapies to treat cancer, cardiovascular
disease, diabetes, and a plethora of other conditions.
This important relationship between capital and emerging
companies has enabled our Nation's biotechnology and medical
device industries to assume their long-held positions as world
leaders in medical innovation. The benefits of robust
biotechnology and medical device sectors are abundantly clear:
better care for patients, cures for diseases and disabilities,
cost-effective treatments that can help lower health-care
costs, and high-paying jobs with tremendous growth potential.
Although researchers continue to identify promising
therapies at a great pace, fewer of these discoveries are being
developed and brought to market, in part due to a growing
reluctance among the venture capital industry to provide
necessary financial backing. Venture capital and emerging
technologies exist in a fragile ecosystem. A number of factors,
including the current economic environment and lack of an IPO
market, have impacted general availability of venture capital.
However, the life sciences sector is being doubly hit.
The uncertainty of the FDA processes has undermined the
ability of life science venture capital firms to achieve
favorable return on their investments and, therefore, to raise
funds to support the next generation of innovative
biotechnology and medical device companies.
Increasingly, limited partners, the endowments, pension
funds, and the institutions that provide much of the capital
for venture funds to invest, are telling us that they are
reducing or even eliminating the share of investment that they
allocate to life sciences venture capital. Some well-
established life sciences venture firms have reduced or ceased
operations; others are no longer investing in early-stage life
sciences companies.
Some firms have changed their investment portfolios,
increasing their support for information technology and social
networking companies, or have begun to invest in emerging
markets, sending private investment dollars previously
dedicated to U.S. companies to startups overseas.
This decline in U.S. investment has enormous implications
for patients and their care providers, who in the future will
have diminished access to breakthrough treatments. It has and
will continue to undermine a key engine of our economy that has
long provided well-paying jobs throughout the Nation.
Obviously, there are many factors at play here, but the
uncertain regulatory environment at the FDA has been a very
significant contributor. Since the late '80s, the agency held
firmly to a balanced risk-benefit approach, with a stable
predictable regulatory pathway. As a result, a generation of
important therapies came to market, and the Nation gained
prominence as a leader in medical innovation.
But the agency dynamic has changed dramatically in the wake
of a series of high-profile therapies that resulted in
significant safety issues. The pendulum has shifted with the
FDA culture now marked by extreme caution and risk aversion.
To be clear, protecting patients must be a fundamental
element of the FDA's activities, and I am in no way suggesting
it should be otherwise. Right now, though, the FDA's approach
emphasizes risk over benefit.
Simply stated, the careful balance that historically helped
to fuel the development of any number of breakthrough
innovations and life-saving treatment no longer exist. Rather,
the approval process is now unpredictable and lacking in
transparency, creating greater risk for researchers, emerging
companies, and investors.
Venture capital is an industry that is all about taking
risk. That is what we do. But it is important to distinguish
between the two types of risk we consider when making
investment: manageable and unmanageable.
When the regulatory pathway is sensible, clear, and
consistent, the regulatory risk is manageable, even if the
associated activities are expensive and time-consuming.
However, in the current regulatory environment, the FDA may
require significant changes in the regulatory pathway
midstream, or even after clinical trial activities have been
completed.
When the rules are changed in the middle of the process,
more capital is inevitably needed at the worst possible time
for the company to be raising it.
The bottom line is that the current FDA regulatory approach
has led to a painful, if not intolerable, increase in
unmanageable risk. As a result, many of my colleagues have
reached a tipping point and have significantly or completely
pulled back their investments in emerging life sciences
companies, or are only investing in companies where a clear
route to commercialization exists outside of the U.S. This is
not good.
The NVCA and its member companies want to work with
Congress and the FDA to reestablish a thoughtful risk-benefit
equation and respectfully offer the following recommendations
for the subcommittee's consideration.
One is to support allowances for variation in risk-benefit
assessments to ensure patient-centric drug and medical device
development and approval.
Second is to expand the accelerated approval pathway into a
progressive approval system for drugs, diagnostics, and medical
devices.
Lastly, ensure conflict of interest policies are not
hindering patient access to new treatments. The goal is not to
eliminate conflicts of interest, but to illuminate them, so
that they may be appropriately managed. We need the most
knowledgeable people around the table for advisory panel
discussions.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Stevenson follows:]

Mr. Burgess. Thank you.
Dr. Mento, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN J. MENTO

Mr. Mento. Thank you, Congressman Burgess, Congressman
Bilbray. My name is Steven Mento, and I am cofounder,
president, and chief executive officer of Conatus
Pharmaceuticals.
I am here testifying on behalf of Biotechnology Industry
Organization, where I serve as cochairman of its Emerging
Companies Section Health Committee. It is important to note
that the majority of BIO's member companies are small emerging
companies like Conatus working on the arduous and capital-
intensive task of developing innovative treatments and
therapies.
I personally have over 25 years of experience in the
biotechnology and pharmaceutical industry. Conatus is focused
on the development of innovative human therapeutics to treat
liver disease and cancer. Our lead development candidate,
Emricasan, a novel drug being tested as a potential anti-
fibrotic drug to delay the progression of hepatitis and prevent
the development of cirrhosis. Our pipeline also includes a
potential oral therapy to reduce tumors associated with
lymphomas.
Everyone would like to see innovative treatments and
therapies to treat liver disease and cancer be successfully
developed. However, it is essential to understand the
difficulty in accomplishing this shared goal in today's
environment.
While we in the United States are currently the global
leader in the development of biotechnology treatments and
therapies, intense competition from China and India means this
is a position we have to fight to keep. Indeed, when it comes
to small venture-backed startup biotechnology companies, such
as my own, our industry is facing a crisis.
In addition to the economic downturn, regulatory
uncertainty, longer drug development timelines, and an
increasing regulatory and congressional focus on risk instead
of reward in pharmaceutical innovation, are deterring investors
from investing in biotechnology, as you have just heard.
While these projects may have the highest risk, they also
have the highest potential to positively impact society.
Investors have always known that the science is difficult and
fraught with risk, but FDA's shift in recent years to an
increasingly cautious, risk-averse posture has had the
unintended consequence of diverting investment in life sciences
innovation toward things like Groupons and iPads.
In addition to the past potential medical breakthroughs we
offer to patients, the bioscience sector accounts for over 7
million direct and related high-paying, high-quality jobs. We
have a national imperative to foster the development of
innovative treatments and therapies. With baby boomers now
entering into the Medicare system, the costs associated with
chronic care diseases will skyrocket unless we work to develop
novel medicines to treat these diseases.
We as a Nation need to focus policy discussions on how to
unleash the promise of biotechnologies so that the American
public can realize the benefits it has to offer. A fundamental
part of our ability to innovate and raise private investment is
having an FDA with the resources and mechanism required to
effectively and consistently review and approve innovative
products in a timely manner.
These decisions must be understood by stakeholders,
industry investors, patients, and physicians, and then must be
made in the context of patients and diseases being treated.
The FDA is rarely praised for approving a novel therapy,
but they are often maligned if there are unforeseen adverse
events that occur once a product is approved. It is imperative
that policymakers understand the scientific realities of
approving novel medicines.
The remainder of my testimony will focus on solutions. BIO
has developed a set of policy proposals designed to encourage
innovation through the creation of a 21st century FDA, which we
have submitted for the record. I will highlight a few of those
proposals today.
FDA has been perceived by many as the global standardbearer
for regulatory review in drug and biologic applications.
However, scientific and medical knowledge, techniques, and
technologies are advancing at a more rapid pace today than at
any other time. And FDA's capacity to access information about
these advancements has not kept pace. It is essential that
FDA's access to scientific and medical advice be enhanced by
improving the operations of the FDA advisory committees,
establishing chief medical policy officers in the immediate
offices of the center directors, and providing FDA staff with
additional avenues for accessing external scientific and
medical expertise.
Two, patients, particularly those with illnesses where no
adequate therapy exists, want to access the promising new
therapies earlier in the drug development process. Expanding
and improving the accelerated approval pathway into a
progressive approval mechanism would help provide patients more
timely access to needed therapies. This pathway would also
ensure risk-benefit analysis that incorporates the safety and
needs of patients in the real world.
And three, FDA's current statutory authority requires that
the agency approve applications for new drugs when they have
been demonstrated to be safe and effective under the intended
conditions of use. The law provides that effectiveness is
established where FDA is satisfied that there is substantial
evidence that the new drug has the intended effect that it is
purported to have.
FDA typically requires two adequate and well-controlled
studies under this standard. A weight of evidence approach to
data analysis, however, would allow the decisionmaker to look
at all the data and information, and give appropriate
consideration.
Thank you for allowing me to testify, and we look forward
to working with you on developing policies for a 21st century
FDA that will serve to unleash the promise of biotechnology in
the United States.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mento follows:]

Mr. Burgess. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Casey, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DONALD M. CASEY

Mr. Casey. Thank you, Congressman Bilbray and Congressman
Burgess. Thank you for inviting me to testify. And thank you
for coming to San Diego, and you get to see the weather.
And I would also like to add it has been a pleasure working
with your committee and your fine aide Clay, who has been very,
very helpful in us understanding the process.
My name is Don Casey, and I am the CEO of West Wireless
Health Institute, and I spent 30 years working in the health-
care industry.
West Wireless Health Institute is a not-for-profit medical
research organization whose mission is to lower health-care
costs through technology and innovation. With $100 million in
funding today from Gary and Mary West, the institute has hired
more than 60 scientists, engineers, and other experts who are
incubating promising health-care technologies and engaging with
policymakers on broad efforts to dramatically lower health-care
costs.
I would offer the following points today. First, novel
medical technologies can save us literally billions of dollars
while creating tens of thousands of new jobs. But they have to
get through the FDA first. Second, the current regulatory
climate, as you have heard from other testifiers today, is more
challenging than ever and is slowing innovation and, indeed,
driving U.S. jobs overseas. And third, there are several
practical solutions the FDA can undertake today, including
modifying the agency's de novo 510(k) regulatory review
process, that would actually substantially aid in this process.
The institute believes that novel medical technologies will
play a huge role in health-care delivery in the future,
providing better care for chronic diseases and dramatically
lowering health-care costs, while literally creating tens of
thousands of new U.S.-based jobs that can't be shipped
overseas. We base this on our own research as well as major
studies, including one by the VA. These studies show that we
can reduce hospital readmissions, emergency room visits, and
overall lower costs by up to 20 to 30 percent by using an
infrastructure independent model for health care in the future.
However, the regulatory environment that exists today is
making it extremely difficult for such an innovative healthcare
delivery system to be, A, developed, and then, B, deployed.
The FDA is slowing development in novel health-care
technologies in a number of ways. First, in our industry, by
determining that once a device that has a wireless
communications component, it may require different review
process. With traditional medical devices, a manufacturer in
the 510(k) process can cite a predicate device; i.e., a
thermometer is a predicate for a new thermometer. The minute
you add a wireless component now, a wireless thermometer can no
longer cite a thermometer as a predicate device, which sets off
a lengthy and somewhat circuitous regulatory review process
where they ask you to cite the predicate even though you want
to say that there is no predicate.
A second is regulatory overreach. The FDA is exercising
authority over more and more areas of health-care information
technology, particularly where they are intersecting with
medical devices. By taking an expansive regulatory approach to
data collection, data transmission, and data analysis, the FDA
is increasingly raising the bar so high that we are
discouraging new entrants into the field.
We ask ourselves all the time at the Institute, where is
the goal in health care? It is information-intensive. It should
be able to be searched. You can't do that, though, if the FDA
continues to take a very aggressive and expansive approach to
regulation.
I would offer the institute's own experience with our first
prototype, Sense4Baby. And I would be remiss if I didn't show
you Sense4Baby.
Sorry, if Bill can have a tall chair, we can have a
Sense4Baby.
This is the device that we are looking for, to focus on
high-risk pregnancy, which basically takes a $4,000 to $5,000
device that is currently sold in a hospital, and we can break
this down into components that might cost us under $100 when
using a cell phone to transmit this data.
We are very excited about the potential it has to
dramatically lower health-care costs--and I know, Dr. Burgess,
you would appreciate this--by identifying high-risk mothers and
giving them the capacity to be monitored on a regular basis and
pushing that data to you.
We are, however, once we have developed this process right
up the road in La Jolla, going to actually begin to do our
preliminary validation studies in Mexico. That is driven
strictly by our interpretation of FDA regulations that says
wireless health-care devices need to be looked at as--the
wireless component--as a medical device in and of itself.
For us, it is a more expeditious path to actually get
experience with this product by taking it to Mexico, which does
not look at this in the same way.
New medical innovation is pushing the bounds of FDA's
current regulatory paradigm, particularly those where a
predicate does not exist. Traditionally, the FDA has relied on
the de novo process to provide approval pathway for low-risk
medical devices products that have no identifiable predicate.
But the de novo pathway is not working efficiently today.
Review times for de novo products during the last 4 years
are now almost twice as long as the FDA's promise for a PMA
submission. So basically, we are taking a 510(k) device that
should be much more accelerated versus a PMA, and we are now
seeing this de novo process taking it to be longer than the
PMA, and this is very discouraging to industry.
The fundamental problem with de novo today is it can only
be pursued after the manufacturer applies for and completes the
initial 510(k) review and then receives an official letter from
the FDA explaining that there is not an approved predicate
device. This time-consuming process must be completed even if
the manufacturer is willing to acknowledge right up front that
there is no predicate device before submitting the device for
approval.
We recommend that Congress reform the de novo process to
allow device manufacturers to proactively initiate the de novo
approval process without having to undertake the circuitous
process that is required today.
The FDA could also foster greater innovation and speed of
delivery for safe, effective medical technology by making the
510(k) process, as you have heard today several times, more
predictable, transparent, and reasonable.
The FDA's own reports indicate today that the average time
for a 510(k) review has increased from 96 days to 140 days over
the last decade. That is not even looking at industry studies
that might show that that data is almost triple that.
Manufacturers are increasingly being asked for new
information late in the approval process, subjecting them to
changing endpoints and delays. This stance has deterred venture
capital, as we just heard, even for something in the low risk,
like something like we are developing.
In sum, we would ask the Members of Congress and the FDA to
work to preserve patients' access to innovative products by
taking the following steps: reject the IOM's recommendation and
ensure that FDA preserves the 510(k) process to allow low-risk
devices to come to market in a timely manner. We want to
strengthen the 510(k) process so that manufacturers have more
certainty, clarity, and predictability in the approval
pathways. And finally, we want to reinvigorate the de novo
process by permitting medical devices without a predicate to
initiate an approval process without having to exhaust the
510(k) process.
We believe that all of that will, A, increase jobs, B,
dramatically lower costs, and the final benefit of that is that
you're going to get better patient care over time.
We will look forward to working with Congress and building
upon its leadership role in spurring innovation, creating new
jobs for America, and helping all patients benefit from an
infrastructure independent model for health care. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Casey follows:]

Mr. Burgess. Thank you.
Mr. Panetta, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JOE PANETTA

Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Vice Chairman Burgess and
Representative Bilbray. Thank you both for being here in the
center of global innovation of the biomedical industry of
Southern California.
My organization, BIOCOM, is the advocacy organization for
our industry here in Southern California. Ninety percent of our
members have fewer than 50 employees, and most have products in
research and development that hopefully will commercialize them
in the near future, if we can create an environment that is
conducive to their being able to do this. And today I am glad
to be here to be able to talk to you about some of the
challenges that we face.
I also want to acknowledge the great work of committee
staff, and Mr. Bilbray's committee staff as well, his personal
staff, Gary Kline, the great work that we have done with Gary.
We appreciate the relationship that we have had. And we
appreciate the work that Congressman Bilbray has done to
address the challenges that we face as an industry.
I want to address in sequence here some of the challenges
that we face as a result of FDA's medical device regulation,
and that impact on innovation jobs and patients.
As you have heard indirectly here, our companies face one
challenge. Their fate is completely determined by a single
federal agency, and that is the FDA.
Without approval from the FDA at each stage of the
commercialization process, nothing else about the company
matters. Life science companies must be afforded transparent,
predictable, clear regulatory processes to encourage the
immense investment that it takes to get a concept from
discovery to commercialization.
However, as you have heard, according to our members, the
current environment at the FDA is perceived by investors to be
unpredictable, hesitant, and risk-averse. This environment has
created a funding crisis for many of our small to midsize
companies, and these are the companies that have been central
to the growth of the life science industry over the past 20
years.
And I will remind you that this is an industry that has
constantly outperformed other sectors during the past economic
downturn.
It is essential that FDA focus on innovation to be
strengthened in order to maintain this country's leadership in
biomedical innovation, and all of the jobs that go with that
global leadership. Even some of the most strident critics of
the life science industry, including California's own raking
member Henry Waxman, agree that the FDA is perceived as being a
failed agency by much of the American public.
The U.S. is headed for a crisis as more and more boards and
investors are demanding that companies first commercialize
their products outside the U.S., where safety standards may be
just as rigorous, but the approval process is more consistent,
transparent, and predictable. And the companies, therefore,
have a better chance of realizing a revenue stream.
Unfortunately, that FDA's leadership has made recent public
statements that appear to indicate that the agency is in denial
regarding this migration of products to Europe. I can assure
you that our members would reinforce the fact that this is
correct.
For example, a recent BIOCOM member survey revealed that 59
percent of our respondents are developing strategies to seek
approval and commercializing outside the U.S. before seeking
FDA approval.
Sending innovation to another country first has many grave
implications. Jobs related to clinical trials and development
are moved to those countries in which approval is being sought.
Once approved, manufacturing facilities and distribution are
set up in and around those countries. And those jobs are not
just limited to Ph.D.s.
This isn't a matter simply of jobs. Patients become aware
of the most current and effective treatments and technologies,
but only those who can afford it can travel to foreign
countries to access them. This is ironic, because it indicates
a reversal in the prior trend over years of patients from the
E.U. and other places coming to the U.S. to access cutting-edge
treatments.
It also should be noted that many insurers won't provide
coverage for a therapy or device not approved in the U.S., so
this option is limited to those who can afford to pay all costs
out-of-pocket. For the vast majority of Americans, however, it
just means that they must go without the best and most current
therapies and technologies.
The impact on patients in the U.S. is undeniable. They are
being denied access to the most cutting-edge lifesaving, or
life-changing products.
I want to remind you, members of the committee, that FDA's
mission is very clear. Its primary mission is both to protect
public health and to promote public health as it relates to
approval of drugs, devices, and diagnostics.
BIOCOM industry members share a common goal with the agency
and support the desire to improve public health by bringing
innovative, high-quality products to patients in a timely
fashion. But we continue to hear from our members that this
system is creating delays, it is more unpredictable, and more
data seems to be required than in previous submissions.
We don't believe that this is a reflection on the quality
of the data that our companies are submitting so much as a lack
of effective communication between reviewers in the industry as
well as the issue of reviewers' access to training and
education of the newest technologies.
We have conducted a survey five times over the last 16
years with PricewaterhouseCoopers called ``Improving America's
Health.'' I have provided copies to all the members of the
committee.
Our survey continues to indicate a growing concern that the
FDA is becoming more detached from the industry that it
regulates. The survey seeks to evaluate the relationship
between the FDA and the companies regulated by it. Sixty
percent of our survey respondents stated that the FDA changed
its position during the course of a review, and that was up
from 40 percent 4 years ago. Almost half of the people
responding to the survey felt the products were being denied in
part because of inadequate resources at the agency, and 48
percent reported a break in continuity during the review
process.
This level of uncertainty isn't surprising when taken in
the context of the current state of the agency's human resource
pool. Dr. Schoen, head of CDRH, recently said in a town hall
meeting that the average CDRH reviewer has less than 3 years of
experience.
With that level of turnover, it is not surprising the
review times become elongated as new reviewers are brought up
to speed on the industry. Sometimes these new reviewers may
request information or data on issues never previously raised
with the applicant. Often these requests can require studies
costing millions of dollars and a year or more to complete.
I want to point out that FDA has recognized that they have
a problem, and they are implementing measures to address some
of these specific measures. However, BIOCOM is concerned that
that these changes won't go far enough. Therefore, we have
developed specific, focused recommendations that we intend to
share with FDA and with Congress regarding potential
organizational improvements and efficiencies to improve the
agency's overall performance. And I would be glad to discuss
these as well.
I just want to turn briefly to a few other issues that add
uncertainty to the uncertainty that we already feel as an
industry.
First, the Independent Payment Advisory Board enacted as a
part of health-care reform is an unelected body, which could
institute broad changes to Medicare with no congressional input
or oversight. And we don't support this approach.
Medicare Part D, which provide seniors with long-sought
drug benefits, and part B, which provides oncology products for
administration in physician offices, has been under threat.
You have heard about the medical device excise tax. This
will be devastating to many of our members, and we support the
efforts of both Representative Bilbray and of Representative
Paulsen of Minnesota to repeal this unfair tax, which, as you
have heard, takes dollars away from R&D and job growth.
And finally, there are those, including the President of
the United States, who continue to seek to reduce the 12-year
data exclusivity period for biologic products. That 12-year
period has been supported overwhelmingly in Congress on a
bipartisan basis.
Innovation in the life science industry is meaningless if
it doesn't reach the patient, so we at BIOCOM welcome
constructive dialogue with agencies, with Congress, the
industry, FDA leadership, and the patient population we all
seek to help, so that we can come together to ensure patient
safety and advances for cures and treatments that will reduce
overall health-care costs, create jobs, and benefit all
Americans while ensuring that our citizens have access to them.
Thank you for this opportunity, and thank you for your time
in coming to San Diego.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Panetta follows:]

Mr. Burgess. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Larkin, you are recognized for 5 minutes for purposes
of an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN T. LARKIN

Mr. Larkin. Good afternoon. I am Kevin Larkin, CEO of
TherOx, a venture-capital-supported clinical stage medical
device company located in Irvine, California. And I appreciate
the opportunity to testify before you today.
As background, I have spent 37 years in the cardiovascular
medical device business in items such as heart pacemakers,
implantable defibrillators, angioplasty catheters, and stents.
As a consumer and as an occasional patient, I absolutely
recognize the need for and support reasonable evaluation and
regulation roles for FDA. These facilitate, but do not foster,
innovation.
My peers and physicians I have worked with over the years
are overwhelmingly honest and ethical, and will not knowingly
do harm. Unless and until these values are violated, they
should be treated as professionals with trust and respect.
I believe also that FDA has huge challenges satisfying its
diverse, heterogeneous constituents: the public, physicians,
industry, media, and legislators. Most of these groups do not
understand the risk-benefit aspect of medical treatments.
Specific to the PMA regulatory path, the advisory panel
process is dysfunctional and counterproductive. The good news
is it can be fixed fairly easily.
As background, TherOx is a non-revenue-generating, clinical
stage company that pioneered a breakthrough heart attack
treatment that minimizes heart damage compared to the standard
of care.
We successfully completed a controlled, randomized pivotal
trial that met both its effectiveness and safety endpoints with
headroom. Our trial design was collaboratively worked out with
our FDA review team, a group within CDRH.
After we submitted our trial data, our FDA review team on
its own initiative awarded us what is called expedited review,
a classification that not only indicates prespecified criteria
were met, but that the new therapy treats a serious disease
state for which there are no better alternatives. Despite this
apparent success, an advisory panel did not vote to recommend
approval of our therapy.
Here are some observations from that panel meeting.
Physician composition of 15 members, three routinely treat
heart attack patients and, therefore, know the practices,
logistics, adverse event and mortality rates for this serious
disease state. These physicians were ignorant, even dismissive
of our Bayesian statistical design, which was recommended by
our FDA advisory group.
Because they don't routinely treat heart attack patients,
they were unfamiliar with our heart measurement assessment,
Sestamibi Nuclear Imaging, a well-validated assessment tool.
They dismissed it.
They were concerned about a 1.8 percent death rate in the
treatment arm of the group. They didn't understand the normal
death rate was greater than 3 percent at the time. They just
didn't know.
An untrained advisory panel chair accepted a motion for
approval without conditions, completely inappropriate for a
full PMA product. Minimally, a postapproval study is always a
condition for approval.
The panel vote was 9-to-5 not to recommend approval,
despite the trial having met its endpoints.
Here is a summary of actions since that meeting.
Jobs were lost. One of my first actions post-panel was to
fire half of the employees as a cash conservation maneuver
while we attempted to work through an approval path with FDA.
The employees let go had done their jobs effectively, helped us
deliver a successful trial, and did not deserve this outcome.
Since that panel meeting, heart attack patients,
particularly those suffering large, debilitating heart attacks,
have no access to our therapy.
The advisory panel is being tweaked slightly. For the most
part, it operates as it has in the past.
Venture capital, by far the dominant financing resource for
innovative breakthrough medical devices, is increasingly
abandoning investments in PMA product research due to
uncertainty over FDA approval, even when outcomes meet goals.
No doubt, many of you here today have heard a variety of
criticisms about FDA policies, personnel, arbitrariness,
follow-up, and more. Unlike many of my peers who run small
medical device companies, I have high regard for most of our
particulars CDRH members. They are collaborative, helpful yet
firm, and importantly, they are responsive. I appreciate that
we work together and how each of us tries to work toward
deliverables.
As you may have assumed by now, my biggest single criticism
is with the advisory board. The good news is that I believe the
advisory panel function can be monumentally improved with just
a few changes. Here are a couple recommendations.
Reconcile the ridiculously extreme conflict of interest
restriction that increasingly staffs advisory panels with
nonspecialists in the field being evaluated. Strike a balance
between accessing expertise with reasonable, commonsense
restrictions. Require advisory panel members to pre-read the
prepared material and attest to having done so, or be
disqualified.
If the FDA adopts and recommends trial design efficiencies,
such as Bayesian statistics, uneven randomization, and other
maneuvers, panel members have to be educated and oriented to
such concepts or be considered not qualified. Panel members who
make false or misleading statements must be corrected
immediately by either the FDA or the sponsor to prevent
negatively influencing other members. And instruct panel
members to evaluate the trial and the results being presented,
not redesign it on the fly. Train panel chair and other members
on panel logistics, voting procedures, risk-benefit
interpretation, and other issues critical to effective panel
function.
Having gone through what I call a good example of a bad
example, I believe a few changes like these can preserve the
important independent advisory function intended for panels,
yet dramatically improve the effectiveness and the assistance
of those panels in FDA's decisions to approve or not and under
what conditions.
The big picture: This is about maintaining our overwhelming
U.S. leadership in medical research and innovation. It is about
U.S. citizens being able to access the latest, most effective
new treatments. It is about preserving venture capital's
dominant role in financing daring new breakthrough treatments.
And it is about adding, not reducing, U.S. jobs in this
exciting medical device field.
I appreciate having had the opportunity to testify today. I
offer to be of assistance in any way I can.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Larkin follows:]

Mr. Burgess. I want to thank all of the panelists for their
testimony this morning. It certainly has been enlightening.
It is usually our custom to go to questions from the
Members of Congress at this point. We usually start with the
person who has traveled the farthest and has the most
seniority.
[Laughter.]
If it is all right with you, Mr. Bilbray, I will go first.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes for the purpose of
questions.
Mr. Larkin, I have heard it from others on the panel as
well, this issue of the advisory panels. And I have to tell
you, in June of 2007, when we did the reauthorization for the
FDA, in particular the prescription drug user fee, the medical
device user fee, and it was the first time I saw the language
that was going to be restrictive that said, no one with any
potential for conflict of interest was going to be seated on
the panel.
The Institute of Medicine, and I recognize there always are
some disagreements with the Institute of Medicine, but they
themselves said no more than 40 percent should have some
identifiable conflicts. But they recognized the utility of
having people on the panel who actually understood the drug or
device under question.
And when we had that conveyed in the committee, we had the
markup on the bill, and I put up an amendment out there twice,
once in subcommittee and then a full committee, and it was
always voted down on a party-line vote. So clearly, there were
political overtones as to why you mustn't have any type of
conflict of interest on the panel.
But particularly in a very small universe, I was thinking
at the time about pediatric oncology; certainly, your area fits
that bill. But in a very small universe, the number of people
who actually know something is going to be a pretty small
number of people. And if you exclude all of them, then you are
knocking all the experts off of the panel before you started.
You might as well have OB-GYNs on the panel as pediatric
oncologists.
So I certainly welcome the fact that I have heard I think
from several of you today, and I promise you this is something
I am going to get fixed when we reauthorize both the
prescription drug user fee on the medical device user fee in
this Congress.
It was wrong the way it was approached last time. I was
young, well, younger. I didn't appreciate how things worked. It
was my first term on the committee in the minority. And I
didn't really understand how things were working, when the
chairman, then-Chairman Dingell, offered to work with me and
help me get this fixed, it turned out to be pretty much an
empty promise. This time, we will get this done.
Do any of you have any things you would like to offer on
the conflict of interest stuff, because that is a fight that I
intend to continue into this year?
Yes, Doctor?
Mr. Gollaher. We have talked to the FDA, including the
commissioner, about this. And I think the FDA themselves
support significant changes. So you are not completely swimming
upstream. They realize that there are weaknesses that they can
bring to bear, both on the drug and device side.
We talked with the commissioner about transparency. And the
rule, generally, in looking at IRBs, for example, institutional
review boards, within clinical medicine is conflicts are
unavoidable. So clear illumination, as was said before, about
the nature of the conflict is essential.
But I think what we have seen is going very far the wrong
way to try to exclude them, and that causes more harm than
good.
Mr. Larkin. I think, sir, David is correct. The pendulum,
to use that expression again, has swung too far.
To me, it is sort of a cascade. You know the media gets the
public stirred up about not necessarily a real problem but a
whiff of a problem, a potential drug or device related problem
that has yet to be demonstrated. And then once that is going,
the public gets upset about it, rightfully. And then, I have to
say, sometimes a few legislators kind of join that bandwagon.
And at that point, it is very hard for someone to stand up and
say, wait a second, let's have a commonsense, practical
approach to conflict of interest.
It is as if, at that point, the public has said nobody who
has anything to do with this specialty can be involved in this
decision. And of course, that is not right.
The more you know about the field, the more you know about
devices or new approaches, particularly the more important you
are as an element in that decision. I think you can be vetted,
but I think we have to get back to some more reasonable--and
the other thing I would say is, my point about believing that
the vast majority of physicians and professionals in the
medical space are honest and ethical is important. As soon as
someone violates that, you kick them out.
Mr. Burgess. Yes, and that is critical.
Mr. Panetta, you talked about the cutting-edge stuff now
moving and instead of it being United States-oriented, it would
be oriented overseas in Europe or perhaps even Asia. Right
before his death, I had an opportunity to meet Dr. DeBakey. He
got the congressional gold coin, and we spent an afternoon
talking. And he reminded me that in the 1930s, when he
graduated from medical school, that he was immediately required
to go to Europe to get the credential to be a researcher,
because he wanted to do research, and you couldn't be a
researcher of any renown if only trained in the United States.
So he was a graduate of medical school, I think the year
Elvis was born. And then things all changed after the Second
World War. He attributes a lot of it to the funding of the
National Institutes of Health, but there are obviously other
reasons as well.
But it seems like such a shame to undo that now, as we are
poised to do. But that is obviously something that concerns
you, as well.
Mr. Panetta. Absolutely, Congressman.
It used to be, too, that the majority of drugs were
developed in Europe. And we saw, fortunately, the pendulum
shifting as drug companies came to the U.S. to take advantage
of the work that is done by the NIH, to take advantage of the
skilled workforce here, and certainly to take advantage of the
reimbursement that is supported here that doesn't come anywhere
close in Europe to what companies are able to ----
Mr. Burgess. And the academic community, we must mention
them, since we are in their facility today.
Mr. Panetta. Absolutely. And here in San Diego, if it
weren't for the academic community, we wouldn't have a
biotechnology industry. It came out of the academic community.
Just to get back to the advisory panel situation, the one
comment I would add, if I could, on that situation is that many
of my members tell me that there is definitely a disconnect
between the advisory panels and a lot of the work that is done
leading to advisory panel meetings, in terms of an
understanding of the earlier work that has been done. And we
have had several companies here that have gone all the way
through the process and invested hundreds of millions of
dollars only to be redirected back to something that came up as
an issue early on in the process and could have easily been
tackled then. And this creates even more delay and uncertainty
at the end of the process. So there is definitely a
discontinuity there.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you.
Mr. Bilbray will be recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilbray. Yes, Joe, let me follow up on that. So you are
talking about the staffers who review the original applications
are not available as resources for the review bodies?
Mr. Panetta. Many times, Congressman Bilbray, the staffers
are no longer there, because, as I said, there is a 3-year
average turnover. Many times the products are reassigned.
Staffers move from one division to another. And many times the
record is just not clear within the agency as to decisions that
were made early on, and there is no consistency in that
decisionmaking.
Mr. Bilbray. So we have a real problem with institutional
memory starting with that nobody can follow this through. I
mean, how many people know the frustration, a good example, is
you go to get your passport and somebody says oh, yes, you do
this and this. You go back to the same window or you go back
for your birth certificate, and they say, well, I wasn't here,
I didn't tell you that. And I have a new set of rules.
So I think this institutional memory, I just can picture,
the fact of, coming from local government, of a planning
commission not being able to have as a resource the staffer who
actually processed the application. I mean, that is a huge
resource there. And so, you are literally flying blind.
Kevin, my question, though, is this conflict issue, it
really is broad. I mean, it is almost going to a concept--and I
guess it is something that I would ask both sides of the aisle
to perceive--this would be like saying that you wouldn't allow
any school board member to be either a parent with a child in
the school system or to be a teacher. You know how that would
be received around this country.
But that conflict I think is a real concern I have, because
it is almost as if that there is a willingness to accept
ignorance to avoid any appearance of prejudice. And I guess
that is where we get into it on that. It is a big concern that
you can't sanitize the system to the point where nothing can
grow. And, hopefully, we will be able to address that kind of
conflict.
Let me just open up on one thing here. My concern is that,
anybody here, if we do nothing, if we don't address the issue
of the desperate need for venture capital for research, if we
don't change the system where we allow experts--and let me just
say a moment about that. You think cardiovascular, you know,
you have a pretty broad perspective with some of this kind of
stuff that goes on. I mean, I think we can talk about--what
about gene therapy?
If you don't allow somebody was some expertise in the
field, literally, you are flying blind. You would rather say,
why even have a review body if they are going to be basically
blind to the whole facts and science out there?
But let me just open up, if we do nothing at all, if we
keep on the projection that we are looking now, you know how
guys love to do their scales. OK, here is our projection, here
is where we are going, where are we in 10 years?
Mr. Gollaher. Sir, just one way to think about this is the
concept of regulatory competition. The FDA doesn't view itself
as having international competitors, but it does.
In fact, the Europeans have designed their drug and their
device regulatory systems with the explicit intention of
building up their industries. And so it is really the opposite
of the way that we have thought traditionally about regulation.
Mr. Bilbray. So it sounds like they actually approach this
like they did the shipbuilding industry, where they were going
to participate in helping to get to that outcome, that they
were going to be partners with the researchers and the private
team to get to the outcome. Where we used an approach of,
``That is your problem. We are just here to make sure you don't
do something we don't want to do. We don't. We have no
obligation to help you do the things we do want.''
Mr. Gollaher. Well, it is interesting. If you look at the
European system, and it is different for drugs than it is for
devices. But in both cases, the regulatory system has a sponsor
that relates to the company that is going for approval. It is
called a rapporteur in the medicines agency, and it is called a
notified body in the device industry.
But these are people who are basically working with the
industry sponsor to shepherd the product approval through. And
it is not an adversarial but rather a collaborative process.
Mr. Bilbray. Doctor?
Mr. Mento. Yes.
Mr. Bilbray. I hear that we are looking at having our
medical research facilities go the way of our shipbuilding. And
it all ends up being basically something we used to talk about,
where Americans used to be employed, used to being involved
with that. If we don't change the system, is our medical
research going the same way as our shipbuilding did?
Mr. Mento. I think it is actually worse than that. I think,
I mean you heard today, and the concept is that in small
biotech companies that are willing to take the risk, so they
are going to go out there with a first class drug. Well, the
problem with first in class drugs are, there is no regulatory
pathway.
You are talking about pathways that exist with endpoints. I
am talking about drugs that we are developing in liver
fibrosis; there are no endpoints. No one has ever done a drug
in that space.
So when you think about uncertainty associated with
trusting that the FDA is going to be capable enough to have
continuity over a 10-year process it is going to take to
develop a brand-new drug in a space that hasn't been developed
before, it is incredibly difficult to bring money in. And if
the money doesn't come in, you are going to have more--I mean,
I have a distinguished member of the venture community next to
me. But I can tell you that the people I talk to, they would
rather have I have a second or third generation drug where they
know the pathway is, where they can at least identify if it is
the next antihypertensive, people know how to measure blood
pressure. They don't know how to measure the progression of
fibrosis in the liver in a way that will determine whether or
not the clinical outcome for those patients is going to be
better or worse.
And, in particular, in our case, the epidemic--everybody
talks about obesity. We are talking about the epidemic of
obesity, and one of the things that people are probably not
aware of--you probably are, as a physician.
Mr. Bilbray. He is aware of everything.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Mento. The inflammation of liver associated with
obesity is rampant and increasing, not just in the States but
elsewhere. So it is not just that we are developing drugs for,
say, in the U.S. elsewhere. The diseases that we have, because
of the westernization of some of these other locations, are
becoming more prominent there.
They are going to be first in line, because they are going
to be able to have the scientists there, have the funding for
that to treat the disease there. They may not even get to the
United States.
So I think it is worse than the shipbuilding industry.
Mr. Panetta. May I add to that, Congressman?
Mr. Burgess. Of course.
Mr. Panetta. Last year, I had I had the--Mr. Chairman, last
year I had the opportunity to go to Taizhou in China, where the
Chinese are building China Medical City.
China Medical City is a remarkable effort to begin with,
because it is a ground-up--from the ground up effort to build
research facilities, universities, incubators. But what
impressed me the most was in the center of China Medical City
was an SFDA building, a Chinese FDA building.
And when I asked about it, I was told this building is here
so that the SFDA folks can work directly with the researchers
and the folks in the incubators from beginning to end and make
sure that there is collaboration in the development of
products. What a unique concept.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman's time has expired. We are,
obviously, going to go another round for questions.
Dr. Stevenson, I would like to ask you if I could, the
concept of the shipbuilding having already left the country.
Has the financing for the shipbuilding, has that ship also
already sailed?
Ms. Stevenson. It is hovering, I would say. I am not so
sure sailed.
But the point about the fragile ecosystem I think is
really, really important, because I can only invest in
companies when I have a fund to invest. I get that from my
limited partners, who are, as I mentioned, the pension funds.
In our case, we have these small funds. A lot of ours are
family offices and high-net-worth individuals.
Well, people are only--they are making those investments in
order to get returns. So if I can't demonstrate consistently
over time that they are getting a reasonable return, they are
simply going to go elsewhere. I mean it is----
Mr. Burgess. There are too many iPhones being made.
Ms. Stevenson. Well, yes. Why not go where you are going to
get a guaranteed return, as opposed to investing in innovation.
Good to be a good citizen, but that is not why people are
making these investments.
And there is a really big lag. You asked what would happen
if it all kind of stopped today. Well, it takes a long time to
go grow an idea. It takes a long time to grow the management
team. I mean, nobody does life science management that hasn't
been doing something allied for 15 or 20 years. Well, those
people are going to go elsewhere.
I mean, I had like 20 years of college and operating
experience and all this stuff before I started doing that. That
is not unusual for a venture capitalist.
So the life sciences folks will go find other things to do.
And it is very hard then to restart this ecosystem, once it has
started to die off, like in any other ecosystem.
Mr. Casey. And to put a point on that, you asked a
question, Congressman. I mean, if things track the way they are
today, the medical device industry will be a memory in the
United States, point 1. Point 2 is patients are going to be
paying a lot more for devices, and that money, just like oil,
is going to go overseas to either China, South Korea, or over
into Europe. And to be honest with you, the economy is going to
have sacrificed, in our estimation, between 200,000 and 1
million jobs on literally looking at how you begin to foster an
industry and the next generation of health-care information
technology.
A lot of discussion here is a little bit more about bio and
pharma. I will just tell you that if--you mention gene
sequencing. When you look at wireless data, the prevalence of
data is just going to explode in health care. And there is an
entire new industry that is waiting to be formed on data
analysis, data capture, data manipulation, over time.
And if we have a regulatory environment today that is
basically saying, well, hang on a second. The minute you move
off the device and a drug into something that combines
information with a device, that creates a whole world of
regulatory uncertainty. That industry is going to be picked up
and moved.
I will tell you, currently today we are 3 years behind
Japan. I would tell you we are about 18 months behind what we
are seeing going on in Europe. And the Chinese who had no
interest in that a year ago are now throwing around a ton of
money looking at the space.
So it is an industry that should be American. It is needed
for the economy; it is needed for jobs. And we are just going
to watch that just sail away.
Mr. Burgess. Dr. Stevenson, I know you have to leave.
Is there any parting advice that you want to give Mr.
Bilbray and myself?
Ms. Stevenson. Well, to use the analogy I used with our
risk, manageable and unmanageable, to manage what is obvious
here that needs to be managed, the conflict-of-interest issues.
We can live with an FDA that is hard. We want safe,
effective products. That is what we are investing in. We just
simply need to be able to see the process and then depend on
that process. So when we make our forecast, when we make our
investments, we get to where--we have forecasts. We can get on
that amount of capital and that amount of effort.
That is really all anybody is asking for. And it existed at
one point in time. And we believe it should exist again.
Mr. Burgess. I agree with you.
I yield back to Mr. Bilbray.
Mr. Bilbray. Yes, let me just say, Doctor, we don't talk
enough about it, because it is not sexy. It is heart-wrenching.
But thank you for representing the venture capital industry,
because as those of us that have been involved in the
environmental movement, you are the krill of medical miracles.
Ms. Stevenson. Is that good or bad? I am not familiar with
the term.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bilbray. The entire ecosystem depends on you being
healthy.
Ms. Stevenson. Oh, OK.
Mr. Bilbray. But you are out of sight, out of mind.
Ms. Stevenson. And sometimes maligned, I would also ----
Mr. Bilbray. There was once a very bad movie that Charlton
Heston did called ``Soylent Green.'' And when the krill dies,
we start eating each other. In other words, it is not
sustainable without you.
And you are out of sight, out of mind. You let people take
you for granted, and trying to get both sides to understand
that we need that public research to create the sea grain for
you. But we have got to allow you to get the capital to be able
to create those startups that the big guys use to feed the
system of the next generation.
And without you, I really worry that we are going to be
asking ourselves in 10 years, where are all those great medical
breakthroughs? Where are the things like a vaccine for cervical
cancer, so the politicians can debate about should it be
applied or not.
[Laughter.]
Those type of miracles I think we take for granted too
much, and I think we are too jaded.
But you are the foundation on that, and I want to thank you
for that.
Ms. Stevenson. Thank you.
Mr. Bilbray. My time has----
Mr. Burgess. No, your time has not expired. You encroached
on my time, which is perfectly fine.
Go ahead and reset the time. We will give it to Mr.
Bilbray.
Mr. Bilbray. I want to bring that up, because there is a
lot of stuff like the medical device issue.
And, Don, my family went through the tragedy of crib death.
And then went through the tragedy of living with an infant
monitor with false alarms and everything else out there. A big
concern is where we would have been if we didn't have that
device and how if that wasn't made available--and, sure, there
was a lot of false alarms. But let me tell you something, after
you have to pick up a cold, dead baby, that false alarm doesn't
bother you at all, especially when you could pick up a nice
warm baby while you are terrified.
And I guess that is my frustration of taking a look at
things like aspirin. Hundreds of people die every year in this
country from aspirin. And I wait for the time of the FDA
explaining to me how aspirin stays on the market and admitting
because, probably of any drug out there, it has probably saved
more lives than anything else.
But aspirin, as far as I know, do you think aspirin, anyone
of you guys, do you think aspirin could get through the system
today?
[A chorus of noes.]
Mr. Bilbray. And how many people, how many thousands of
Americans and people around the world, are alive today because
of aspirin? So how many other aspirins are being held up in a
system and how many other people are dying because we are not
approving the proper triage on that?
And I would open it up. If there any specifics that you
guys can see, the frustration you run into.
Mr. Casey. Congressman, I want to pick up on your Sudden
Infant Death Syndrome as illustrative of what is going to
happen.
I mean, basically you are talking about a baby monitor that
you can hear and whatnot. The technology is rapidly getting to
the point where it is eminently affordable that you could put a
device under a mattress that is going to basically measure
whether the child is breathing with a pretty fair degree of
precision. And then that can be either pushed to a doctor, a
caregiver, a parent. It could get pushed anywhere, because the
data is basically easily moved.
The challenge and the reason we are talking about de novo
is, the minute you take a relatively straightforward device and
put a wireless component to it that involves data transmission
analytics, you enter into this very strange world where, well,
hang on a second, are we actually looking at a device? Are we
looking at a device plus an analytical system? And you get in
this very strange do-loop.
And one of the reasons, and it is a shame that Dr.
Stevenson isn't here, venture capital is walking away from
that, saying, oh, hang on a second, that is wireless.
You know that is going to get into a bad place with the
FDA. And you have totally ramped up the regulatory risks.
So the technology that should actually already be 10 years
old is waiting. And just pick that or, for us, congestive heart
failure. $10 million disease, in terms of what the government
pays out. It is billed $30 billion, but it is a $10 billion
disease. There are relatively straightforward wireless medical
devices that can make a transformative difference that can
really ramp down costs, increase patient satisfaction, and
reduce readmissions.
Then again, it gets caught in this lack of predicate
device, which is one of the reasons we have been pushing so
hard on this de novo pathway.
Mr. Mento. If I may add something in the context of a word
that we heard--I don't know, I was going to count--probably 100
times: innovation.
Funny you brought up gene therapy. The first biotech
company that I was recruited to in San Diego back in 1992 was a
gene therapy company. And in those days, in the '90s, the
investment in this industry was truly all about innovation. You
heard from the venture community that limited partners were
flowing in there because there was the perception that the
science was going to dictate and lead the way. And when we
started in gene therapy, the FDA not only had no one at the FDA
that knew anything about gene therapy, because it was such a
new field, but there wasn't that fear that there wasn't going
to be a pathway that could be generated, because the feeling
was that science was going to win out, both in the companies to
develop innovative products, and through the FDA, that
ultimately the process would be defined well enough that that
the venture community would not go away.
That is completely the opposite now. I mean, there is a
fear, an absolute fear, in innovation, and you heard a bit of
it here, in the venture community, not so much the science
isn't good, but there is no predictability and no trust that a
pathway will ever be developed.
And even when you have a job that goes all the way through
the process, you have had your agreements, you add the issue we
had talked about relative to the scientific advisory committee
meeting, and not having people on there that are even capable
of understanding the process. We are in dire straits.
If it doesn't get fixed, we may not see its 4 or 5 years, I
am more concerned not about the drugs that are currently in
phase 3. It is the pipeline that is not going to be there 5 or
6 years from now, where you are not going to have to worry
about regulating innovative drugs, because they are not going
to be any there, because there wasn't any financing.
And it is not just the venture community. Look at the large
pharmaceutical companies. They are eliminating their R&D
organizations, because they can't even manage or feel
comfortable in managing if that is a good investment on our
part.
I mean, shipbuilding is close, but I don't think not even
close to being as dire, what we are in for in the future.
And when I talk to my colleagues within the industry, there
is depression, because the science is better now. It is better
than it was 20 years ago. We can develop--it is remarkable the
kinds of things that we can do. And you know, with electronics,
also with gene sequencing and marker analysis.
But there is no way that we can convince investors that
there will be a pathway, that the FDA is going to get up to
speed, and that even if they are that that pathway is going to
be predictable enough with a trust level that if it really does
meet its endpoints, it is actually going to get through, and
not be stifled by some people that are in the process at the
end-stage that don't even know what they're talking about.
So I don't know how you fix that.
Mr. Bilbray. OK, Doctor, you raise a whole new concern that
we need to follow up on and get into. And in all fairness, you
are right. It took decades to lose the shipbuilding or the auto
industry. It will take months to lose the research facilities.
But the prejudice, the prejudice of people that claim to be
based in science but bringing prejudice in, and the gene issue
is a good example, where a top oncologist here at U.C. tells me
flat out, we are this close, this close. If there was any
opportunity, this close to the breakthrough, but it has been
stopped dead in its tracks.
And resources and everything else are moving off, and to
see somebody whose entire life is devoted to trying to save
life, a frustration of seeing a system that basically takes
prejudice, and discriminates against a certain scientific
approach, based on ignorance, and to claim they are somehow
being informed decisionmakers just I think is one of those
things that we need to talk more about and look at. And that is
one thing our committee has to look at is the prejudice.
We just got this big scandal that is coming down that the
doctor and I are working on of a certain kind of energy
technology. And the prejudice led them to major mistakes that
cost the taxpayers a half billion dollars.
The trouble is, with your field, we are seeing bureaucratic
prejudices that are standing in the way of not just the
creation of jobs, but the saving of lives. And that sure makes
what went on up in San Francisco look second rate.
Mr. Burgess. Let's go each one last round.
Mr. Panetta, I wanted to ask you a question. You referenced
the period of exclusivity. And I thought, for all the bad stuff
that is in the Affordable Care Act, I thought at least the
period of exclusivity had been put to rest. It seemed to be
pretty bipartisan, bicameral support for the 12 years that was
I think included in the amendment that passed through our
committee. And I think similar language was taken up by the
Senate.
Then the President the other day said we are going to roll
that back, I think he said to 7 years.
Mr. Panetta. Seven years, correct. And if you recall,
Congresswoman Eshoo took the President on directly on this
issue as the Affordable Care Act was in the process of being
passed. And this was probably a good year and a half ago that
the President proposed to reduce it to 7 years period. We
thought that had been put to rest, but of course it is in his
latest deficit reduction plan again.
Mr. Burgess. Yes, I mean, it almost defies gravity that you
are going to be able to recoup the investment cost in such a
short period of time and have a product on the market that
anybody can actually afford. Otherwise, your price is so high
that it becomes something that is not attainable.
Mr. Panetta. Absolutely, and there was plenty of economics
behind the proposal for 12 years. Of course, it was debated by
the Energy and Commerce Committee, and we were able to back up
the need for 12 years.
It provided some sense of confidence and security to the
investment community. And to propose to move it back to 7 years
brings that insecurity back into the equation.
Mr. Burgess. And just so you can take some comfort, I don't
see any abiding interest from either side of the political
dais, and in our committee, to reengage that fight. There was
one person who was pushing it, as I recall, and the vote was
literally that lopsided in July of 2009, when that came up in
committee.
Mr. Casey, on the novel device aspect, you have obviously
referenced one that sounded pretty important to me. I assume
there are others out there in the pipeline that you all are
looking at.
Mr. Casey. There are a ton. I mean, if you look at this
space again, we commit to things as to how do we dramatically
lower the cost of health care by creating infrastructure
independent, or how do we create monitoring that to accelerate
the development of novel technologies.
If you look at the combined weight of like an Apple or
Verizon, AT&T, they all want to jump in the health-care space,
but then they jump and they look and say, oh my God, there is
an uncertain regulatory body there that actually is actively
discouraging innovation by virtue of not investing in
understanding the science and not creating a pathway.
We just see a significant amount of problems where we----
Mr. Burgess. Now would Google be subject to that 2.9
percent medical device tax on the iPhone?
Mr. Casey. No, it is very interesting. Apple, as an
example, for which there are now over 13,000 medical apps, you
actually sign a release if you are going to develop a medical
app with Apple that declares that you will not make the Apple
iPhone a medical device, as a way of shielding them from the
2.9 percent tax.
And it is interesting that one of the most innovative
companies in the world is so concerned about being regulated
that they just basically sit there and put up a big wall.
But if you look at the five most costly diseases--and I am
talking to a physician. I don't mean to--but if you look at
congestive heart failure, if you look at COPD, all of these,
you run down asthma, you run down pregnancy, in terms of cost
per individual that has that. These are all conditions that
there are devices that can be made to transmit well-understood
biometrics from point A to point B, and create--Congressman
Bilbray, whether it is a false alarm or any kind of alarm, just
move data and get it into a rich data analytic field, where you
can learn long term what is the actual pathology of the disease
and other things.
But if you look at the amount of money that is being spent
on wireless devices in COPD right now, it is nonexistent.
Congestive heart failure, a little bit.
Mr. Burgess. Yes, are forced expiratory volume transmitted
wirelessly on a daily basis to predict the compliance----
Mr. Casey. Lack of compliance.
Mr. Burgess. Or lack of compliance. Same with the daily
weight on a CHF patient. Relatively low-tech ideas that go
high-tech on the wireless side. But it could just be a game-
changer, as far as the practice of everyday clinical medicine,
where you are able to anticipate your patient's problems.
One of the things I liked about that was you can set that
so that the investigation is done at 2 o'clock in the
afternoon, not in 2 o'clock in the morning, which is when we
typically see the patient come in to the emergency room,
because they have been worried because all day they have had
this pain or this lack of activity, or something that has
gotten their attention. So the ability to manage your clinical
practice becomes huge.
Mr. Casey. And you set the alarms. If you say, I have a
diabetic obese--gestational diabetes obese patient, I actually
might want to see more data than less. Where if I see somebody
who you think is relatively low risk, you set the parameters,
because this is the revolution that we are talking about.
And the fact that the country invested so much money in
creating basically ubiquitous communication technology, and we
are not leveraging it against the 20 percent of spending that
is called health care I think is really kind of of a national--
--
Mr. Burgess. Maybe the critical point was----
Mr. Bilbray. Doctor----
Mr. Burgess. Wait, wait, I just have one cautionary tale.
Three or 4 years ago, I went out to Seattle with Newt
Gingrich, who was giving a talk out there. And he asked me to
talk on electronic health records. And we got the tour through
Microsoft, and all of the smart people at Microsoft were there
with us. And we went through the Microsoft house. The house is
named Grace. You walk up to the door and Grace recognizes you.
You don't have to activate Grace. She recognizes that you are
coming up.
She turns on your favorite light, warms up your favorite
chair, all this stuff. You go into the kitchen and Grace has
some menu suggestions for you. And Grace might know if you are
a diabetic or prediabetic.
The thing that concerned me about that house was if the
refrigerator talked to the bathroom scale, it might put the ice
cream on lockdown for that night.
[Laughter.]
That is one of the things that--the cautionary tale I would
have about wireless run amok.
Mr. Bilbray?
Mr. Bilbray. I almost was ready to make a marriage proposal
to Grace. By the time----
[Laughter.]
Until she cut off the ice cream.
Speaking of that is how in government we can weave these
webs that come back to get us.
As far as I know, there is a mandate in this new health-
care bill of the private sector has to go to electronic
recordkeeping and data processing.
But is there any protection against the tax that is in the
bill of coming down on that technology that is mandated?
Mr. Casey. No protection.
Mr. Bilbray. So while they are mandated on one side, and,
oh, by the way, veterans and military have been trying to do
this for 10 years. We are going to have the private sector do
it in 4.
But now they say they want to do it, but at the same time
basically have this cloud hanging over that there may be this
big tax on you. If you do what the Federal Government wants, we
are going to be coming hard with a big heavy tax. Is that
correct?
Mr. Casey. It is circular logic. And I will just push the
EMR debate. We are not huge advocates of EMRs per se, but even
EMRs, there is a carveout with the FDA.
Now the FDA is saying, well, excuse me, EMRs have a
carveout, but if you put in your clinical decision support
algorithm in your EMR, well, that is now under review. And then
if you put in your medical device collection capacity in your
EMR, now that is going to be regulated.
So the interesting issue is rather than increasing the
functionality of this data-driven electronic medical record
world that people want to live in, the FDA is now encroaching
on what was something Congress had actually stepped up and said
there should be a carveout to protect that, to get the
innovation we actually need to change health-care paradigms.
Mr. Bilbray. So maybe we want to start by, basically,
getting both sides to agree that we will not implement the
device if it falls into the category of a mandate for the data.
Mr. Casey. That's a good start. A very wise Congressman I
thought introduced something about that.
Mr. Bilbray. Let me just say, we are about--do you have any
more questions?
Mr. Burgess. No, I have some things that I must do at the
end, so go ahead with your closing observations.
Mr. Bilbray. OK.
You now, let me just make an observation as a local, and I
want to thank the chairman for being here, and I want to thank
the witnesses.
I think the American people are looking around and saying,
why can't Washington work in a bipartisan effort? And I
apologize, both sides of the committee wanted to see this
happen, and, hopefully, they will be able to review this. And I
appreciate the fact of the bipartisan effort.
This is the kind of thing that Americans really want to see
a bipartisan effort on. The fact is, being from San Diego, it
is sort of interesting that today we have had two visitors that
have come. One everybody knows it is visiting. Another most
people in this county of 3 million-plus won't even notice it.
One from the West and from the ocean, and the other one from
the East from the sky.
And those of you when you leave here today, you can look
out, you can see some very blue water. But then you can see
some very ugly red water out there. And it is a thing called
red tide.
And the red tide to me is really a great analogy for what
we have seen happen in the FDA. Red tide is something that goes
into an environment and, basically, makes a very healthy
environment toxic. Red tide will poison the basic building
blocks of life in the ocean, and that is what we have out here.
I see that as being an analogy for what we are seeing
happen with FDA, that people will wonder why the environment
has become so, so toxic for innovation and not just job
creation but health creation. And we need to do something about
it to make sure that red tide moves off into another
neighborhood and leaves the research facilities alone, so you
guys can grow and feed the system that we depend on so much.
The other visitor was the President has come to visit us
today, and for a lot of reasons, but I think that one that I
hope that somebody talks to the President about here is how
important medical research is for the creation of jobs in San
Diego, that California has been historically the great
incubator of medical breakthroughs.
And I hope the President is confronted with the fact that,
do not take us for granted here. Everybody in Washington talks
about innovation, research, you know, the great potential that
this is the backbone of America's economic and social future.
And I hope somebody goes over there and reminds the President
that he is in a city that desperately needs him to take a lead.
Because everything we talked about today can be done tomorrow
by the executive branch. They can make the institutional and
cultural changes in FDA to make this possible.
But let me just say this, I hope that there is a
possibility that maybe some young lady can walk up to the
President and not say do this for me, because we all talk about
what--Bill Walton says he was a benefactor and he was somebody
that benefited by this kind of research and this kind of
medical device opportunity.
But I will tell you something, more important than a young
lady walking up and saying do this for me, would be a young
lady walking with her child and say, the only thing worse than
a Bill Walton or somebody and somebody in pain and suffering
and needing medical breakthroughs is watching a child. That is
a challenge that I wish that President could be confronted
with. ``Mr. President, if you don't do it for me, do it for my
children and do it for my grandchildren.''
And so, hopefully, all of us can kind of leave here and
say, our grandchildren won't remember if we are Democrat or
Republican, but we are going to remember did we save the
industry that could have saved their lives? Did we rise to the
challenge to not only make sure we have a strong economy, but
that we have healthy grandchildren?
And thank you very much for being here today.
Mr. Burgess. And I think that concludes our testimony and
time for questions.
I do want to thank all of you for being with us today. It
has been an informative discussion. It is the committee's
practice to allow members to submit written questions to
witnesses. And I would ask that you would reply to those
questions, if offered.
And again, I want to thank you for the time, the time you
took in preparing the testimony, the time you took coming here
to testify to the committee.
Remind the members that they should submit their questions
to the committee clerk by Monday, October 10.
And with that, I will adjourn the subcommittee. Thank you
all.
[Whereupon, at 1:17 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]


