- H.R. 1633, THE FARM DUST REGULATION PREVENTION ACT OF 2011

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 1633, THE FARM DUST REGULATION PREVENTION ACT OF 2011

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

----------

OCTOBER 25, 2011

----------

Serial No. 112-99

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

H.R. 1633, THE FARM DUST REGULATION PREVENTION ACT OF 2011

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 25, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-99

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
76-176                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

7_____

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JAY INSLEE, Washington
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  KATHY CASTOR, Florida
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             GENE GREEN, Texas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   LOIS CAPPS, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio)
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Mike Pompeo, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Kansas, opening statement......................................     9
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     9
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................    13
Hon. Pete Olson, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................    13
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    13

Witnesses

Hon. Kristi L. Noem, a Representative in Congress from the State
of South Dakota, opening statement.............................    15
Prepared statement...........................................    18
Hon. Robert Hurt, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Virginia.......................................    23
Prepared statement...........................................    25
Regina McCarthy, Assistant Administrator for Air and Radiation,
Environmental Protection Agency................................    46
Prepared statement...........................................    48
Answers to submitted questions...............................   354
Steve Foglesong, Ranch Owner, Black Gold Cattle Company, on
behalf of National Cattlemen's Beef Association................   149
Prepared statement...........................................   152
Answers to submitted questions...............................   357
Kevin Rogers, President, Arizona Farm Bureau Federation, on
behalf of American Farm Bureau Federation......................   218
Prepared statement...........................................   220
Answers to submitted questions...............................   363
Pete Lien, President, Peter Lien & Sons, Inc., on behalf of
National Stone, Sand & Gravel Association......................   234
Prepared statement...........................................   236
Answers to submitted questions...............................   366
Kurt E. Blase, Partner, Holland & Knight, on behalf of Coarse
Particulate Matter Coalition...................................   250
Prepared statement...........................................   252
Answers to submitted questions...............................   367
Till von Wachter, Associate Professor of Economics, Columbia
University.....................................................   259
Prepared statement...........................................   261
John Walke, Senior Attorney and Clean Air Director, National
Resources Defense Council......................................   265
Prepared statement...........................................   267
Answers to submitted questions...............................   369
Gregory Wellenius, Assistant Professor of Epidemiology, Brown
University.....................................................   327
Prepared statement...........................................   329

Submitted Material

H.R. 1633, A Bill to establish a temporary prohibition against
revising any natinoal ambient air quality standard applicable
to coarse particulate matter, to limit Federal regulation of
nuisance dust in areas in which such dust is regualted under
State, tribal, or local law, and for other purposes, submitted
by Mr Whitfield................................................     6
Letters, dated October 3, 2011, October 12, 2011, October 14,
2011, and October 17, 2011, to committee and subcommittee
leadership and Mrs. Noem in support of H.R. 1633, submitted by
Mr. Gardner....................................................    37
``Guide to Agricultural PM10 Best Management Practices:
Agriculture Improving Air Quality,'' Second Edition, 2008,
Governor's Agricultural Best Management Practices Committee,
State of Arizona, submitted by Mr. Gardner.....................    70
Report, ``Livestock Best Management Practices to Reduce
PM
10
,'' undated, State of Arizona, submitted by Mr.
Gardner........................................................   101
Letter, dated October 24, 2011, from Arvin Ganesan, Associate
Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency, to Mr. Rush,
submitted by Mr. Rush..........................................   143

H.R. 1633, THE FARM DUST REGULATION PREVENTION ACT OF 2011

----------

TUESDAY, OCTOBER 25, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:06 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed
Whitfield (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Sullivan,
Shimkus, Walden, Terry, Burgess, Bilbray, Scalise, McMorris
Rodgers, Olson, McKinley, Gardner, Pompeo, Griffith, Barton,
Upton (ex officio), Rush, Markey, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Allison Busbee, Legislative Clerk; Cory
Hicks, Policy Coordinator, Energy and Power; Heidi King, Chief
Economist; Ben Lieberman, Counsel, Energy and Power; Mary
Neumayr, Senior Energy Counsel; Alison Cassady, Democratic
Senior Professional Staff Member; Kelley Greenman, Democrat
Legislative Associate; Caitlin Haberman, Democratic Policy
Analyst; and Alexandra Teitz, Democrat Senior Counsel, Energy
and Environment.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. This hearing will come to order.
Today we will discuss H.R. 1633, the Farm Dust Regulation
Prevention Act of 2011. In most respects, this hearing will be
similar to many of the others our subcommittee has held this
year. As you know, we have jurisdiction over EPA's Clean Air
Act regulations, and we have an obligation to the American
people to ensure that new regulations do not impose burdensome
costs or obstruct job creation, particularly at a time when our
unemployment is high, our economy is struggling and uncertainty
is widespread.
EPA's unprecedented wave of stringent and inflexible
regulations pose a serious threat to the economy, on job
creation, in our opinion, which is why we have held an
unprecedented number of hearings on the plethora of regulations
issued by EPA. The only difference between today's hearing and
most of the others is the target of the EPA regulation at
issue. Many of the previous hearings dealt with rules most
directly impacting manufacturing and energy production. Today,
we discuss EPA's particulate matter standards and their
potential impact on family farms and small businesses in rural
America.
EPA is in the process of revising its National Ambient Air
Quality Standards for particulate matter. This includes
PM
10
, which is coarse particulate matter, also known
as dust. Although EPA has said it will not propose changes to
its existing dust standard, there are several reasons for
uncertainty about the outcome of EPA's ongoing review. EPA has
discussed further regulation of farm dust since 1996. Most of
us believe that the current PM
10
standard of 150
micrograms per cubic meter is sufficient and should not be
changed, especially given the absence of evidence that farm
dust poses a health threat.
In April 2011, EPA issued a policy assessment that
recommends this standard either be unchanged or lowered to 65
to 85 micrograms per cubic meter. The assessment also
recommends a change in the way compliance is measured. Any
changes to the current standard would almost certainly force
States and localities to impose additional restraints on
farming and other operations in rural America in order to
comply.
It is possible that EPA will ultimately retain the current
PM
10
standard in its pending review, but it should
be noted that the last time EPA considered revising its
standard for PM
10
in 2006, the final version did not
adopt an exemption for agricultural dust that had been on the
table at an earlier stage.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.002

[H.R. 1633 follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.005

Mr. Whitfield. At this time I would like to recognize the
gentleman from Kansas, Mr. Pompeo, who is a sponsor, I believe,
of this legislation, for 1 minute.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE POMPEO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF KANSAS

Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
this hearing on H.R. 1633.
You know, I represent an agricultural State and my district
has lots of production agriculture. It is part of who we are.
The issues that these folks face are like a lot of other small
businesses--crushing regulations and tax burdens, but some have
a very different flavor like this one.
The issue we are talking about today, the effort to
regulate farm dust as a particulate pollutant, is one of the
most concerning and potentially most burdensome regulations
coming from Washington, D.C., in my 10 months here so far. Now,
the EPA's recent announcement that it currently has no
intention of imposing new regulations on dust sounds to me like
a purely political and likely temporary decision and frankly
doesn't give our farmers in Kansas or across the country the
certainty they need. The fact remains that EPA staff has
suggested tightening this regulation, and that tightening of
the regulation would include farm dust.
Like many other sectors in our economy, we need long-term
planning. We need the ability for farmers to know what they can
and can't do. That is why I am proud to be a cosponsor of the
Farm Dust Regulation Prevention Act, and I am pleased to have
Congresswoman Noem and Congressman Hurt here this morning to
testify about it. Thank you both for being here.
With that, I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, and I will yield back
the balance of my time as well, and I recognize Mr. Rush for 5
minutes for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I also
want to thank all the distinguished witnesses who will be here
at today's hearing and testifying.
Mr. Chairman, we are here to discuss the Farm Dust
Regulation Prevention Act of 2011, even though last week EPA
made the decision that it would not propose any changes to the
current standard of 10 PM or 10 micrometers for coarse
particulate matter. The basis of today's hearing is H.R. 1633,
the bill introduced by Representative Kristi Noem of South
Dakota, who we are pleased to welcome to the subcommittee for
her testimony today.
H.R. 1633 would bar EPA from revising its rules for coarse
particulates for 1 year. It would also create a permanent
exemption for ``nuisance'' dust from farms and country roads. I
look forward to hearing from Assistant Administrator of the
Office of Air and Radiation, Gina McCarthy, as well as other
stakeholders testifying to better understand the impact that
this proposed legislation will have on the Clean Air Act as
well as on public health.
In particular, I have concerns over section 3 of H.R. 1633,
which states that the Clean Air Act does not apply to, again, I
will quote, ``nuisance'' dust and would eliminate EPA's
authority under the Clean Air Act to regulate anything that
constitutes nuisance dust except narrowly defined
circumstances. As currently drafted, nuisance dust is defined
as particulate matter that is, one, generated from natural
sources, unpaved roads, agricultural activities, earth-moving
or other activities typically conducted in rural areas, or,
two, consisting primarily of soil, other natural or biological
materials or wind-blown dust. However, the phrase ``other
activities typically conducted in rural areas'' is much too
broad and could potentially include industrial activities that
are commonly located outside of urban areas that will be exempt
from the Clean Air Act regulation including power plants,
ethanol refineries, mines and smelters, and pulp and paper
mills. Section 3 raises serious concerns over whether EPA could
continue to implement fine and coarse particle pollution
programs or whether the EPA could ever adopt or implement
revised fine or coarse particle standards.
However, H.R. 1633 takes certain types of particulate
matter out of the entire Clean Air Act altogether. This bill
could potentially forever prohibit EPA from regulating mercury
from coal-fired power plants based on the argument that mercury
is emitted as particulate matter from coal-fired power plants
and burning coal to generate electricity is an activity
typically occurring in rural areas. Additionally, as written,
section 3 is not limited to stationary sources so H.R. 1633
calls into question EPA's ability to set tailpipe emission
standards for new vehicles or engines to limit their fine
particulate pollution as well as the ability to enforce
existing particulate standards for new vehicles or engines.
So I think it is important, Mr. Chairman, to clarify the
bill's language to avoid unintended consequences to the overall
Clean Air Act.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to hearing from all of the
panelists on the merits and necessity of H.R. 1633, and with
that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Rush.
At this time I would recognize the full committee chairman,
Mr. Upton of Michigan, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing looks at a source of major concern to the
ag sector and rural America, which is EPA's regulation of
coarse particulate matter, otherwise known as dust.
H.R. 1633, the Farm Dust Regulation Prevention Act of 2011,
provides relief from this regulatory threat, and I welcome two
of the cosponsors of this bipartisan legislation, Kristi Noem
of South Dakota and Robert Hurt of Virginia, who are here
today.
The very last thing that our struggling economy needs is
new costs and regulatory burdens on farmers and small
businesses across rural America. They already face indirect
consequences from EPA's costly regulatory agenda, and now they
are rightfully concerned about the threat of direct regulation
of their operations.
The EPA recently announced that it plans to propose
retaining the existing standard for coarse particulate matter,
and I appreciate those assurances. But like the stakeholders
that we will hear from today, I am not at all satisfied with
this step for the simple reason that regulatory uncertainty
will remain.
EPA's proposal could change throughout the review process.
The ag community's concerns may not be fully addressed. And
even if the final standard contains no changes, it is always
subject to court challenge. For these reasons, EPA's insistence
that it does not plan to change the rule is far from a
guarantee that such a change would never come to pass.
In the face of this ongoing regulatory uncertainty, this
legislation makes good sense. The bill is targeted. It prevents
EPA from setting a new coarse particulate matter standard for 1
year, and it also makes clear that State, tribal, and local
governments have authority to regulate so-called nuisance dust
common across rural America. The State and local emphasis is
appropriate for dust, which is a local issue.
The bill gives EPA authority to regulate nuisance dust in
the absence of State or local action, and after both costs and
benefits are taken into account. That is common sense and it
protects the interests of our vital rural economy.
I commend our colleagues for putting together their
legislation on the table. If EPA is serious that it does not
intend to regulate farm dust, it should embrace this
legislation.
I yield to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Barton.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.006

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Barton. Well, thank you, Congresswoman Noem and
Congressman Hurt for introducing this and being here. We are
beginning to have some dust storms like we had back in the
1930s. We had a very bad one in Lubbock, Texas, last week.
There are differences of opinion as to the cause of the storms
but it appears that we are in a cycle where the weather
conditions are such that we are going to have dryer weather and
a little bit warmer temperatures and so we are going to have
dust storms.
EPA back in 2006 suggested that we shouldn't regulate farm
dust. I wish the EPA would dust that proposal off and institute
it instead of even thinking about regulating farm dust. As the
chairman just said, this legislation is preemptive in nature
and I would hope that we can move it very expeditiously. We
don't want to have a re-creation of the 1930s, and because of
farm practices and some of the dam projects that have been
constructed, we shouldn't, but we also don't want to overreact
and regulate something that God himself or herself can't
regulate.
So with that, I would yield the balance of the time to Mr.
Olson of Texas.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PETE OLSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Olson. I thank my colleague from Texas.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for holding this hearing on H.R.
1633, the Farm Dust Regulation and Prevention Act, of which I
am a proud cosponsor.
This hearing is critically important to my home State of
Texas. Texas has been battling and unprecedented drought. In my
hometown of Sugar Land, we are almost 2 feet behind our annual
rainfall. In addition, wildfires have burned 3.6 million Texas
acres. Texas farmers and ranchers have been hit particularly
hard by the drought and the fires. And to think that the EPA is
attempting to regulate farm dust now or in the future is simply
out of touch with reality. This move would impose devastating,
unjustified and burdensome regulations on farmers and ranchers
already struggling in this economy to provide food for an ever-
growing population.
Mr. Chairman, as you know, farmers and ranchers are the
backbone of America. We must give them the tools and certainty
to plan for the future so they can succeed.
I welcome all of our witnesses here today, particularly my
colleagues from South Dakota and Virginia. I look forward to
your testimony. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
At this time I recognize the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Waxman of California, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing considers yet another bill to allow more
air pollution, more asthma and more heart attacks, and once
again, it is a bait and switch. The bill's sponsors say the
legislation is narrowly targeted to help farmers. In fact, the
bill is drafted broadly and has sweeping anti-environment
effects.
We are going to hear today that we must pass H.R. 1633 to
stop EPA from regulating farming. This isn't just nonsense. It
is pure fantasy. EPA does not regulate farming practices to
reduce dust and has expressed no intention of doing so in the
future. EPA has set standards for the levels of coarse
particulate matter in the ambient air because there is
scientific evidence that this pollution causes serious health
effects. Coarse particulate matter, or PM
10
, is
produced by uncontrolled burning of coal and oil, construction
and demolition activities, mining, and unpaved roads, as well
as farm activities. Once EPA sets the standards for ambient
levels of air pollution, it is up to the States and localities
to determine how to meet them. It is the States and localities,
not EPA, that decide which sources must reduce pollution and by
how much.
EPA set the current PM
10
standards in 1987,
during the Reagan administration. As required by the Clean Air
Act, EPA has recently reviewed the science supporting those
standards. Based on that review, the Administrator recently
announced that she intends to propose making no change to the
Reagan-era PM
10
standards. Now we are being told
that we need to pass this bill because EPA could change its
mind and do something the agency has said it has no intention
of doing.
If we adopt this standard for legislation, there is no end
to the bad ideas we could legislate. Should we pass a law
saying the United States cannot invade Canada? Or one
preventing the government from outlawing apple pie?
We are facing real and serious problems that are happening
right now. Millions of Americans are out of work; our economy
is stalling; fires, floods and droughts are afflicting our
Nation. We need to spend our time addressing these real
challenges, not squandering it on imaginary problems.
But even though this bill stops something that won't happen
anyway, that doesn't mean the bill has no effect. H.R. 1633 is
so broadly worded, it could invalidate EPA's existing standards
for both fine and coarse particulates. This would have a
devastating effect on clean air requirements and public health.
The biggest problem is in section 3, which is not limited
to farm activities, rural areas, ambient air quality standards
or coarse particulate matter. It says the Clean Air Act does
not apply to anything that meets the bill's definition of
``nuisance dust,'' unless a narrow exception applies, and the
definition of nuisance dust is sweeping. It includes
``windblown dust,'' which is undefined and not limited to rural
areas, and it includes any particulate matter ``generated from
activities typically conducted in rural areas.''
Well, mining is typically conducted in rural areas, and
mining operations have huge equipment that can generate large
quantities of particulate air pollution. Seventy percent of the
Nation's power plants are located in rural areas. The
particulate matter generated by power plants includes not only
fine and coarse particulate matter, but also particles of
mercury and lead and acid particles that form from nitrogen
oxides and sulfur dioxides. Children in rural areas typically
take the bus to school, and diesel buses generate particulate
pollution. Under this bill, EPA could have no authority to
regulate any of this pollution.
Now, the bill's sponsors will argue that they don't intend
to exempt mines, power plants or school buses from regulation
under the Clean Air Act. But as we have seen with so many other
bills this Congress, the bill language doesn't match the stated
intent. It is the legislative language that matters, and the
language could result in a massive increase in dangerous air
pollution.
This year, the subcommittee has reported bills to allow
more carbon pollution, more air pollution from offshore
drilling, more air pollution from power plants, more air
pollution from industrial boilers and incinerators, and more
air pollution from cement kilns. Today's bill is more of the
same. Americans want their kids to breathe clean and healthy
air, not another bill to let polluters off the hook.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, and at this time I would like to
recognize our members on the first panel, Congresswoman Kristi
Noem from South Dakota and Congressman Robert Hurt of Virginia,
primary sponsors of this legislation, and we genuinely
appreciate your being here with us today, and I will recognize
each of you for 5 minutes for your opening statement, and
Congresswoman Noem, we will begin with you.

STATEMENTS OF HON. KRISTI L. NOEM, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF SOUTH DAKOTA; AND HON. ROBERT HURT, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA

STATEMENT OF HON. KRISTI L. NOEM

Mrs. Noem. Sounds great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and the
ranking member, who is not with us right now, but the rest of
the committee members, I appreciate you for having this hearing
today and for letting us bring forward H.R. 1633, the Farm Dust
Regulation Prevention Act of 2011.
I introduced this commonsense bill on April 15th of this
year with my colleagues, Representative Robert Hurt, Larry
Kissell and Leonard Boswell, because of the regulatory
uncertainty that is facing rural America.
We certainly have challenges in front of us. My bill is a
bipartisan approach to ending the EPA's regulation of farm dust
in rural America while still maintaining the protections of the
Clean Air Act to the public health and welfare. It is not a
Republican and it is not a Democrat issue. There is broad
bipartisan support with over 100 colleagues on both sides of
the aisle sponsoring this bill. And the committee will see in
the record that there is also over 100 agriculture- and
research-based organizations who have written in support of the
bill as well.
As this committee knows, there is growing concern that
excess regulations are hampering economic growth and job
creation across the country. In my home state of South Dakota,
this is a huge concern for farmers and for ranchers and small
business owners who are struggling to stay afloat in an already
stressed economy. One of the most overwhelming concerns that I
hear about from farmers every day and ranchers back home is the
overbearing regulations coming out of the EPA, including the
regulation of farm dust. Their concern is certainly not
unwarranted.
Under the Clean Air Act, the EPA is responsible for setting
the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for certain
pollutants. This includes particulate matter, which is broken
down into both fine and coarse particulate matter, commonly
known as dust. The Administrator of the EPA, Lisa Jackson, must
set the National Ambient Air Quality Standards that States must
meet or be designated as nonattainment areas. The goal of these
standards is to protect the public from harmful pollutants like
industrial soot and car emissions common in urban areas, which
I certainly support. The EPA measures the amount of particulate
matter, or dust, in the air through monitoring devices that are
placed throughout the country. At least every 5 years, the
Administrator must review those standards and decide if they
want to keep the current standard, or potentially adopt a more
stringent standard. As this committee is aware, the EPA is
currently in the process and in the midst of another review.
Under current law, the EPA's standards include all kinds of
dust, including dust generated from ag activities and the dust
that is typical in rural America. This type of dust is
naturally occurring and includes soil, windblown dust or dust
that comes off of dirt roads. I call it farm dust. This is
completely different than the type of dust typical in urban
areas which has been shown to have adverse health effects.
My legislation specifically focuses on rural dust. It
allows the standard to apply unchanged in urban areas. Farm
dust is a fact of life in rural America and, unlike urban dust,
has not been shown to have a significant health concern.
Including farm dust in the National Ambient Air Quality
Standards regulations causes great concern and uncertainty for
farmers and other resource-based industries in rural America.
I would like to clear up the myth that EPA currently does
not regulate farm dust. Farmers and ranchers are already
subject to the standard for dust in nonattainment areas like
Arizona. There are people in Arizona that certainly know the
impact that this has on businesses. It can cost some producers
in that State over $1,000 a day to comply with dust standards.
On September 17, 2011, a Des Moines Register story tells
the story of Kevin Rogers, who is going to testify here later
today and tell his personal story. He is a farmer from outside
of Phoenix, Arizona. If the wind is blowing too much, he has to
park his tractors, he has to park his combines so that he
doesn't kick up too much dust. As a lifelong farmer and rancher
myself, I certainly understand the impact this can have when
you have a job to get done and you have a business to run. And
as Kevin puts it, ``It is a difficult thing when the government
is in the middle of every single thing that we are doing.'' We
need to put an end to regulation of farm dust and prevent its
expansion into the future.
Regulation of farm dust is a problem today and will be more
of an issue if the EPA continues to have opportunities to make
more stringent standards into the future. The inclusion of farm
dust in the EPA's National Ambient Air Quality Standards will
continue to be a problem until legislation is enacted to ensure
that farm dust is treated differently. EPA is well aware that
it cannot under current law differentiate between dust coming
from rural areas or urban areas, and while officials in the EPA
continue to say that they have no intention of regulating farm
dust, the EPA does regulate farm dust and has no plan to exempt
naturally occurring farm dust from their regulations.
This bill certainly provides a solution. It gives us the
ability to differentiate between naturally occurring rural dust
and that that is typically occurring in urban areas, and also,
what it does is, it provides immediate relief for farmers in
rural areas by preventing any changes to the current standards
for 1 year. Secondly, it provides flexibility for States,
localities and tribes to regulate farm dust and nuisance dust
themselves.
I certainly appreciate the opportunity to testify before
you today, and I will certainly stick around and answer any
questions that the committee may have for me.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Noem follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.011

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
Mr. Hurt, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT HURT

Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is an honor to be
with you, and I thank you for the invitation to be here to talk
about H.R. 1633. It is an honor to be here with Representative
Noem, and I appreciate her leadership on this as well.
I represent Virginia's 5th District, a primarily rural area
which includes most of central and Southside Virginia, and is
larger than the State of New Jersey. In the 5th District, we
have a proud heritage in agriculture, manufacturing and other
resource-based industries that provide good-paying jobs for
thousands of Virginians.
Dust is a necessary byproduct of the hard work the farmers
and businesses in my rural district perform every day. These
are the people who are struggling to survive, to grow, and to
create jobs during this stalled economic recovery. That is why
the EPA's national standard for fugitive dust, which falls
under the Clean Air Act's National Ambient Air Quality
Standards for coarse particulate matter is so troubling to the
people that I represent. It is yet another example of the
expansion of Federal Government and the uncertainty that
Washington continues to impose upon our family farms, our small
businesses and our rural communities.
That is why H.R. 1633 is necessary. The bipartisan
legislation will help create a better economic environment for
job creation by replacing the current Federal standard for dust
that comes from driving on unpaved roads, working in
agricultural fields and similar activities in rural America.
H.R. 1633 provides relief from the more stringent Federal
standard for coarse particulate matter recommended in the April
2011 policy assessment prepared by the EPA staff. It also gives
States and localities the flexibility to set a standard for
dust if they choose. More important, it keeps the Federal
Government out of the business of over-regulating naturally
occurring dust unless the EPA can prove substantial adverse
public health effects caused by dust and can provide a rigorous
cost-benefit analysis on the need for such regulation.
While I applaud EPA Administrator Lisa Jackson's recent
promise that she will not propose a more stringent standard for
coarse particulate matter, I remain concerned about the
uncertainty of the rulemaking process where these rules can be
modified. I am also troubled by the comments of some officials
in the administration to discredit the issue of Federal dust
regulation, including Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack who
wrote that the ``regulation of farm dust is another frequently
repeated myth.'' After reviewing the EPA's 2006 Federal
standards for coarse particulate matter, which by definition
includes dust, I respectfully disagree with the statement that
this is a myth.
I know that farmers and business owners in the 5th District
disagree with this assessment of dust regulation as well. When
traveling the 5th District last year, I spoke with a small
business owner who was warned by a State regulator about the
amount of dust that was coming off of his property. When this
business owner questioned further about the regulator's concern
over fugitive dust, the regulator replied that the business
needed to take active measures to decrease the dust coming from
the dirt driveway leading in and out of his facility.
It also appears that the Sierra Club would take issue with
the administration's statements that Federal dust regulations
are a myth as well. When discussing a petition it filed with
the Virginia Air Pollution Control Board in my home State,
which was ultimately dismissed, by the way, the Sierra Club
alleged that the levels of dust it measured on a road in
southwest Virginia were above the national health-based
standard promulgated by the EPA. It is difficult to understand
why the Sierra Club would take such action if the Federal
Government mandates for fugitive dust are a myth.
While it is true that the EPA and State regulatory agencies
have not set up monitors at every family farm and every unpaved
road, the Sierra Club has shown one way in which these national
standards for dust regulation continue to provide uncertainty
for rural America.
Because of these dust regulations, rural farming and
business operations can face the threat of unnecessary
harassment, regulation and litigation by private actors or
State and Federal regulators. Additionally, companies
throughout the 5th District and the country are required to
comply with the Federal standard for dust in order to obtain
permits, such as those issued by the Virginia Department of
Environmental Quality as required in its State Implementation
Plan with the EPA.
This is why Congress must act in a bipartisan fashion to
pass H.R. 1633 and assure our farmers and our rural industries
that naturally occurring dust will not be subject to expanded
Federal regulation. When it comes to dust, the EPA and the
Federal Government should not mandate a one-size-fits-all
standard that could eventually lead to lost production. With
unemployment rates nearing 20 percent in some areas of
Virginia's 5th District, we simply cannot afford to continue to
perpetuate unnecessary regulations and uncertainty for the
farmers and businesses in our rural communities.
I thank the chairman and I thank the ranking member again
for inviting us to appear. I thank the subcommittee for
considering our bill. I appreciate the opportunity to testify
this morning and look forward to any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hurt follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.016

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank both of you for your testimony.
We appreciate your taking time to talk about your legislation,
and I was delighted to hear Ms. Noem indicate that you do have
bipartisan support. How many cosponsors of this bill do you
have?
Mrs. Noem. Well, there are 100 cosponsors that are signed
on to the bill. There also has been a lot of support shown over
in the Senate side as well. I mean, it is a commonsense bill
that we certainly recognize could be addressed--the concerns
could be addressed through this legislation.
Mr. Whitfield. And has a similar bill been introduced on
the Senate side?
Mrs. Noem. You know, there has been a bill that has been
talked about. I am not certain if the sponsor is continuing to
pursue it.
Mr. Whitfield. But when we say that EPA is not regulating
coarse particulate matter, of course, in any nonattainment
area, if the State does not have a State implementation plan,
the Federal Government certainly has the authority to step in.
Is that correct, Mr. Hurt?
Mr. Hurt. Absolutely, and I would like to maybe address
some of the concerns raised by Mr. Rush and Mr. Waxman, that
section 3, it does allow for the Federal Government to come in
but under circumstances that I think any American would find
very reasonable, and that is, when it is proven that there are
substantial health risks and after a cost-benefit analysis that
this makes sense, and I think that from what I have heard
across my district, that is exactly the kind of view that
Americans and 5th District Virginians would like to see going
on here in Washington. And it is also important to note that
this does nothing to change the particulate matter 10 and PM2.5
standards, the emissions that the ranking member and Mr. Waxman
discussed, would still be regulated under or viewed through
those different standards.
Mr. Whitfield. You know, it is interesting we find
ourselves here discussing the regulation of dust. I know that
there are some studies that say well, there's some correlation
between particulate matter, coarse particulate matter, and
health, and then there are other studies that indicate there is
no causal relationship whatsoever, and yet--and I know we have
a gentleman from Arizona, I believe, in the next panel, but it
is my understanding that under the State implementation plan of
Arizona, in some instances on windy days the farmers are
literally prevented from farming. Is that your understanding?
Mrs. Noem. Mr. Chairman, yes, it is my understanding, and
that would be the facts that they face every single day, and I
think there is a clear definition and difference between urban
dust, which is the kind of dust that has been proven
scientifically to create the adverse health effects that a lot
of the questioning has come from. There hasn't been that kind
of scientific research and data that has shown the detrimental
effects of this nuisance dust, which we are addressing in this
piece of legislation. We are talking about dirt, soil, matter
that occurs naturally through the course. Some of the concerns
that were brought up in previous statements did happen to come
from coal-fired plants, from mining, other situations such as
that, scientific research has proven that that is very
different than the type of rural dust that we are talking about
with this piece of legislation.
Mr. Hurt. If I could just comment on that, I think also one
of the things that I have discovered in working on this
legislation is that at some--we have standards, but at some
level at the end of the day, if you can't abate the dust, the
only way to stop it is to stop production or stop driving on
the roads, and what does that translate to? That translates to
lost jobs.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, one thing that I think also is
beneficial in your legislation, my understanding under the
Clean Air Act, there really is no definition of nuisance air so
it could be whatever it could be. At least in this legislation
make an attempt to define it, which may not suit everyone but
that would be an area that we would have an opportunity to work
with others to at least have a definition of that, which I
think it is important.
Mrs. Noem. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would agree. I think this
piece of legislation the EPA should have no problem with. I
really do. I think they should be very supportive of this
because it simply says that they are not going to change their
standards for a year, which they have already said that they
are not going to do, and then it provides that definition.
Rural dust and urban dust are not the same thing, and I think
it would be very helpful to them and their processes and how
they evaluate the ways that they approach enforcing the Clean
Air Act to have that definition in place because they are very
different, and the research behind them shows that.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, some people make the argument well,
EPA is not going to regulate it anyway so we don't need this
legislation, but we know for a fact that entities file a lot of
lawsuits over at EPA, and whether EPA intends to do something
or not, they frequently find themselves in lawsuits and
frequently they enter into consent decrees in many instances
agreeing with the plaintiff and then it becomes a court order
and that is another frustrating thing. We find the court in
many of our environmental regulations, their decisions as we do
regulations coming out and initiated by EPA.
Mrs. Noem. Yes, Mr. Chairman, this bill provides certainty
and it provides certainty to a risky business that a lot of
farmers and ranchers engage in and the people in rural areas
are trying to keep their doors open and provide for their
families, and this shows them that we are going to give them
the certainty they need to be protected from those types of
sudden regulations that may come up because of lawsuits and
environmental issues.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you all very much.
At this time I recognize Mr. Rush for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to
also thank my colleagues, Representative Noem and
Representative Hurt, for being here today, and I want you to
know that my grandfather was a farmer. I was raised in my early
years on a farm, and I am pro-farmer, and I see you are the
sponsor of this bill, and I want to focus my questions on the
bill.
Representative Noem, many on the minority side are
concerned with some of the language that is not clearly defined
in section 3. Specifically, the ``nuisance dust'' as defined by
``other activities typically conducted in rural areas'' is
causing concern for me and others because it may exempt many
other industrial activities from Clean Air Act regulations. You
are the sponsor of H.R. 1633, and is it your intention to
provide exemptions for other activities not associated with
standard agricultural practices in section 3, and if not, would
you be amenable to modifying this language in order to make
clear the bill's intention?
Mrs. Noem. Well, thank you for the question, Representative
Rush, and I certainly believe that the title of the bill and
the language of the bill is very clear that it means to address
farm dust and nuisance dust throughout the piece of
legislation. I think that some of the interpretation that it
goes too far and might include things such as coal ash and
other harmful pollutants is that my bill simply does not exempt
anything from regulations. It simply gives States and
localities the flexibility to regulate dust in rural areas on
their own. Now, if there are no local regulations that address
in this place Federal regulations will certainly apply if the
EPA--if the dust proves that it has negative health benefits
and if it does rigorous cost-benefit analysis. So I believe the
legislation as it stands today with the title that it has and
with the language it has within it clearly defines nuisance
dust and what is to be regulated and that the States and local
governments certainly have the opportunity to address the
concerns that may be particular in one area.
Mr. Rush. Well, you feel quite strongly that your bill is
necessary in light of the fact that EPA has already come out
and publicly stated that it would not propose any changes to
the current standard of 10 PM or 10 micrometers for coarse
particulate matter. Can you explain why you feel so strongly?
Mrs. Noem. I feel so strongly because I think the fact that
if there is a piece of legislation out there that guarantees
that EPA will not take any action for the next year, that that
is a benefit to our small farmers and producers across this
country. It is not that they wouldn't trust the EPA, but I
certainly think that they would appreciate knowing that there
is a guarantee on no changes for the next year.
The second part of this bill is that it actually does
define the difference between rural dust, nuisance dust and
urban dust simply because of some of the testimony that I gave
earlier, that there is a big difference between the nuisance
dust and that it has proven to not have the negative side
effects and health benefits, or detrimental effects that some
of the urban dust does that you referenced when you gave your
opening statement. There is a big difference between those two
different types of dust that occur in this country, and that
definition and clarity between the two will certainly help the
industry as well.
Mr. Rush. Is there any, besides industrial dust and
particulate matter, is there any other dust classification that
are exempted or included in your legislation?
Mrs. Noem. Well, I don't believe so. As far as what this
simply does is to put that definition into place in statute
that there is a nuisance dust definition and what is included
in that is the naturally occurring dust particles that would
happen and the difference between urban dust, and this gives
clarity to the EPA. This makes their job easier. They can look
at each of these two different types of dust and know
specifically how to define them and what the adverse health
effects are on those, and then it also allows them the
opportunity to come into area if the State and local
governments do not.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Rush.
It is the custom of this committee that the chairman and
ranking member will ask other Members questions, so we have
completed that, and I want to thank you all once again for
introducing the legislation and for----
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Chairman, you are not going to allow other
members to ask questions of this panel?
Mr. Whitfield. Would you like to ask some questions?
Mr. Waxman. I would like to ask some questions.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection, then I recognize the
gentleman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. I just want to take issue with some of the
things that have been said because I think you oversimplified
it to the point where I think your conclusions are incorrect.
First of all, the title of the bill has no legislative effect.
What has legislative effect is the wording of the bill. And you
made a couple statements, Representative Noem, that I take
issue with. You said there is no proven difference between--
there is a proven difference between urban and rural dust.
Mrs. Noem. I said--thank you, Representative Waxman. I
appreciate that. What my statement was or should have been was
that the scientific research is very different showing the
detrimental effects of urban dust versus rural dust, that there
is much different research data that is available on the
detrimental health effects of urban dust as where----
Mr. Waxman. The Clean Air Act doesn't regulate dust. The
Clean Air Act regulates harmful pollutants, and in this case,
we are talking about two kinds of pollutants. We are talking
about fine particulates and coarse particulates. The standard
was originally set when President Reagan was President, and it
has been reviewed but the basic standard has been in place.
Now, you said that there is no proven adverse health effect
from rural dust. If that rural dust is produced by farm
machinery, that could have harmful impact, couldn't it?
Mrs. Noem. It could, but we could speculate all day. What I
prefer to operate with is the facts that we have in front of
us.
Mr. Waxman. Well, the facts we have in front of us is your
bill defines this nuisance dust which is a new term in law that
you would propose to put in law, and it says particulate matter
generated from natural sources, OK, unpaved roads, agricultural
activities, earth moving or activities typically conducted in
rural areas, and I mentioned in my opening statement that a lot
of things are conducted in rural areas, which could add to the
particulate matter which particularly in the area of fine
particulates, there is a genuine threat to human health.
The point that I am raising is that your intentions seem to
be, both of you, pretty reasonable. You don't want the dust in
rural areas regulated, as Congressman Hurt said. If you are
going to try to stop the dust coming from farms, you would have
close down the farms and lose the jobs. That doesn't make any
sense at all. But the problem is, nobody is proposing to do the
things that you fear might happen. If you had a 1-year period
of time in which there could be no regulation on coarse
particulates coming from dust in the rural areas, well, that
could give somebody certainty for a year. Nobody is planning to
do it anyway. But I fear that your bill is drafted in a way
that goes much further, and it doesn't sound like that that is
your intention.
Representative Noem, I mentioned in my opening statement
that it is a nonexistent problem and we have so many real ones
that should be addressed. There was an editorial my staff
brought to my attention from a newspaper. It is the largest
newspaper in South Dakota, and it said, ``There are important
issues at the Federal level right now that will have direct
impact on our States so it is disappointing to see
Representative Kristi Noem continue her fight against a made-up
problem like the potential for farm dust regulations by the
Environmental Protection Agency. Dust has become a lightning
rod for some Republicans, drumming up fear in farming
communities that more Federal Government intrusion and over-
regulations coming to take money out of their pockets. Noem
proposed legislation that would ban the EPA from regulating
farm dust for a year, and similar legislation was advanced by
Senator Mike Johanns. The problem is that the EPA has
repeatedly and at every turn said it has no intention of
regulating farm dust. On Monday it went as far as to write a
letter to Congress stating it would not be regulating dust
kicked up by combines. That should put the issue to rest.''
With those multitude of assurances that this is a phantom
issue, what is your response to this editorial?
Mrs. Noem. Well, Representative Waxman, that editor of that
newspaper certainly doesn't represent my farmers and ranchers
across South Dakota, and it is clear that he doesn't understand
the bill, because in that editorial he didn't address the fact
that it is going to provide a clear definition between nuisance
dust, rural dust and urban dust. He simply----
Mr. Waxman. Let me take exception to----
Mrs. Noem. One of the----
Mr. Waxman. Excuse me. Let me take exception. You state
that as a fact but there is nothing in the law that says this
dust is from rural areas, this dust from urban areas, it is
different. The difference is only the amount of particulate
matter in the region and particularly if it's nonattainment,
which is not attaining what is the health standard.
When I was a young member of the State assembly in
California, I heard that there might be a freeway coming
through--I ask for 30 seconds more--and I went out of my way to
make sure that we fought that freeway and it was stopped. It
turned out they never intended it but the people in my district
thought I stopped it anyway. That is a good thing to do
politically, but when you change something like the Clean Air
Act, a lot of unintended consequences, I fear for that. If
there is a chance to go through this legislation, maybe we can
change it in some way, but I fear that your bill goes too far.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Waxman, your question--oh, yes, Ms.
Noem.
Mrs. Noem. Well, I just wanted to make a statement that
certainly the people in South Dakota recognize, widespread they
recognize the need for this piece of legislation or else I
wouldn't be bringing it, but they have been talking to me about
it every single meeting that I have that people deal with rural
industries in South Dakota. And I think when you hear the
personal story of Kevin Rogers a little bit later you will
really----
Mr. Waxman. But that is another State where there is a
nonattainment.
Mrs. Noem. But certainly right now----
Mr. Waxman. When people are fearful, you ease the fears.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Waxman. Whether it is realistic or not.
Mr. Whitfield. We all get excited about dust, but let us
calm down here a minute.
Mr. Waxman. Settle the dust.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, let us settle the dust here.
But Mr. Waxman raised some dust, and now I would recognize
Mr. Shimkus for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A couple things. Kristi, how far is your home from a paved
road?
Mrs. Noem. Well, my home particularly is not too far. It is
about a quarter of a mile from a paved road. But our farm is
about 8 miles from a paved road.
Mr. Shimkus. And is that chaff, as I would call it, or is
it dust? Is it a dirt road or is it limestone rock road?
Mrs. Noem. Oh, it is a dirt road. It is a gravel road.
Mr. Shimkus. So it is gravel, and if there is an air
monitor placed on that gravel road, which is 8 miles from a
paved road, the gravel road probably would not be in attainment
on the PM
10
standard when the big four-wheel-drive
hemi pickup truck with the horse-drawn trailer goes down that
road. Isn't that correct?
Mrs. Noem. I would agree. I would say virtually every
single field during harvest time would be in nonattainment.
Mr. Shimkus. And I have a photo that I showed Administrator
Jackson when she first testified, and I will probably pull it
up later on, and it is this time of the year when we are
finishing cutting of beans, and it shows a plume. Now, some
people would say--oh, there it is, right there. That is right
outside my hometown just north of Collinsville. Now, if you had
an air monitor right behind that, it would probably set off.
But that is not diesel, that is just chaff. That is organic.
That is leaves, that is stalk, and that is what we call cutting
of beans.
Mr. Whitfield. Is that natural dust?
Mrs. Noem. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. So my point is, in rural America where the air
monitor is could determine it, and the difference between urban
America and rural America is that dust cloud will disperse way
before it is in any concentration that would kick off. So a
concern, and so the additional regulation imposed is a severe
threat to rural America. You have how many agriculture groups
in support of this bill?
Mrs. Noem. Over 100.
Mr. Shimkus. Are they just crazy? I mean, are they just
meddling? They have nothing else to do than be worried about
the EPA?
Mrs. Noem. Well, Representative Shimkus, if I could say one
thing that Representative Waxman continued to say over and over
is that dust is not currently regulated, and it is. The EPA
does regulate dust, and the staff did recommend tightening
those standards. So when he believes there is no concern, there
is valid concern in rural America.
Mr. Shimkus. Robert, do you want to add anything?
Mr. Hurt. Well, I would say a couple of things. You know,
when we were asked whether or not we need this bill, to me, the
question ought to be, why don't we use our legislative
prerogative to guide policy in this country. I think if you
talk to the people I represent, they say for far too long the
Congress has wholesale given its legislative prerogative over
to agencies like the EPA who are not elected, who are not
accountable to the people. So why on earth would not we take
our responsibility as being a voice for the people seriously
and what objection could one have to exercising that
legislative authority that has been given to us by the people
we represent?
Going back again to some of the questions that have been
asked about the actual standard, there is nothing unreasonable
about section 3 and the standard that is proposed. It just says
there must be shown substantial health risk and that there is a
cost-benefit analysis that goes through and proves that the
benefits outweigh the costs. So I don't think anybody is
suggesting that you have--and I in my district, my rural
district, we have power plants. No one is suggesting that
emissions from power plants be exempted in any way, and this
bill would not do that.
And then finally, as it relates to the fear mongering, and
I take issue and I wish Mr. Waxman was here, I take issue with
his suggestion that this is somehow politically motivated. I
talk to farmers in my district all the time whose fears of
government regulation are real and they translate to lower
productivity and fewer jobs, and all they are trying to do--you
know, I have a farmer in Nelson County, he is a fruit grower.
He says, you know, I get regulated by the Department of Labor,
Department of Transportation, the IRS, the USDA, the EPA. He
said all I am trying to do is grow peaches, I have been doing
that for five generations, how hard can it be.
Mr. Shimkus. Let me reclaim my time and just recognize Cory
for a unanimous consent request.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you. And I just would like to ask
permission for the record to submit letters of support from
well over 100 different organizations that support H.R. 1633:
NFIB, chambers of commerce, ag groups, farm organizations,
business groups. Yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection. Thank you very much.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.025

Mr. Whitfield. Once again, thank you all for taking time to
be with us. We appreciate it and look forward to working with
you on this issue. Thank you.
At this time I will call up the Honorable Gina McCarthy,
the Assistant Administrator for Air and Radiation, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency. Ms. McCarthy, we welcome you
back to Capitol Hill, which I am sure you enjoy coming up here
a great deal.
Ms. McCarthy. It is always my pleasure, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stearns. Sorry we don't have some refreshments for you
this morning.
We do appreciate your being here very much to testify on
H.R. 1633, and at this point I would recognize you for 5
minutes for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF REGINA MCCARTHY, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR FOR AIR
AND RADIATION, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

Ms. McCarthy. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member
Rush, members of the subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity
to testify on the Farm Dust Regulation Prevention Act of 2011.
This sweeping bill could roll back Clean Air Act protections
and adversely affect public health in urban, suburban and rural
areas.
This bill has been sold as a narrow one. If all this bill
is intended to do is prevent the EPA from tightening the coarse
particle standard, the bill is simply unnecessary.
Administrator Jackson committed in an October 14, 2011, letter
that she is prepared to propose to keep the PM
10

standard, or coarse particle. The National Ambient Air Quality
Standard will remain unchanged if the Administrator's proposal
as intended is moved forward. I am hopeful that this
announcement ends the myth that the agency plans to tighten the
regulation of farm dust.
Whether intended or not, we are concerned that this bill
does far more than its sponsors have indicated. It could
prevent EPA from regulating power plants or other major
industrial sources of pollution in urban and suburban areas as
well as in rural areas. This is because section 3A takes away
Clean Air Act authority to regulate nuisance dust and then
defines nuisance dust very broadly, and it includes particulate
matter generated from activities typically conducted in rural
areas. This exemption would cover both coarse and fine
particles emitted from anywhere in the country. It might
include pollutants like NOx and SOx that form fine particles.
This would appear to preclude EPA from regulating particle
pollution from activities such as power plants, mining
operations, industrial operations and construction anywhere in
the country because those activities are not atypical to occur
in rural areas. It could even call into question EPA's ability
to enforce tailpipe emission standards that would limit
particle pollution from cars, trucks and buses because those
same cars, trucks and buses typically drive in rural areas. In
other words, the farm dust bill might forever bar the EPA from
limiting emissions of coarse particles, fine particles, sulfur
dioxide, nitrogen oxide and mercury from power plants,
industrial sources and maybe even motor vehicles.
We are also concerned that H.R. 1633 could block revision
of fine particle standards and implementation of existing fine
and coarse particle standards. Since the existing particle
programs did not distinguish between nuisance dust and other
particles, the bill raises the issue of whether the EPA could
enforce or maintain existing fine or coarse particle pollution
standards. The term ``nuisance dust'' is not a scientific term,
which would make it very difficulty to incorporate an exclusion
of nuisance dust into a scientifically based program. This
could raise practical concerns. It is unclear how one would
design a monitor that measured fine particles except for
nuisance dust and it is unclear how the agency could implement
particle pollution programs without a scientifically sound
monitoring network, and it is certainly unclear what the costs
would be to States or local communities to put in that type of
a monitoring system could one be designed and developed.
The existing fine and coarse particle pollution reduction
programs are important for public health. While nuisance dust
sounds like it is merely inconvenient, it includes particle
pollution that is harmful to public health. When we breathe,
both coarse and fine particle pollution can reach the deepest
region of our lungs and move past our bodies' filtering
systems. We have a health-based standard for particles smaller
than 10 micrometers since 1987. That is 24 years. Coarse
particles have been linked to a variety of adverse health
effects including hospital visits related to cardiovascular and
respiratory diseases and premature death. This is the standard
that the Administrator has announced she is prepared to propose
to retain, not propose to change.
In 1997, EPA added a health-based standard for fine
particles, which cause serious health effects. Nationally, EPA
estimates that exposure to fine particles results in, among
other effects, 130,000 to 320,000 excess deaths in adults,
110,000 emergency room visits by children, 2.5 million cases of
exacerbation of asthma, and 18 million lost workdays each year.
I have briefly discussed some of the potential consequences
of H.R. 1633. As written, this bill would significantly weaken
EPA's authority under the Clean Air Act and significantly cause
and preclude us from preventing public health protections that
are necessary for the American people. If these consequences
aren't intended, it would be best to revise the bill to avoid
the confusion, litigation and the concerns that I have raised.
I hope this information that I presented as well as the
Administrator's October 14, 2011, letter clarifies EPA's
intentions and obviates the need for this legislation. It is
simply not necessary at this time to block the tightening of
the PM
10
standard which the Administrator has very
clearly indicated that she has no intention at this time of
proposing.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. McCarthy follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.033

Mr. Whitfield. Ms. McCarthy, thank you for your testimony.
You heard me say earlier that one of our concerns is that
it doesn't make any difference what EPA decides or doesn't
decide. Outside groups file lawsuits on a regular basis against
EPA, and I think even you would admit and agree that frequently
the courts' decisions determine what the interpretation of the
EPA act is and what becomes law. So what our concern is, even
though Lisa Jackson says no, are you convinced that a third-
party environmental group or some other entity would not file a
lawsuit?
Ms. McCarthy. Mr. Chairman, as you know, the Administrator
has made her intention clear but certainly she can't preclude
the rights and responsibilities she has under the
Administrative Procedures Act and the right to listen to
comment that is received. I would, however, say that the
Administrator is basing her decision on a wealth of scientific
information. I have the Integrated Science Assessment right
here. She has taken the advice of the Clean Air Act Science
Advisory Committee. She has listened to the staff
recommendations and she believes that the law gives her
deference in making these determinations in terms of what the
science said and what----
Mr. Whitfield. But you do still understand our concern
about--how many lawsuits are pending against the EPA right now?
Ms. McCarthy. There are a number of lawsuits pending but in
the----
Mr. Whitfield. There is over 400, I believe, aren't there?
Ms. McCarthy. In the case of PM
10
, the
administration has acted a number of times, first under
President Reagan, second under President Bush and this
administration. We believe the science is clear and we believe
that the Administrator's recommendation will hold true.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, see, we agree with you. We think the
science is clear also and that is why we think that moving
forward with legislation would remove any ambiguity whatsoever.
So that is where we stand on that issue.
Now, as far as coarse particulate matter, does EPA have the
authority to regulate coarse particulate matter now?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes, it does, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. And if the State implementation plan of a
noncompliant area does not do so, EPA can step in. Is that
correct?
Ms. McCarthy. Well, the EPA would have an obligation to
step in if a State implementation plan didn't effectively
address attainment in the way the Clean Air Act requires.
Mr. Whitfield. And how many States today are regulating
coarse particulate matter because they are in nonattainment?
Ms. McCarthy. There are only a very few number of States
that are regulating PM
10
. It amounts to about 41
counties. It is a very small area of the country at this point
in time.
Mr. Whitfield. Do you believe yourself from the evidence
that you have read that coarse particulate matter does have an
impact on a person's health?
Ms. McCarthy. I do. I do believe that, and I think the
scientific evidence is quite clear, and we have evidence not
only that coarse particles that are emitted in urban areas
cause problems but there is clear scientific evidence that
distinguishes what we call--what people have called rural dust,
that that also causes significant public health concerns.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, if you do believe that even rural
coarse particulate matter does impact health, why did you all
decide not to strengthen the coarse particulate matter
regulation?
Ms. McCarthy. Well, the Administrator has to establish a
standard that is requisite to protect public health with an
adequate margin of safety. The Reagan administration NAAQS
standards set in 1987, 24 years ago, that was also revisited by
the Bush administration and that is now being reconsidered by
this administration, is actually a very sound standard. It is a
standard that we believe is sufficient to protect public
health. We believe that there is scientific uncertainty, which
the Administrator has been looking at and considering that
would lead her to retain the standard as it is proposed but
certainly that information is rigorous enough to indicate that
we should retain the current standard.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, the current PM
10
standard is
150 micrograms per cubic meter. Is that correct? Is that the
current standard?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. And then there is a threshold of 99
percentile. What does that actually mean?
Ms. McCarthy. Actually, that means--and that is one of the
issues that has been most confusing because the Clean Air Act
Science Advisory Committee actually proposed to change the
standard and the form or actually ask the Administrator to
consider a change in the standard and the form. The 99th
percentile just really means that the area could be in
nonattainment if they exceeded or had events that brought up
the level of pollution to a certain amount just a few times a
year and it would trigger National Ambient Air Quality
Standards. If you lower that percentile, it means it needs to
be more often and more frequent in order to trigger
nonattainment.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. So the standard is 150 micrograms per
cubic meter and the form is 99 percentile, so if you exceed
that 1 percent of the time, you are OK, but if you exceed 2
percent of the time----
Ms. McCarthy. That is right.
Mr. Whitfield [continuing]. You violate?
Ms. McCarthy. That is right.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, my time is expired.
I recognize the gentleman, Mr. Rush, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ms.
McCarthy, I want to welcome you again to this subcommittee.
I got a little bit confused during the questioning from the
chairman here. It seemed that we were discussing the Farm Dust
Regulation Prevention Act but it seemed to me like he was
talking about the EPA litigation prevention act, trying to keep
EPA from being in court, being litigated in court, and I just
don't know, do you think that is what our legislative powers to
keep the EPA out of court?
Ms. McCarthy. Mr. Rush, I think that we actually are
authorized to establish National Ambient Air Quality Standards.
We certainly do that to the best of our ability based on the
science and the law. Without question, it is often challenged,
but without question, we win a considerable amount of time
because we do our jobs well.
Mr. Rush. And I agree with you, you do do your jobs quite
well.
We heard earlier from Representative Noem that the
scientific research shows a clear distinction between ``urban
dust'' and ``rural dust'', and H.R. 1633 will make it simpler
and easier for EPA by defining what nuisance dust is. Does the
scientific research show a clear distinction between urban dust
and rural dust? Also, does H.R. 1633 make it easier for EPA by
defining nuisance dust as it is defined in this bill?
Ms. McCarthy. The definition of nuisance dust in this bill
is very broad, and we are very concerned that it could have
significant spillover impact in terms of our ability to
regulate pollution from sources well beyond rural areas and
well beyond agricultural sources, and we are concerned about
that impact. I would also say that there are significant
amounts of health studies, and they become more every time we
look at the data and every time we visit that NAAQS that show
that coarse particles, whether they are generated in the rural
areas or they are generated in the urban areas have significant
health consequences. They deserve to be regulated. The science
demands it. The law requires it. EPA does that.
Mr. Rush. Well, so let me just ask you, is the matter that
is established in 1987 under the administration of President
Reagan, has that standard been a threat to the farming
communities in this Nation or has it been helpful?
Ms. McCarthy. We do not believe that there is any evidence
that farming has been in any way significantly disrupted by any
of the National Ambient Air Quality Standards. As you know,
when we establish a NAAQS, it is a national standard. It is not
targeted to a specific sector or a specific geographic area. I
do know since 1987 when this was first proposed, there have
been identified by States and local air quality districts when
they implement in nonattainment areas, they implement their
requirements to look at sources and identify what sources
contribute to local health consequences. There have been times
when they have worked with the USDA, they have worked with
local farmers. They have identified best management practices,
conservation measures that those farms can put into place that
would reduce the amount of dust that they admit and still allow
farming to continue unabated, and there have been instances
where we have worked in a collaborative way to help that effort
and that outcome, and it has been an enormously successful
opportunity for all of us and to make sure that farming can
continue, that it can continue unabated and we can work with
them to reduce the amount of dust that is emitted and maintain
the health standards that are required to protect public
health.
Mr. Rush. I only have a few more seconds. There seems to
be--the 800-pound gorilla in the room seems to be the fear
factor that is prevalent or that some have alluded to in
previous testimony at today's hearing. Can you comment on what
your understanding of the fear factor is and how great is it,
how significant is it?
Ms. McCarthy. Well, we heard quite a while ago, Mr. Rush,
that there was concern in the farming community on the basis of
the recommendations by the Clean Air Act Science Advisory
Committee that the Administrator consider a change in the
standard. What was misunderstood was they were asking for both
a change in the standard as well as the form. It actually would
have resulted in fewer counties. It would have been a little
bit more flexible, not so much sensitive to the high levels as
much as averaging a little bit in a way that would have
provided more flexibility. We did six listening sessions with
the agriculture community immediately to explain to them what
the process was, that it wasn't the recommendation of the
staff, that the Administrator didn't make a decision yet, and
we also talked about all of the work that we have done together
on farm dust since 1987 and the collaborative nature of that
process and the impacts that hasn't happened as a result. And
we will continue that effort, and now that the Administrator
has made it clear that she is not intending to propose a change
in that standard, we are certainly hoping that it puts those
fears to rest.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Shimkus, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, and it is great to be with you,
Assistant Administrator McCarthy.
Ms. McCarthy. Good to see you too.
Mr. Shimkus. We have a lot of fun here, and hopefully I
will be kind and courteous, and again, I appreciate all the
help that you have given in the past.
A couple issues. It is true that tier 4 engine regs, which
has created additional costs for the agricultural community in
diesel engines. Is that correct?
Ms. McCarthy. The tier 4 engine rules have been tightened
and it does require that they look at particulate matter and
other emissions----
Mr. Shimkus. So when you have diesel engines operating in
rural America, you cannot say there is no effect on cost and
production and operations when you have ratcheted down diesel
engine emissions on the clean air applications.
Ms. McCarthy. The engines that we regulate are very large
engines.
Mr. Shimkus. I mean, large engines are used in agricultural
America.
Ms. McCarthy. I believe that I was referring to dust
issues, so----
Mr. Shimkus. Well, I am just trying to----
Ms. McCarthy. There are definitely requirements in the
farming community when you have large farms that are
significant individual sources of pollution and they have to
achieve the same kind of engine standards that----
Mr. Shimkus. Right. Production agriculture is large
operations and large engines, so I just want to put that on the
record. There is an effect. To say there is no effect, that
really can't be stated.
You mentioned 41 counties that you know are in this, and I
have one of the maps. There are other counties that continue to
regulate particulate matter on their own. Is that correct?
Virginia has fugitive dust regulations in Virginia?
Ms. McCarthy. I am sorry, Congressman. I am not familiar
with that, but these are the requirements that are attributable
to the Clean Air Act.
Mr. Shimkus. Just placing that into the record that there
are States that are monitoring for dust in States on their own
outside of the SIP and the requirements of the Clean Air Act.
The fear factor that my friend mentioned, one of your
statements in your opening statement said ``at this time.''
Using that terminology ``at this time'' creates a fear factor
in rural America because tomorrow you may. The importance of
legislation is to codify that to say not at this time, no more
PM
10
. In fact, the letter that the Administrator
sent to Lisa Jackson says--I mean Lisa Jackson sent to Debbie
Stabenow, ``I am prepared to propose retention with no revision
of the current PM standard and form when it is sent to OMB for
interagency review.'' Now, the question is, so the
Administrator must believe that PM standard as it is currently
operated under the EPA, that it protects public health. Is that
correct?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes, adequate with an adequate margin of
safety.
Mr. Shimkus. And you would agree with that?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Good. I want to have that on the record
because that is part of this whole debate of the concern of
ratcheting it down. You heard during the opening questioning,
and just the difference of concentration. A lot of our
experience here on the committee is focusing on concentrated
amounts that affect human health. Do you agree that
concentrated particulate matter can be harmful to human health?
Ms. McCarthy. I believe that exposure to particulate matter
can be----
Mr. Shimkus. In any concentration or in certain
concentrations?
Ms. McCarthy. It depends on both. It depends on the
concentration as well as the size of the particle.
Mr. Shimkus. But you just said PM
10
is safe.
Ms. McCarthy. No, no, I said that the National Ambient Air
Quality Standard was appropriate as a safeguard for public
health protection. That does not mean that I think that it is
safe for exposures at all levels. Certainly our goal is to
achieve the National Ambient Air Quality Standard that is
required under the Clean Air Act. I am making no statement
about my independent knowledge of health consequences
associated with exposures beyond that.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time is expired.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, sir. At this time I will recognize the
gentleman from California, Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. McCarthy, we heard from some people that the
Republicans want to make commonsense changes to the Clean Air
Act but in reality, I fear they may be making some radical
changes and you said in your opening statement the bill does
far more than prevent a change in the coarse particulate
standard. We believe it could result in far-reaching damage to
the bedrock public health protections in the Clean Air Act.
Now, this includes a broad definition of so-called nuisance
dust that would be exempt from EPA regulation. The bill lists
several examples of what falls under the category of nuisance
dust including ``earth moving.'' The bill doesn't limit these
farms. Ms. McCarthy, could the operations of a large, open pit
mine fall under the category of earth moving?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Waxman. In fact, during the next panel, we are going to
hear from the Coarse Particulate Matter Coalition, an industry
association that supports this bill. One of the coalition's
members is Kennecott Copper, which operates one of the world's
largest copper mines. That company would like to expand its
mine with fewer air pollution controls. So that is one way this
bill goes beyond farms.
The bill also includes ``windblown dust'' in the definition
of what constitutes nuisance dust. Ms. McCarthy, could all
particulate air pollution be viewed as windblown dust and does
the bill distinguish because particulate matter from a farm or
from a factory?
Ms. McCarthy. It could, and there is no such distinction in
the bill that you have asked me to comment on.
Mr. Waxman. So the dust is undefined in the bill and
commonly applies to small particles, so all particulate air
pollution might fall under this phrase?
Ms. McCarthy. It might.
Mr. Waxman. The bill further includes as nuisance dust
particulate matter that is generated from ``activities
typically conducted in rural areas.'' This is extremely broad
and could capture a range of industrial activity that often
occurs in less populated areas. Ms. McCarthy, what activities
could be covered by this definition?
Ms. McCarthy. The generation of power at a power plant,
large industrial sources like steel plants, gravel operations,
mining operations, driving diesel buses to school, diesel
engines. A variety of the same kind of sources that you would
find in rural areas can be found in urban areas as well.
Mr. Waxman. The bill is so broadly written that it could
prevent EPA from ensuring that school buses don't spew
dangerous air pollution in rural communities across the
country. I think that is not common sense, I think that is
ridiculous.
Ms. McCarthy, given these broad definitions, how could this
bill affect EPA's ability to limit emissions of particle
pollution from all sources, not just farms, and what are the
public health implications?
Ms. McCarthy. This bill, if passed as written, could have
serious implications on the major tenets of the Clean Air Act.
It could preclude us from regulating PM fines as well as
coarse. It could preclude us from regulating NOx and SO2
emissions from power plants, from mining operations, from large
industries, from mobile sources. It could have serious
unintended consequences.
Mr. Waxman. If the Republicans want to reduce or eliminate
existing controls on particulate pollution from industrial
activities, they probably have the votes to do that, but if so,
let us debate that on the merits. Let us not pretend that this
bill is about stopping EPA from imposing new regulations on
farms.
I hear this all the time, and I have heard it all my
career. I have got a simple bill, totally common sense. It only
deals with a problem that is on people's minds. And then you
look at the language and you find out that it is much broader
and has a lot of consequences that we presume are unintended
but they might even be intended. So I think we have to look at
legislation as it is written, not as how people would say it is
intended because their intentions are not part of the law that
EPA enforces. Isn't that correct, Ms. McCarthy? Does EPA
enforce intentions of the authors or the language of the bill?
Ms. McCarthy. We have to enforce the language of the bill,
Mr. Waxman.
Mr. Waxman. Even if Congress intended something else?
Ms. McCarthy. Often times, yes.
Mr. Waxman. I yield back my time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I will recognize Mr. Terry of
Nebraska for 5 minutes.
Mr. Terry. Thank you.
Ms. McCarthy, while listening here and some of the
discussion about whether or not we should even be having this
discussion and EPA has already said they won't enforce the
PM
10
on agriculture was the statement I think Lisa
Jackson made when I asked her about that and after she
answered, ``dust happens'' as the answer, I thought that was
rather flippant and insulting to our farmers. But the reality
is, the fear exists and I do think it is real, not only because
there was a recommendation to regulate dust on the farm and the
roads but there has been a history with this EPA. For example,
in the State Nebraska, under a proposed rule for CSAPR,
Nebraska was not even given reasonable notice or opportunity to
revise its implementation plan to react to requirements of the
2006 PM2.5 NAAQS, and it wasn't until August 2011 that Nebraska
became aware that a level of emission control necessary to
mitigate interstate transport.
So the point is, those of us in Nebraska have already gone
through a situation where the EPA said basically you weren't
going to be covered and then to our surprise we were covered,
which resulted in a lawsuit. So there is a history with the EPA
of making promises and then breaking them.
Now, in regard to the specific of nuisance dust and
PM
10
, the chairperson, Chairman Whitfield, hit on
this and it has always been my saying that we are only one
lawsuit away from you being forced to regulate dust
particulates from farming activities or the roads, and in fact,
there is a history with the EPA of their partners, Sierra Club
and Natural Resources Defense Council, filing lawsuits and then
you entering into a settlement agreement.
So with that fear that I have that that is the ultimate
plan here is to have one of your partners file suit, therefore
it is not Lisa Jackson's or this Administrator's decision but
the court's decision. I used the fictional because that is what
happens. You enter into a settlement agreement. So my question
to you is, to your knowledge, has Lisa Jackson, you or anyone
with the EPA had any discussions with Sierra Club, the NRDC or
any other environmental group about filing lawsuits on nuisance
dust from farming activities and dirt roads?
Ms. McCarthy. Absolutely not.
Mr. Terry. No discussions?
Ms. McCarthy. Absolutely not.
Mr. Terry. No emails?
Ms. McCarthy. Absolutely not.
Mr. Terry. OK.
Ms. McCarthy. Mr. Terry, we can talk about the cross-state
rule another time. I would really like that opportunity. But
what I will say is that this whole issue arose because people
were concerning about the Administrator going out and making a
change in a standard that had never been brought to her. The
rule has not been proposed. She has indicated what she intends
to propose. It would go through a public process and then it
would be finalized, and without doubt, it will be challenged.
There is ample opportunity for this body to see whether the
Administrator is actually going to live up to the letter that
she wrote and whether or not the science and what the final
rule looks like.
Mr. Terry. Listening to the discussions that have occurred
so far, you would agree that basic combining harvest or plant
would create dust that would then in that instance violate the
PM
10
?
Ms. McCarthy. Actually, that is not how it works. We
actually rely on monitoring technologies, not modeling from
individual sources, to establish nonattainment areas, and we
don't have farm dust standards.
Mr. Terry. But we already have an example in Virginia where
the monitoring said that at that particular time of the truck
driving over the road violated the standard, and so the reality
here is that we are only one lawsuit away from you being forced
to enforce the rule on farming activities, and my time is up.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. At this time I will recognize the
gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Markey, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Markey. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
In 1999, the public was outraged to learn that Congressman
Tony Schnell had introduced bill 602P to allow the United
States Postal Service to impose a 5-cent tax on every single
email that was sent. Email action alerts were sent out with
alarming instructions to read this if you intend to stay online
and continue using email. Congressional offices were flooded by
frustrated constituents. The issue even got raised at campaign
debates where candidates predictably came out in opposition to
this misguided scheme. There was just one problem. None of it
was real. There was no bill 602P. There wasn't even a
Congressman Schnell in the House of Representatives. The whole
thing was an Internet hoax, and everyone should have just moved
on.
But Republicans forged ahead. They introduced the Internet
Access Charge Prohibition Act of 1999, apparently because only
by passing actual legislation to prohibit the goals of the
imaginary legislation authored by a fictitious Congressman
could we prevent these horrible surcharges from being imposed
in the real world, but it didn't just do that, that piece of
legislation. Then it went on further to actually include
provisions which would have hurt poor and rural Americans to
get phone service.
So I am reminded of that legislation as we consider this
bill to prevent the regulation of farm dust. Just like the
email tax hoax, there is no plan to regulate farm dust any more
than there is to regulate fairy dust. There is no attempt to
accomplish that goal. Let me say that again: EPA has made it
very clear that the so-called plan to regulate farm dust is a
myth, but that hasn't stopped the Republicans from moving
forward with this legislation, and just like the email tax
bill, this bill goes well beyond its stated intent because it
also blocks EPA from settings standards for the dirty soot that
gets spewed out of coal-fired power plants, incinerators,
refineries and chemical plants. That is the real agenda, not to
stop something that isn't going to happen but to then switch in
the middle of their legislation to move over to something that
really would protect the public from public health hazards.
This bill should be relegated to the dust bin of similar urban
legends along with Congressman Schnell's imaginary email tax
bill.
Ms. McCarthy, can you tell me whether EPA has any new plan
to specifically regulate farm dust?
Ms. McCarthy. We do not.
Mr. Markey. Isn't it true that this legislation goes beyond
a simple prohibition on farm dust regulations by also
preventing EPA from regulating any dust that is generated by
activities that are typically conducted in rural areas and any
dust that can be blown in the wind?
Ms. McCarthy. That is true, Congressman.
Mr. Markey. Even if that dust is actually coming from coal-
fired power plants or other industrial sources?
Ms. McCarthy. There is a grave concern that that is part of
what the bill might do.
Mr. Markey. And finally, since I am sure that many little
girls all over America care about this deeply, can you commit
to me that EPA will never try to regulate fairy dust or pixie
dust? Because if not, we may just want to amend the legislation
in order to protect us against that threat which could be posed
by the EPA or other regulatory agencies seeking to move into
other fictional areas such as the legislation which is being
considered here by this committee.
Ms. McCarthy. After we look at the complete scientific
review, yes.
Mr. Markey. You will make sure that you do not under any
circumstances? OK. Thank you.
So I thank the chair very much and I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Texas, Dr. Burgess, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
gentlelady for being here with us today and answering our
questions. You brought a lot of material with you there at your
left hand. What is that compendium of documents?
Ms. McCarthy. This is the Integrated Science Assessment for
Particulate Matter that has recently been prepared that would
underpin the decision of the Administrator in terms of moving
forward with updating both the PM
10
and the PM2.5
standards.
Mr. Burgess. And there are health studies included in that?
Ms. McCarthy. This is actually a peer-reviewed summary of
peer-reviewed scientific literature that would have an impact
and concern relative to particulate matter.
Mr. Burgess. So are there available then health studies
that have found that rural dust is a health concern?
Ms. McCarthy. There are many, yes.
Mr. Burgess. And will you leave those behind with us?
Ms. McCarthy. Absolutely.
Mr. Burgess. Has the EPA conducted a quantitative health
risk assessment of coarse particulate matter?
Ms. McCarthy. The EPA has not used that tool on coarse
particulate matter, no.
Mr. Burgess. Is the reason for that because you don't have
enough scientific evidence?
Ms. McCarthy. The reason for that is because coarse
particulate matter, we don't have the kind of monitoring data
that we have available relative to other pollution so it
doesn't seem like it would be an appropriate tool to use, but
we certainly have enough studies that look at coarse particles
so that a linkage has been made in terms of the emissions of
those particles and health impacts that would result.
Mr. Burgess. Let me ask you this. There was another
subcommittee of Energy and Commerce that asked Administrator to
share with that subcommittee any studies that show a causal or
associative relationship between fine particulate matter and
deaths at levels below what the EPA calls the lowest measured
level. Now, apparently that request has yet to be honored so
can I ask you today that you will endeavor to help us receive
those materials that Administrator Jackson promised another
subcommittee and this full committee?
Ms. McCarthy. I will assure you that we will provide all of
the health studies that are the basis of these decisions.
Mr. Burgess. We will get you the details on that, but I
think it is important, and I appreciate your willingness to
help us gather the information.
Let me just ask you a question that is a little bit off
topic for a moment. Now, it seems like Administrator Jackson
and the EPA are very concerned about asthma and asthma deaths.
Is that a fair statement?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. It seems like almost every hearing we have on
almost anything, asthma deaths are brought up as one of the
metrics.
Ms. McCarthy. Well, air pollution generally the health
impacts of most concern are usually respiratory or
cardiovascular, yes.
Mr. Burgess. Well, one of the things that is just really
perplexing to me, I am an asthma patient. I am on a long-term
medication, and I also use a rescue inhaler. Now, occasionally,
like anybody else, I will forget my medication. I travel a lot.
And it is reassuring to know that I can go into any pharmacy in
the country and buy Primatene Mist over the counter. I don't
have to go to the emergency room. I don't have to get a
doctor's prescription for it. I can just simply get the
medication when needed and self-administer and avert a problem.
But Primatene Mist is not going to be available after January
1st, is it?
Ms. McCarthy. That is correct. If the FDA ban continues,
yes, that is true.
Mr. Burgess. Well, it is not just the FDA. I mean, EPA is
playing a role in this as well because of the propellant, the
vehicle, the CFC that actually propels the medication.
Ms. McCarthy. Certainly we have been working closely with
FDA for many years on this issue, yes.
Mr. Burgess. But the fact remains that because of the EPA,
this medication is no longer going to be available to me after
January 1st.
Ms. McCarthy. Well, the fact remains, I think that just to
clarify, this is an issue where there are CFCs that actually
are used in these inhalers, both in the ones you get by
prescription and there is one remaining that is over the
counter that has an impact on ozone layer, and as part of our
obligation with the Montreal Protocol----
Mr. Burgess. I would submit that the volume of CFC that is
released into the atmosphere from the contingent of asthma
patients that uses an occasional rescue inhaler that they buy
at 2:00 in the morning is vanishingly small and not responsible
for the hole in the ozone layer. And I will tell you, my own
comfort at 2:00 in the morning takes vastly more precedent than
any potential theoretical enlargement of the hole in the ozone
layer. I just have to say, here is an example of, we come in
here and we talk about in lofty terms that we want to prevent
asthma deaths, and yet at the same time the EPA and the FDA in
concert are acting to keep the medication out of the hands of
the patients who so desperately need them. It is irony to the
nth degree, and I thank the chairman for allowing me the
indulgence.
Ms. McCarthy. I am happy to have the discussion and bring
back the dialog relative to FDA's determination as to whether
or not this inhaler is an essential use.
Mr. Burgess. Look, you are not going to get me defending
the FDA. I promise you that. But both Federal agencies are
playing a role in this, and the fact remains, January 1st,
patients all over the country are not going to be able to get
access to their medication. If we are concerned about asthma,
we would fix that.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Dr. Burgess, and appreciate
your raising that issue of sometimes unintended consequences.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Scalise, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
having this hearing, and I want to thank my two colleagues that
were presenting the legislation that we are discussing today. I
strongly support the legislation and what we are trying to do
is I think bring some certainty to an area where is tremendous
uncertainty, and unfortunately, the uncertainty has cost jobs.
It has cost a lot of businesses, what we are seeing over and
over from businesses in my district and other districts. When
you talk to colleagues all around the country, you hear the
same thing over and over. It is not only the uncertainty but
the actual threats from real regulations or potential
regulations coming down from agencies like the EPA that are
impeding their ability to create jobs, that are impeding their
ability to invest in their business, and I am looking forward
to the next panel because we are going to hear from some people
who are actually on the ground dealing with this, and while
unfortunately some of my colleagues on the other side want to
make fun of this and, you know, want to tell jokes about fairy
dust, this is about real American jobs that are being lost
because of these regulations, you know, and yet some people
just want to make fun of that. They think it is funny that
people in middle America, people in rural America are looking
at these regulations that are coming down and looking at the
threats.
I want to read you to some--this is off of EPA's Web site.
You know, you are talking about some potential diseases coming,
respiratory irritation, lung function reduction, asthma,
inflamed damage to lungs, aggravated lung disease, permanent
lung damage, and I know you rattled off some other things in
your opening testimony. I am not talking about dust particles.
I am talking about the ozone ruling. These were all the same
things that EPA said were threats that you need to have this
ozone ruling, and even President Obama said you are out of
control. He pulled it back. And so when you come before our
committee and no matter what bill it is, if it is Cement MACT
or Boiler MACT or dust or ozone, you rattle off the same things
over and over about, you know, if we don't allow you to go
forward with this or we bring a bill to prevent some radical
regulation from EPA, it is going to send more people to the
hospital and kids are going to get asthma and, you know. Lung
disease, you know, you have been beating that drum for
everything, and even the President said that you are out of
line. And so I hope, you know, when you all come and oppose
these commonsense bills to just put certainty in place, to
prevent some regulations from coming in that aren't there now
that would put people out of business, when you keep saying the
same things over and over about threats to health, I mean, are
you saying that the President doesn't support public health
because the President said you went too far.
Ms. McCarthy. I guess I am a little confused because I
think this bill was initiated because the Administrator
actually made it clear that she doesn't intend to propose a
change in the PM
10
standard at this time.
Mr. Scalise. But then you should be OK with the bill
because the bill just says that you won't go forward with it.
You are saying you are not going to do it. The thing is, you
have said you are not going to do it on other areas, not you
personally but EPA has done this in the past, and the chairman
brought this up. The chairman of the committee talked about
these consent decrees, these consent agreements that some of
these outside groups will come and sue the EPA, and we have
seen it with energy production, we have seen it with other
things, and then you all go into an agreement with them. It is
not a law, it is not even a rule, and yet you can go into these
consent agreements and all of a sudden there is a new standard
on the books that nobody agreed to. It wasn't Members of
Congress that agreed to it, the elected representatives of the
people, it was some backroom deal cut either by a judge or,
even worse, some outside group who is a specialist interest
that got together with you all and you all came up with some
kind of new agreement that everybody has got to comply with,
and it puts people out of business. It kills jobs in this
country. And we are just trying to say we are going to issue a
preemptive strike before you all are forced in that position.
You might not even want to do it, but if they bring you to
court and all of a sudden some judge gives some ruling,
everybody in America, rural Americans, all these farmers have
to comply with this stuff. And I am trying to say, before you
cost any more jobs, because you have already cost jobs, whether
you agree with it or not. We can bring in business owner after
business owner and job creators that can tell you thousands of
jobs in each industry that have been lost because of EPA
regulations. We are just trying to say enough is enough before
this new one comes out. Let us stop it. What is so wrong about
that when you look at all the outside groups who--you are
looking at over 100 farmer groups, U.S. Chamber, National
Association of Manufacturers, all these farm groups. I mean, I
saw a story from the Illinois Farm Bureau. I mean, do you think
they are just making up stuff? Do you think they are having
imaginations about fairy dust, as it was suggested? I mean,
these are people that on the ground trying to just create jobs
and they are scared to death of what is coming down the pike
from EPA.
Ms. McCarthy. Congressman, the language in this bill goes
far beyond the interest that you have expressed in making sure
that the Administrator's decision to not propose to change
the----
Mr. Scalise. All right. So if you don't like the language,
then what you are saying is, you are OK with some kind of
prohibition, you don't like this----
Ms. McCarthy. All I am suggesting is that this law is not
necessary.
Mr. Scalise. I think a lot of hard-working farmers out
there would----
Ms. McCarthy. And the only other----
Mr. Scalise [continuing]. Disagree, but I yield back. I am
out of time.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
I recognize the gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Gardner, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Ms.
McCarthy for your time here today. I truly appreciate it.
We have talked a lot today, EPA currently has a
PM
10
standard, dust standard. Is that correct?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Gardner. And that basically means 150 microns per cubic
meter of air at the 99th percentile. Is that what it means?
Ms. McCarthy. That is correct.
Mr. Gardner. Which means you get about 3 days over the
standard average over a 3-year period and you are still in
compliance. Is that correct?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Gardner. OK. Does that standard apply across the
country?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Gardner. Are there areas of the country that are in
nonattainment for PM
10
?
Ms. McCarthy. There are.
Mr. Gardner. And where are these areas?
Ms. McCarthy. Well, I can certainly point them out to you.
For the most part, they are in the western part of the United
States. I would certainly be happy to share this with you.
These----
Mr. Gardner. Southern California, Arizona?
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. Are the 45 areas. That is right.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you. Do any of these nonattainment areas
have any agriculture production?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes, many of them do. I think there is--it is
primarily around urban areas where we monitor we most closely.
Mr. Gardner. What requirements are placed on those
producers if they farm in a nonattainment area?
Ms. McCarthy. It all depends. They may not be seen as
contributing significantly to the nonattainment, in which case
there is no obligation. In areas where they have been
identified, which represent a couple of counties that I know
about, there are a number of best management practices that
have been developed with USDA and the farming community. They
tend to choose what is most appropriate off that list and
implement those measures.
Mr. Gardner. Well, I am glad you mentioned that, because in
fact, since there is nobody on this committee from Arizona, I
do have where some of the nonattainment areas are. I would like
to ask that these documents be submitted to the record,
Arizona's mandatory BMPs, best management practices, for rural
crop agriculture and mandatory BMPs for livestock producers.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.099

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Gardner. And it seems that based on these documents,
the results of the PM
10
standard that are set by the
EPA that you currently regulate farm dust. That is what these
documents are here for because of the regulations on dust that
occurs in agriculture, farm dust. Now, I understand, I live in
Colorado, it is very dry. I would love to ban dust. It seems
like that is all we do is dust. We have worn the coffee table
out with it. But I was just curious, your statement, and I have
heard others say it is a myth that EPA is trying to regulate
dust but you already do. Is that correct?
Ms. McCarthy. Actually, we establish health-based
standards. It is up to the States and the local communities to
determine what is most appropriate to regulate.
Mr. Gardner. But that is on dust, right? You do regulate
dust?
Ms. McCarthy. We establish National Ambient Air Quality
Standards----
Mr. Gardner. The answer is yes, you regulate dust? I mean,
that is why you have these best management practices here that
are about farm dust.
Ms. McCarthy. I believe that that is a regulation in
Arizona and it being----
Mr. Gardner. So Arizona just has this regulation, not
because of the EPA?
Ms. McCarthy. No, it is very directly a linkage because of
the health consequences associated with coarse particles, some
of which may be from farms if they determine that there is
significant----
Mr. Gardner. Which is farm dust and so you are causing them
to regulate farm dust?
Ms. McCarthy. We could probably continue this for a while
but I do not--we do not directly regulate farm dust. We have no
farm dust regulations. What we have is National Ambient Air
Quality Standards that regulate coarse and fine particles,
which many businesses, industries as well as some
agricultural----
Mr. Gardner. So let me rephrase my question. Do you
regulate dust from farms? Maybe that is a different question.
You know, farm dust, maybe there is no specific category for
defining farm dust but do you regulate dust from farms?
Ms. McCarthy. I really am not trying to be evasive. Let me
tell you how----
Mr. Gardner. But, see, the problem here is that what my
district sees. This district is the 11th largest ag-producing
district in this Congress out of 435. It is not fairy dust to
them. This is a very real issue.
Ms. McCarthy. I am not suggesting this is not a serious
issue.
Mr. Gardner. EPA also suggested that they weren't going to
regulate milk from dairies but they had to actually put
something in there--milk spills at dairies but they had to put
something in the Federal regulations saying they weren't going
to regulate milk spills. You can see the problem that we face
when it comes to the EPA and how our farmers and ranchers are
trying to deal with it. We have best management practices from
States that are dealing with the regulation of dust from farms.
Now, whether that is farm dust or not, maybe that is a point of
distinction.
Ms. McCarthy. In areas where farm dust contributes to
nonattainment and imposes health concerns in those communities,
there is certainly both a right and an obligation to take a
look at those issues and to see if there are cost-effective
practices that can be put in place that would reduce the health
consequences associated with those emissions. But so I don't
see anything wrong with that. In fact, I see that as a good
practice to continue.
Mr. Gardner. So do you think there should be regulations on
dust from farms?
Ms. McCarthy. I believe that there should be regulations on
coarse particles, and coarse particles, no matter where they
are emitted from, can be reduced in areas where they are
causing a health burden that they should be reduced if they can
be done cost-effectively----
Mr. Gardner. So the answer is yes----
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. And practically.
Mr. Gardner [continuing]. Dust from farms ought to be
regulated?
Ms. McCarthy. I did not say that, no.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is up.
At this time I recognize Mr. Pompeo of Kansas for 5
minutes.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ms.
McCarthy, for being here today.
I want to spend time on the statute but first I do want to
clarify. Mr. Markey didn't take this very seriously. He talked
about fairy dust. He talked about myths and fake Congressmen
and fictitious things. Do you agree with him? Is this a myth?
Are the 100 folks who signed that letter in support and
everybody who talks to me back in Kansas, are they irrational,
ignorant or just sadly mislead?
Ms. McCarthy. I think there are many misunderstandings
here, and there are complexities here that people don't
understand. I certainly understand----
Mr. Pompeo. So they are ignorant?
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. That the agricultural community
is concerned. I do recognize the importance of the agricultural
community, and we certainly don't want EPA to look like it is
adding burden on the farming community when in essence the
Administrator has clearly said she has no intention of
proposing a change in this PM standard. All of that is very
real.
Mr. Pompeo. I appreciate that. So you disagree with Mr.
Markey? You take this seriously?
Ms. McCarthy. I take my job very seriously.
Mr. Pompeo. I appreciate that.
I want to talk about what the proposed legislation does and
what it does not do. Mr. Waxman talked about this eviscerating,
gutting the Clean Air Act. I think that is the 57th time I have
heard that in 10 months. Everything we do guts the Clean Air
Act. He talked about taking away, eliminating regulations. This
doesn't eliminate any regulation. This just gives the States
the ability to do it, and if they don't do it adequately, you
can come in and clean up their mess. Isn't that right? As I
read this language, isn't that exactly what it says? This
doesn't deny anybody's ability to regulate this coarse
particulate matter. It just says we are going to give that to
the States, and if you don't get it right, we will come in and
make an adverse health finding, we will do a cost-benefit
analysis and Ms. McCarthy will come in and clean up the mess,
right?
Ms. McCarthy. I think that if what you are saying is right,
what you are saying is rolling back national standards, health
standards that are necessary for public health protection. You
are talking about giving those to local communities or States
that certainly don't have the scientific or the resource
wherewithal to be able to make this happen. So I would say in
essence you are actually gutting the Clean Air Act.
Mr. Pompeo. Wow. So you think the States are completely
incapable of making sure they can take care of the health of
Kansas. My Governor, Governor Brownback and his Kansas
Department of Health and Environment, are incapable of
protecting the health of their citizens?
Ms. McCarthy. Actually, I would----
Mr. Pompeo. They don't have the resources. You said they
don't have the resources or the scientific knowledge out in
flyover country?
Ms. McCarthy. I would say that the way in which nuisance
dust is defined here in what you would need to do to regulate
it is potentially beyond the wherewithal of EPA and our
scientists at this point in time, and I certainly wouldn't want
that burden imposed on States and local communities.
Mr. Pompeo. Last point. So I think it was Mr. Waxman and
you had a little colloquy about all the horrors that could
follow. We could have school buses killing children, large open
pit mining exemptions, and you said that this language might
prevent the EPA from regulating those. This really isn't a
question. This is a statement and my observation. You have
never let statutory language get in the way of your efforts to
regulate things. We have made things clear. We make them
explicit and you run through stop signs. And so here we have
got language which doesn't talk about school buses and yet you
and Mr. Waxman say that this is going to allow school buses to
do great harm. Do you really believe that this language would
preclude you from doing those kinds of regulation for power
sources and for school buses? My question is, do you believe
that this language would preclude you?
Ms. McCarthy. I believe that it very well could.
Mr. Pompeo. It very well could?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Pompeo. So you would sit with your team and you would
say I don't think we can do that?
Ms. McCarthy. Well, one of the issues is, I am trying to
understand what it was intended to do. Was it intended to do
that?
Mr. Pompeo. Well, you said before, it doesn't matter,
right? You said what does the language do. I think it is very
clear what the language does. This language grants the rights
to the States to regulate this and keep their folks safe, and
then if there are health adverse health effects and if a cost-
benefit analysis is completed, you all can go fix it. So I
think it is very clear. We are trying to prevent EPA from doing
not what an imaginary Congressman said they would do and not
what some silly email chain that was fraudulent centered on but
what your EPA staff said they were considering.
Ms. McCarthy. So this bill is actually intended not just to
prevent the Administrator from ever being able to advance or
enhance regulation of farm dust or coarse particles, it is
actually intended to roll back 24 years of history in
regulating coarse particles that started with the Reagan
administration, that continued to the Bush administration, that
protects public health today. That is the intent of this bill.
Mr. Pompeo. My time is up. It is intended to do precisely
what it says it will do. It is intended to stop the EPA from
regulating farm dust, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
All right. Let us get back into this and we will pick up
right where we left off with Mr. Pompeo, because I am trying to
figure it out, and I don't think that the intent of this bill
is to do any of the things that you think it is intended or
that you were trying to imply that Mr. Pompeo was saying it is
going to do. I think it is regulating farm dust. That being
said, would you all support this bill if you changed on line
15, page 3--do you have the bill in front of you, ma'am?
Ms. McCarthy. I do have it in front of me somewhere. Yes, I
have it.
Mr. Griffith. If you changed on line 15--and I am not
speaking for the patrons, I am just asking. On line 15, if you
change the ``or'' to an ``and'', wouldn't that resolve all of
your semantic problems or all of your language problems?
Ms. McCarthy. I am really not prepared at this time to
negotiate the bill. What I will say is that I think that in----
Mr. Griffith. Just look at the plain language of the bill.
If you put an ``and'' there, there is no way anybody on earth
could interpret that that would allow mining. Isn't that
correct?
Ms. McCarthy. I do not know the answer. I can certainly go
back and take a look at it.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Let us talk about this----
Ms. McCarthy. Could I just point out, one of the confusing
things in the definition, it is----
Mr. Griffith. I will take back my time, ma'am.
Ms. McCarthy. OK. I am sorry.
Mr. Griffith. You know, I think most of us over here were
offended by the fairy dust comment, and I was concerned about
it enough that I got Representative Hurt to bring me his
language, and apparently in his district, there was a farmer
who has already been warned by a State regulator. Now, you
indicated you weren't aware of State regulations in Virginia,
and I am happy to share those with you, if you would like, and
these are the regs, not the underlying law but the regs in
Virginia which talk about fugitive dust, and I guess what I
want to know is, is that based on your earlier testimony, my
impression is, is that you have all indicated to the States
that this is the direction that they should go in. Is that not
correct? You have indicated to the States that they should be
regulating fugitive dust from agricultural sites? Is that not
correct?
Ms. McCarthy. Not that I am aware of. In fact, even in the
coarse particulate standard, our monitoring that we base our
nonattainment decisions on is focused on urban areas. It is
both focused on where there is the highest levels of pollution
as well as where there is most population exposed. So we do not
focus on rural areas as we implement that standard. So----
Mr. Griffith. But as you have indicated, as time goes by,
if there a coarse particulate matter issue, you all are going
to go in and regulate that. And I guess one of my concerns is,
is that in regard to another set of regulations, not this one,
back when I served in the Virginia legislature on the Virginia
Joint Commission on Administrative Rules and Regulations, we
had an issue that came up and it looked like it was Virginia
enacting something that we just thought was foolish, and when
we pushed on it, they said well, we have been told by the EPA
we have to do this. This was stormwater management. And we said
well, bring them in, and the EPA came in and basically said
that, you know, Virginia didn't have any rights even outside of
the Chesapeake Bay area and that they were going to force us to
do it one way or another. And so I want to know, are we dealing
with the same kind of situation with dust? Are you all going to
tell the States that they have to do this or you're going to
come in and tell them how to do it?
Ms. McCarthy. This is a National Ambient Air Quality
Standard. That means that when States are implementing the
program, they make their own judgments about what is cost-
effective in terms of an implementation strategy for their
States, and to the extent that it is lawful, EPA respects that
judgment.
Mr. Griffith. Since this bill at this time only has a 1-
year time limit or time period in it and you all have indicated
that you are not planning to go forward with any new
regulations on agricultural dust, why the opposition? Why don't
you join in and support the bill?
Ms. McCarthy. Actually, it has two sections. The first one
is the one that talks about a 1-year limit, but it is really
not limited to coarse particles. It really spills into our
ability to regulate fine particles. And section 3 really
attempts to exempt nuisance dust from regulation altogether,
and because of how broadly that is defined, it can certainly
leak into all areas of the Clean Air Act and prevent us from
being able to maintain the kind of health standards we have had
for decades and the protections that the American people
expect.
Mr. Griffith. But you do understand why people, as Mr.
Gardner pointed out and others, why people are a little gun-shy
when it comes to the EPA because we have seen things that don't
make sense and we had had, in fairness, the States have been
run roughshod at times by the EPA, and so when we hear some of
these things, we don't always necessarily feel comfortable with
it and we may at some point reach a level of trust but we are
always going to have to verify.
Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time the chair recognizes the
gentlelady Ms. McMorris Rodgers for 5 minutes from Washington
State.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate the time and I appreciate Ms. McCarthy for being
here. You know, I too am struggling with the long list of
regulations that have been proposed by the EPA administration
this year, and at a time when unemployment in this country is
at a record high, we continue to face one regulation after
another that is making it, if not difficult, impossible for
people to comply. I had someone in my office just the other day
who said Cathy, the only way we can comply with the long list
of regulations coming out of EPA is to simply not operate, and
that is the fear that our farmers and ranchers face right now,
and it seems that the administration is moving forward without
the scientific, proven health benefits of many of these
regulations.
Now, 5 years ago, EPA concluded that the current PMT
standard was appropriate, and yet today in many regions, they
are still striving to comply with that standard. And that is
why it makes us a little perplexed as to why earlier in the
year EPA was recommending a stricter standard, and so in
eastern Washington, whether we are working in the fields or
herding our cattle or driving down a dirt road, dust is going
to be kicked up, and that farm dust is a byproduct of American
labor, not an air pollutant. So I understand that the
Administrator has stated that the current standard, which has
been in effect since 1987, will be continued. However, I too
believe that farmers and ranchers in eastern Washington need
more certainty. So I wanted to ask you, what made EPA go from
earlier in the year proposing to exempt agriculture and mining
to finalizing a standard that does not exempt them?
Ms. McCarthy. Actually, that was an action that the Bush
administration proposed in 2005 when it was doing its NAAQS
review of the PM standard. They did propose to exempt
agriculture from regulation. On the basis of all the comments
that the Bush administration heard, they believed that the
science was strongly indicating that it needed to be included
within the definition of coarse particles and they didn't
exempt it. That was not this administration, that was the Bush
administration. And EPA has yet to propose anything. And if and
when we do, the Administrator has made it clear what she
intends to propose. When that is finalized if that is
challenged and it goes to court, if we lose that challenge we
re-look at the NAAQS, but you are in no immediate danger of
actually happening.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. But earlier in the year, you were
proposing different standards, so what made you change----
Ms. McCarthy. We actually had never proposed anything. What
we were proposing on PM
10
was to wait for the
Integrated Science Assessment. The Clean Air Science Advisory
Committee did propose that the Administrator consider changing
both the standard and form, which really wouldn't have made the
standard more stringent but it would have changed levels of
protection in the country, and when the staff looked at that,
they believed that the data wasn't certain enough to warrant a
recommendation solely to revise so the staff actually proposed
two recommendations, one to keep it and one to revise it. When
the Administrator looked at that, as she indicated in her
letter, her assessment was that the science wasn't certain
enough to warrant a change in the form and standard and that
she was going to propose retaining that standard. That is how
it has worked out. And there has been a lot of
misunderstanding. So I apologize, but we did not--we have not
put out a proposal in this administration relative to
PM
10
or 2.5.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. It feels like the administration
continues to flip-flop, though, on where they are going to be
on possibly proposing and when they might come, and so I guess
I just want to also--it just begs the question, why are you
opposing what is a very simple bill to clarify and send a clear
signal to our farmers and ranchers that farm dust that is
stirred up while they are working in the fields will not be
regulated?
Ms. McCarthy. I tried to make it clear that that is not
what this bill says or does.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. Would you be willing to--would you
give us your recommendations on how we could write that bill?
Ms. McCarthy. We would certainly provide any assistance we
can to the committee and that the chairman asks us to provide.
I will tell you that it is a little baffling to me, because
generally I am here because we are proposing to do something
that you disagree with. Now we are proposing to do something
that you agree with, and I am still here. There is got to be
something we can do that----
Mr. Whitfield. We like you, Ms. McCarthy.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. It is the fear of what you might do
in this example.
Ms. McCarthy. But in one case, the fear is that the
Administrator will be proposing something and it is sure to
happen. In this case, the Administrator may be proposing
something and you don't think it is going to happen. The
Administrator has been really clear. She is given this
discretion under the law, and she will use that discretion
wisely and she has made it clear the direction that we are
heading.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. We have heard you say many times
today ``at this point in time'' and we don't know when that
might change.
I yield back.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, on that note, I would, if I could,
ask unanimous consent to enter into the record the EPA
technical assistance letter requested by myself and Ranking
Member Waxman.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.103

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you so much.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
Bilbray, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilbray. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I was sort of taken back by comments made by the gentleman
from Santa Monica that somehow there is no regulation on
farming and nobody is proposing regulations on farming and that
the whole concept of regulating farming is a myth, and I would
like you to kind of, you know, bring me back up to speed. It
has been a while since I have been in the clean air, you know,
game. Wasn't there or isn't there an ongoing program to reduce
silicone emissions in the western San Joaquin Valley?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes, there is.
Mr. Bilbray. And that is PM
10
, ma'am, and 2.5?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes, that is true.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. So isn't there also an ongoing program to
reduce or eliminate the use of gravel or the use of gravel
roads in the Sierra Nevada because of the dust potential with
serpentine being used as the gravel?
Ms. McCarthy. I am not aware of that. I apologize.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. If you could ask your staff to take a look
at that.
And then the Owens Valley is a very rural, very isolated
area. Have they abandoned their concept of particulate
management in the Owens Valley?
Ms. McCarthy. No, there are many areas in California that
are out of attainment of those standards and that work with the
agricultural and other communities to try to reduce dust.
Mr. Bilbray. So for the record, there has been historically
intervention in a rural area by regulatory agencies to control
and regulate both PM
10
and 2.5?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. I just want to make that clear because the
reference was like nobody has ever done this, we are not
talking about this, and the fact is, when somebody out in the
West starts talking about this, you know, let me tell you, the
gentleman from Santa Monica is saying in our own State we have
had extensive impact on ag and rural area impacts in our clean
air management, and I think it is disingenuous to tell the rest
of the country that these things haven't happened and won't
happen and don't be worried about it. I think there is a very
real situation that we ought to be open and frank about and not
try to deny the fact that there is a real potential, either now
or in the future, that farming operations, that rural
activities will be severely impacted in their traditional
historical manner of operation because we are looking at
addressing both of these particulate issues. Is that fair to
say?
Ms. McCarthy. I am sorry. I think I sort of----
Mr. Bilbray. Is it fair to say that from the history of
what we have done in other parts of this country to manage the
particulate issue that it is unfair to tell the people in the
rest of rural America that there is no way they are going to be
impacted, no way that their operations may be modified?
Ms. McCarthy. Ever? I certainly would never make that claim
one way or the other.
Mr. Bilbray. I just--farming has been curtailed in
California in certain areas during certain times of the year.
Farming has been impacted. The use of water and the way the
water was distributed in a State that is dying for water has
been impacted through this management practices on this, and I
just think we need to clarify that, you know, there is this
issue of once you justify taking action on the item, you do not
say rural, urban has a different game. You do not say farming
will be protected in our implementation. Everybody is thrown
into the pile. There is no guarantee that traditional
agricultural activities will not be severely impacted once you
start implementing the programs, right?
Ms. McCarthy. You look at all sources of pollution. I will
say in terms of agriculture that how the States and local air
districts have worked with USDA and the agriculture community
has actually be very collaborative, and in the San Joaquin
Valley, as far as I know, it has been enormously successful.
Mr. Bilbray. Well, I think that if we see the impact and a
lot of the concerns over there, and the Owens Valley is the
other one that still is a real issue of do we use our water to
feed our cities and our crops or do we use the water to spray
over the Owens Valley to reduce the particulate matter. That is
the kind of catch-22 that we get into.
Ms. McCarthy. One of the reasons why we work with USDA is
there are a number of strategies that the farming community can
employ. Many of them are supported by----
Mr. Bilbray. To interrupt, I want to make it clear. You
made a statement that this impacts urban areas, and I think you
want to correct that. It does not only urban areas. Rural areas
are impacted severely with the PM
10
and 2.5 and the
potential. A nonattainment area does not know if it is an urban
area or rural area. Nonattainment areas are managed as one
proposal.
Ms. McCarthy. May I clarify the point I was trying to make?
Mr. Bilbray. Yes.
Ms. McCarthy. I am sorry.
Mr. Whitfield. Go ahead.
Ms. McCarthy. Very quickly. What I was talking about is how
you identify nonattainment areas. We monitor nonattainment
areas. We don't model them. Our monitoring is focused on areas
where you have both high levels as well as high population
density. So even in the areas that you are talking about, they
are surrounding high population density areas, although the
rural areas may come in as part of the nonattainment area.
Mr. Bilbray. Excuse me, ma'am. The Central Valley is not an
urban area, and the great majority is nonattainment. I yield
back.
Mr. Whitfield. Ms. McCarthy, you raised an interesting
issue on the monitors. Would you provide the committee with a
list of where monitors are located by State and how that is
determined?
Ms. McCarthy. Of course.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
It looks like there are no more questions, so Ms. McCarthy,
thanks very much for being with us today. We appreciate your
time and look forward to working with you as we move forward.
At this time I would like to call up the third panel. On
the third panel, we have seven witnesses. First, Mr. Steve
Foglesong, who is a ranch owner of the Black Gold Cattle
Company and immediate past President of the National
Cattlemen's Beef Association. We have Mr. Kevin Rogers, who is
the President of the Arizona Farm Bureau, who is testifying on
behalf of the American Farm Bureau. We have Mr. Pete Lien, who
is the President of Pete Lien and Sons, Inc., who is testifying
on behalf of National Stone, Sand and Gravel Association. We
have Mr. Till von Wachter, PhD, Associate Professor of
Economics at Columbia University. We have Mr. John Walke, who
is Senior Attorney and Director of the Clean Air Program at the
Natural Resources Defense Council. And we have Gregory
Wellenius, who is Assistant Professor of Community Health at
Brown University.
So I want to thank all of you for joining us this afternoon
to discuss H.R. 1633 and the regulation of particulate matter.
We look forward to your testimony. Each one of you will be
recognized for 5 minutes for your opening statement, and so Mr.
Foglesong, we will start with you and you will be recognized
for 5 minutes, and be sure and turn your microphone on.

STATEMENTS OF STEVE FOGLESONG, RANCH OWNER, BLACK GOLD CATTLE
COMPANY, ON BEHALF OF NATIONAL CATTLEMEN'S BEEF ASSOCIATION;
KEVIN ROGERS, PRESIDENT, ARIZONA FARM BUREAU FEDERATION, ON
BEHALF OF AMERICAN FARM BUREAU FEDERATION; PETE LIEN,
PRESIDENT, PETER LIEN & SONS, INC., ON BEHALF OF NATIONAL
STONE, SAND AND GRAVEL ASSOCIATION; KURT E. BLASE, PARTNER,
HOLLAND & KNIGHT, ON BEHALF OF COARSE PARTICULATE MATTER
COALITION; TILL VON WACHTER, ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS,
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY; JOHN WALKE, SENIOR ATTORNEY AND CLEAN AIR
DIRECTOR, NATURAL RESOURCES DEFENSE COUNCIL; AND GREGORY
WELLENIUS, ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF EPIDEMIOLOGY, BROWN
UNIVERSITY

STATEMENT OF STEVE FOGLESONG

Mr. Foglesong. There we go. Thank you for the technological
advice. Us ranchers sometimes struggle with that.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, everyone forgets.
Mr. Foglesong. Oh, OK. I am feeling more comfortable all
the time.
Good morning, Chairman Whitfield and Ranking Member Rush
and members of the subcommittee. Anybody that knows anything
about cattle ranching and feeding knows that many operations
are located where wind blows, and that makes dust a part of
everyday life. The idea that the EPA may decide to require me
and other cattle producers in every part of the country to
somehow control that dust gives me cause to lose a lot of sleep
at night. The fact is, farmers and ranchers want and need
certainty about this issue.
While I and ranchers across the United States are pleased
the EPA has decided not to propose to lower the standard this
year, we can't be 100 percent sure of that outcome of the
rulemaking until it is final. In fact, in 1996 the EPA proposed
to remove the PM
10
24-hour standard altogether only
to bring it back in the final rule, and then again in 2006 the
EPA proposed to exempt ag dust. That exemption also disappeared
in the final rule. In addition, even if the EPA retains the
current dust standard, the opportunity remains for that agency
to tighten it in the future. Unless Congress passes the Farm
Dust Regulation Prevention Act, that threat remains.
Now, I know that the EPA currently regulates dust. Cattle
operations have found it very difficult and expensive to
comply. One operation that I know of in Arizona spent $400,000
to comply with that current standard. That is $1,000 a day just
to control dust. Most of that is to sprinkle water in those
pens, and that is just the current standard. Just think about
how much it would cost if the EPA were to actually lower that
standard in the future. If that happens, the simple fact is
that many farms and ranches may be forced out of business.
Ranchers have been concerned about that possibility for
many years but most recently the fear surfaced when EPA
revealed it is considering making the dust standard essentially
twice as stringent as the current standard. NCBA and the Coarse
Particulate Matter Coalition commissioned a study on the impact
of the possible new dust regulation on rural America. The study
determined that vast areas of the Midwest, Southwest and
western parts of the United States would be thrown into the
brink of nonattainment if not completely into that
nonattainment altogether.
It would be one thing if there were a good reason to
regulate farm dust, but there is not. The regulation of dust
under the Clean Air Act is supposed to be based on scientific
evidence of adverse health effects. Historically, there has
been no such evidence of adverse health effects from dust at
ambient levels but EPA has decided to regulate it anyway. Why?
In 2006, EPA based its decision on the precautionary principle.
That is right. EPA's dust regulation is not based on science
but on supposition. Let me explain. Particulate matter is
separated into two distinct sizes and kinds of matter. Fine PM
is combustion-driven material and the size range of 2.5 microns
and smaller, known as PM2.5. That is cigarette smoke. Coarse
particulate matter, or dust, on the other hand, is bigger
particles in the range of 10 microns and smaller down to 2.5
microns. PM
10
includes both sizes and kinds of
particles. The reason I mention particle size and composition
is because, incredibly, the EPA is regulating dust using
scientific studies that show adverse health effects that may
all be caused by combustion-type fine PM, not dust. The studies
EPA reviewed are studies looking at the health effects of
PM
10
from urban areas that are contaminated with
combustion-type fine PM. Any adverse health effects the studies
reveal may well be caused by the fine PM, not the coarse PM.
Use of these studies to identify health effects for
purposes of establishing a coarse PM dust standard is
inappropriate, especially for rural areas, where urban
contaminants are not a concern. Nevertheless, EPA uses a single
standard to regulate dust in urban and rural areas. The
contaminant issue I mentioned is just one of many problems with
the EPA's PM
10
studies.
I am not a scientist or a medical doctor but I want a
confirmation, so we asked Dr. Jonathan Borak, Clinical
Professor of Epidemiology and Public Health at Yale University
School of Medicine, to review EPA's health studies. Dr. Borak
is a highly respected scientist and in fact was one of the
founding members of EPA's own Scientific Advisory Committee. He
found many problems with the studies on which EPA relies and
determined that those studies do not establish risk from a
health basis for dust regulation. I have attached his comments
to my testimony for the record.
In an effort to bring a little common sense back into this
process, cattlemen believe that the best solution is for
Congress to pass the Farm Dust Regulation Prevention Act of
2011. Regulatory uncertainty is unnecessary and unproductive.
If EPA follows though and does not revise the dust standard,
this action would to some degree provide us with certainty but
for no more than 5 years. It provides no relief to producers
who are spending over $1,000 a day on dust control measures
right now. We need immediate, permanent relief from Federal
dust regulations on farms and cattlemen believe the best way to
achieve that is by passing the Farm Dust Regulation Prevention
Act.
Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Foglesong follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.168

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.169

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Foglesong.
Mr. Rogers, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN ROGERS

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Members of the
subcommittee, my name is Kevin Rogers. I am a fourth-generation
farmer. I farm with my family over 7,000 acres of land in
Arizona. We produce cotton, alfalfa, wheat, barley and corn
silage. I am currently the President of the Arizona Farm Bureau
and I also serve on the USDA Air Quality Task Force, which
advises the Secretary of Agriculture on Federal clean air
policies that affect farmers.
I am pleased today to testify on behalf of the American
Farm Bureau Federation in support of H.R. 1633, the Farm Dust
Regulation Prevention Act. My farm in Arizona lies in one of
the worst areas for dust PM 10 in the Nation. Within the past
couple of months, four huge naturally occurring dust clouds
rose from the desert floor and swept over Phoenix. Also, some
of that happened in Texas as well. It covered Tucson in
southern Arizona as well. This is the dust that EPA regulates
under the coarse particulate matter with the National Ambient
Air Quality Standard. H.R. 1633 provides a reasonable and
commonsense approach to controlling ambient PM in a way that
recognizes the natural occurrence of farm dust while also
recognizing the public health mandate the Clean Air Act
requires. By excluding nuisance farm dust from regulation, the
bill allows EPA to continue regulating manmade emissions of
particulate matter while at the same time not trying to
regulate natural occurrences. The exclusion focuses EPA's
attention on things that EPA can control rather than trying to
regulate nature.
The bill does not roll back any EPA protections afforded
under the Clean Air Act. Rather, it reinforces the idea that
regulatory decisions should be based on sound science.
The record here is clear that scientific data on possible
health effects of PM
10
, or dust, is highly
uncertain. The bill provides the necessary flexibility for EPA
to step in and regulate if the science more conclusively shows
the naturally occurring farm dust causes adverse health
effects. The bill recognizes the great disparity in the coarse
PM
10
ambient air quality levels from one part of the
country to another, from rural to urban areas, by providing for
State and local regulation of rural nuisance dust from farming
areas. The bill allows management flexibility to deal with
unique local circumstances.
We do applaud the recent announcement by Administrator
Jackson that EPA will not propose changes to the current
PM
10
standard. That does not mean that farm dust is
not or will not be regulated under the Clean Air Act. For those
of us in a coarse PM
10
nonattainment area, our
activities have already been regulated and will continue to be
regulated. The Phoenix area has not been in compliance with the
coarse PM
10
NAAQS standard for many years.
Arizona Farm Bureau participated with the State to develop
a coarse PM
10
permit to control agricultural
PM
10
emissions and reduce our agricultural practices
that produce PM. The program developed best management
practices in three different categories. The farmers are
required to adopt one BMP in each category. The program was
recently amended to require two BMPs from each category. Now
the EPA and the State, because we continue to be in a
nonattainment area, are pushing for more restrictions and
mandating restrictions against working the fields when winds
reach a certain speed.
All farms and ranches activities in a nonattainment area
are regulated under the Clean Air Act. The program we have is a
mandatory program, and all producers must participate. Those
who do not participate in our BMP program must obtain an
individual air permit, similar to those required by utilities
and factories. BMPs include practices such as tillage based on
soil moisture, not working the fields in windy conditions,
modifying equipment to prevent PM generation, speed limits on
unpaved roads, planting wind breaks and permanent cover crops,
just to name a few. All these activities place restrictions on
farming operations and have economic consequences.
I can tell you that if I am required to park my tractor on
windy days or when soil moisture is insufficient, it continues
to cost me time and money in lost labor and productivity, or if
I am required to have my employees drive 15 miles an hour on my
farm dirt roads, it will greatly increase the time we must
spend on these roads, taking time away from engaging in other
more productive activities. Others with similar restrictions
suffer similar economic hardships.
The fact that Administrator Jackson has determined to
retain the current coarse PM
10
standard for the next
5 years is very good news, but it only addresses one part of
the dust problem facing rural America. H.R. 1633, by excluding
naturally occurring nuisance farm dust from the Clean Air Act,
unless the science is more conclusive, warrants it, addresses
the other.
I thank the committee for your time and look forward to
answering questions when it is appropriate.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rogers follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.170

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.171

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.172

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.173

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.174

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.175

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.176

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.177

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.178

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.179

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.180

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.181

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.182

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.183

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Lien, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PETE LIEN

Mr. Lien. Chairman Whitfield and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify on behalf of
the National Stone, Sand and Gravel Association at this hearing
on the Farm Dust Regulation Prevention Act, which would prevent
the harmful effects of EPA's regulations of nuisance dust.
My name is Pete Lien. I am President of Pete Lien and Sons
of South Dakota, which was started in 1944 by my grandfather.
Representative Noem is my Congresswoman, and I am pleased to
express NSSGA's support of her legislation.
My association's members produce more than 90 percent of
the crushed stone and 70 percent of the sand and gravel
consumed annually in the United States. There are more than
10,000 construction aggregate operations nationwide. Aggregates
are the chief ingredients in asphalt, concrete and used in
nearly all residential, commercial and industrial building
construction and in most public works projects including roads,
highways, bridges, dams, airports, water and sewage treatment
plants, and tunnels
The aggregates industry has experienced the most severe
recession in its history. Production of aggregates has gone
from 3 billion metric tons valued at $21 billion in 2006 to 2
billion metric tons valued at $17 billion in 2010, a drop of $4
billion. Of particular importance to this hearing is 70 percent
of NSSGA members are considered small businesses and many are
located in rural area.
NSSGA members are committed to full compliance with all
pertinent environmental laws and regulations and emphasize
sustainable practices. I am proud to say my own family business
has reserves and plans for 200 years of operation into the
future. We have also won numerous awards including a letter of
commendation from the Bureau of Land Management for reclamation
before reclamation was even required by law. We are the winner
of the NSSGA's Environmental Steward Award, and the only quarry
ever to win EPA's Earth Care Award, which was presented by
Robert Redford.
Like agriculture, resource-based industries such as
aggregate producers have limited opportunities to reduce dust.
To meet the current standard for dust, or PM
10
,
aggregate facilities are required to have permits with State
environmental agencies which seem to control dust by limiting
production and requiring control technologies to limit dust on
crushers and other equipment and road maintenance. Some dust is
generated at an aggregates operation by crushing stone and
truck traffic. However, most of it is from uncontrollable
sources such as from roads and windblown dust, particularly in
our rural areas.
There is no practical way to control natural dust sources
in the West and Southwest and reduce the PM
10

ambient air concentration. Nevertheless, EPA continues to
promulgate unworkable standards that hurt job growth without
any health benefits. For example, in Utah, if EPA would have
reduced the standard by as much as a half, 23 of the 29
counties would go into nonattainment, which would result in
extreme limits on production and/or facility closures and
further threaten much-needed highway funding.
One NSSGA member has calculated that in order to meet a
lowered standard as contemplated by EPA, a typical facility
would have to reduce production by more than two-thirds. This
would substantially change the business model and lead to plant
closure and the loss of 50 jobs or dramatic increase in the
price of the product. Given the over 10,000 operations in the
United States and virtually every Congressional district is
home to an aggregates operation, this could result in
significant job losses.
Taken further, a cut in aggregates production would lead to
a shortage of stone, concrete and asphalt for State and Federal
road building and repair, commercial and residential
construction, which in turn would cause an increase in the
price of materials for those projects ranging from 80 percent
to 180 percent and further suppress employment in the
construction industry. Given that infrastructure investment is
essential to economic recovery and growth, any change in the
PM
10
standard would impose an additional burden on
the aggregates industry that is unwarranted and would adversely
impact aggregate supply and vitally important American jobs.
NSSGA appreciates this opportunity to speak on the
devastating effects of over-regulating nuisance dust on the
aggregates industry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be glad to respond to
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lien follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.185

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.186

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.187

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.188

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.189

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.190

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.191

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.192

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.193

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.194

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.195

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.196

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.197

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
And Mr. Blase, we appreciate your being with us. I failed
to state that you are representing the Coarse Particulate
Matter Coalition. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KURT E. BLASE

Mr. Blase. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Whitfield,
Ranking Member Rush and members of the subcommittee. Thanks for
inviting me to testify this morning. My name is Kurt Blase, and
I am Counsel to the Coarse Particulate Matter Coalition.
The coalition is an organization of industry groups with an
interest in scientifically sound regulation of coarse PM and
air. The current members of the coalition are listed in my
written testimony.
The past two reviews of the National Ambient Air Quality
Standard for PM
10
have focused increasingly on road
dust as a potential public health threat. The theory has been
that dust by urban roadsides can become contaminated by other
materials that render them more toxic. In contrast, dust
composed primarily of crustal material has been reported to be
harmful only at ambient levels much higher than the current
Federal standard.
Our coalition consistently has supported retention of the
current PM
10
standard while exploring avenues of
relief for natural dust emissions. The current standard limits
production and therefore employment by imposing stringent dust
emission limits in permits and State plans. Compliance with the
current standard is very difficult to maintain at our
operations. We have been surprised by recent contentions that
the regulation of dust is inconsequential.
There is one extra point I would like to make here with
respect to permits. We have talked a lot this morning about the
effect of nonattainment areas where the monitors are placed. A
couple of things there. I mean, even if you are in an
unmonitored area now, if the feds change their monitoring
criteria, their siting criteria, you can be monitored. If a
private party such as the Sierra Club story that Mr. Hurt told
wants to come and monitor you, they can do that. And more
importantly, for our group, really nonattainment and monitoring
is almost not an issue because we have to have permits and our
permits have to show attainment of the standard at the fence
line regardless of the attainment status of the area in
concern. I mean, it is these permits even more than the
nonattainment or attainment designation that are limiting our
ability to produce right now on the basis of this standard.
It is widely recognized that coarse PM concentrations vary
widely on a local and regional basis. A recent study
commissioned by our coalition, which was mentioned earlier,
sheds further light on this issue. A copy of the report is
attached to my testimony. I would like to emphasize several of
the conclusions here.
There are great differences in both the quantity and
quality of coarse PM emissions throughout the United States.
For example, PM
10
in the West, Southwest and Midwest
is composed primarily of coarse particulate matter while
PM
10
in the East is composed primarily of fine
particulate matter. In the West, Southwest and Midwest, the
variations among PM
10
within single counties are
very high. By contrast, the within-county differences in the
East are much smaller.
The localized nature of dust impacts leads to a great
disparity in the effects of a single Federal standard on the
different areas of the country. Our study focuses on the
impacts of a potential new standard recommended for
consideration in EPA's PM policy assessment. The potential new
standard would be set somewhere within the range of 65 to 85
micrograms per cubic meter with a change to the 98 percent
statistical form. The policy assessment concludes that a
standard of 85 with a change in the form would be roughly
equivalent to the current standard, and I heard the Assistant
Administrator repeat that several times this morning. However,
our study concludes that such a standard would be much more
stringent than the current standard, particularly in the West,
Southwest and Midwest as a result of the nature of the
PM
10
emissions in those areas.
Under the potential new standard, localized areas in
virtually all of the West, Southwest and Midwest would be
vulnerable to exceeedances. This is depicted in a map taken
from our report, which is attached to my testimony, and I don't
have it handy but it covers--oh, there it is. OK. You can see
the extent of the country that it covers these. In these
vulnerable areas, farmers, owners of dirt roads and operators
of material storage and handling equipment will have few, if
any, reasonable options to reduce emissions. Employment and
businesses generating fugitive crustal dust will be impacted
negatively. This impact would occur despite the conclusion in
the policy assessment that the current Federal standard can
reasonably be judged to provide sufficient public health
protection.
Given the choice between the current and the potential new
Federal standards, we have consistently supported retention of
the current standard. In that respect, we are encouraged by the
Administrator's recent letter indicating that EPA will propose
to retain the current standard. However, the reasons I have
discussed, we believe that State and local regulation is a much
more efficient and effective means of protecting public health
against dust emissions that have a very localized impact.
Accordingly, we strongly support H.R. 1633 and we urge the
subcommittee to adopt it.
I would be glad to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Blase follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.198

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.199

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.200

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.201

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.202

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.203

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.204

[Additional information for the record is available at
http://www.beefusa.org/CMDocs/BeefUSA/Issues/
PM%20Final%20PM10%20Report%200711.pdf]
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Blase.
Dr. von Wachter, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TILL VON WACHTER

Mr. von Wachter. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking
Member Rush and members of the subcommittee. It is a great
honor to be with you today.
Existing evidence suggests that air regulation provides
important benefits in terms of improved air quality, improved
health outcomes and improved housing values. However, it is
also widely acknowledged that air regulation carries potential
cost in terms of lower employment and lower productivity in
regulated sectors. In my testimony, I will focus on current
estimates of these costs and in particular on the costs for
those workers most affected by the regulation, which are
workers displaced when they are previously stable jobs.
So current best estimates of the effect of the Clean Air
Act suggest that the economic costs for workers present in
regulated sectors at the time of regulation are non-negligible.
Existing research has shown that employment and productivity in
regulated sectors declines, at least in the short run. In
addition, there are large and persistent wage reductions for
workers induced to leave regulated firms, especially those who
end up working in a different sector.
Whether the costs of air regulation are of the same order
of magnitude as the benefits in terms of improved health or
housing values is likely to depend on the regulation and the
environment which takes place. So for example, the most
comprehensive study of the effects of the 1990 Clean Air Act
Amendments suggests that there was a loss in wages over the
next 10 years of workers who went through nonattainment of
about $9 billion. Now, that is relative to the estimated
benefits of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments. These losses
appear to be temporary.
However, it is important to keep in mind that the 1990
Clean Air Act Amendments may have represented a best-case
scenario. Why would that be? Well, this is because the
amendments came into force not long before the high-pressure
labor market in the mid to late 1990s, and this matters,
because the cost of regulation in terms of lost wages and
employment tends to mostly accrue to workers who are actually
displaced due to the regulations, so it is job losers that lose
their jobs as a consequence of regulation who bear most of the
costs and job losses, especially for job losses for workers who
had found a stable job at a good, stable firm can lead to very
long-lasting large earnings losses. These earnings losses can
least up to 10 to 15 to 20 years, and job loss is also followed
by extended periods of job instability and earnings
instability, and during these periods, job losers can
experience decline in health. For example, in severe downturns,
these health declines can lead to significant reduction in life
expectancy over the next 20 or 30 years after a job loss.
The consequences of job loss are also felt by workers'
children, who can suffer from the consequences even as adults
and by their families, and job losses have also been associated
with a higher rate of entry into potentially costly public
programs such as Social Security disability insurance or early
claiming of retirement benefits.
The earnings costs of job displacement, and this is
important, has found to be substantially higher in recessions
than in booms. While we know that even displacement in good
economic periods can lead to lasting earnings losses, the one
exception is the mid to late 1990s where even job losers tend
to recover a big chunk of their earnings losses. So workers
displaced from the firms as a consequences of the 1990 Clean
Air Act Amendments were placed in an ideal case scenario
because a few years down the road a very high-pressure economy
pushed up their earnings.
To conclude, while many workers affected by air regulations
are likely to be sufficient mobile to find a new job without
major losses in employment and warnings, a subset of workers
induced to move from their job due to the regulation either
voluntarily or by layoff are at risk of experiencing quite
large and lasting losses of earnings. Existing research
suggests that these earning losses may be substantially larger
in difficult economic environments.
Based on these findings, the economic costs of air
regulations are likely to depend very much on the economic
circumstances in which the regulation is enacted. Hence, a
case-by-case assessment of these costs and their dependence on
the economic environment, the type of regulation and the type
of workers affected are important aspects when considering the
net gain of air regulation.
Now, since I have a few seconds left, let me say, the
results I quoted from the scientific studies mainly pertain to
any reason the county could go into nonattainment that includes
the PM
10
standard, but it is not focused on this
like PM3 to PM
10
thus it could be due to coarse
particulate matter. It could be just due to fine particulate
matter or any other of the other criteria.
Now, the question you are asking, namely, has coarse
particulate matter differential effect in rural areas that are
engaging in agricultural production, or where there is a power
plant or mining, as opposed to urban area is a very important
question that academics potentially can answer, but it is a
very difficult question that requires, as you can imagine, a
very large amount of data. So this is sort of a call in my last
seconds to provide this detailed amount of information so we
can actually answer that important question you were asking.
[The prepared statement of Mr. von Wachter follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.205

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.206

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.207

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.208

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Dr. von Wachter.
Mr. Walke, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN WALKE

Mr. Walke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
subcommittee. My name is John Walke. and I am Clean Air
Director for the Natural Resources Defense Council.
As the hearing today has shown, H.R. 1633 is premised on a
problem that does not exist, that is, nonexistent EPA limits on
farm dust. However, the devilish details of this poorly drafted
bill actually create more real problems that the imaginary
problems the bill purports to solve.
The bill is sweepingly overbroad and it creates numerous
damaging consequences that appear to be unintended but that
would in fact harm Americans. The result would be increases in
harmful soot pollution, not just coarse particulate matter but
deadly fine particulate matter, and across the country, not
just in rural America but urban and metropolitan areas too. The
legislation inexplicably weakens, eliminates or blocks Federal
Clean Air Act authority over overwhelmingly industrial
pollution from power plant, manufacturing facilities, mines and
the like, again as a result of very overbroad and poor
drafting.
Before you consider voting for a bill under the
misconception that you are just addressing so-called farm dust,
I urge your staff to examine closely the testimony by Assistant
Administrator McCarthy and my own testimony to see whether you
find fault with any of this legal analysis or factual
implications of the bill. I will note that none of the other
witnesses here today have contradicted those legal
interpretations in their written testimony.
Finally, I urge your attention to a careful reading of the
written testimony of most of the majority witnesses and
Representative Noem's opening statement. Each time that
testimony complains of existing regulations of farm dust, they
are talking about State regulation, not EPA regulation, for
example, in Arizona or Illinois. Isn't it paradoxical then that
this bill does not eliminate State regulation of farm dust or
its monitoring? By the same token, some have criticized the
temporary relief provided by Administrator Jackson's pledge yet
this bill provides a 1-year period of relief whereas
Administrator Jackson's pledge provides a 5-year period of
relief, equally paradoxical.
H.R. 1633 has been presented under the legislation guise of
blocking nonexistent and unplanned EPA regulations of farm
dust. I invite any witness or member to identify an EPA
regulation in the Code of Federal Regulations where EPA imposes
limits on farm dust. There are none.
Since Mr. Terry, who is not with us now, mentioned NRDC
earlier, I invite him or any other member to identify any
statutory authority to compel EPA to impose limits on farm
dust. There is no such authority from me or any other
environmental group to invoke.
Finally, I invite any member to identify any job in America
that has been eliminated due to EPA limits on farm dust. There
is none.
If Congress truly wants to address so-called farm dust with
a simple bill, all it would take is a single sentence that says
EPA shall not limit farm dust if States are doing so already
yet this legislation does far more and far worse. As Mr. Pompeo
correctly reads the bill, it removes Federal Clean Air Act over
deadly soot pollution from power plants, mines and the like if
States if doing so already. Mr. Griffith does not read the bill
that way, and I think it creates some genuine confusion about
what the bill does, but Mr. Griffith does helpfully start to
put his finger on things by pointing us to page 3 in line 15 of
the bill where you could at least begin to address some of
these problems in overdrafting with the addition of the word
``and.'' However, I would like to note that this would still
allow the exemption of pollution if an activity typically
occurs in a rural area. As Mr. Waxman said, 70 percent of power
plants do so. I don't think that is what the committee intends.
By the same token, it would allow the exemption of pollution if
it is windblown. I hope that we can agree that all pollution is
windblown, and we don't want to eliminate Federal regulation by
virtue of that fact.
Section 3 really is the most problematic feature of the
bill. I think my written testimony and Assistant Administrator
McCarthy's testimony covers that, so I am not going to repeat
that now. But I do have to say that this bill does produce what
appear to be unintended consequences that I think could be
corrected but not based upon the existing structure of the
bill. I notice that elsewhere in the House this week the
Judiciary Committee is considering the REINS Act, which
purports to address and rein in excessive delegation of Federal
authority to Federal agencies, and yet again, paradoxically,
H.R. 1633 engages in excessive delegation of sweeping and vague
authorities to deregulate industrial pollution across America.
I don't think that is what the bill intends to do, and I would
urge you not to pass H.R. 1633 in its present form. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walke follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.209

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.210

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.211

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.212

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.213

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.214

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.215

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.216

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.217

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.218

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.219

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.220

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.221

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.222

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.223

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.224

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.225

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.226

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.227

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.228

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.229

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.230

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.231

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.232

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.233

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.234

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.235

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.236

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.237

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.238

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.239

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.240

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.241

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.242

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.243

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.244

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.245

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.246

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.247

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.248

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.249

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.250

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.251

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.252

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.253

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.254

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.255

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.256

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.257

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.258

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.259

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.260

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.261

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.262

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.263

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.264

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.265

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.266

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.267

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.268

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Dr. Wellenius, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GREGORY WELLENIUS

Mr. Wellenius. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. My
name is Dr. Gregory Wellenius. I am Assistant Professor of
Epidemiology at Brown University.
I earned my doctorate in environmental health and
epidemiology from the Harvard School of Public Health. I
previously served on the faculty at Harvard Medical School. I
have been conducting research on the health effects of air
pollution for more than 10 years. I have authored or coauthored
more than a dozen original studies in this area and contributed
as an author for the EPA's 2009 Integrated Science Assessment
for Particulate Matter. My research has focused on the effects
of ambient air pollutants on cardiovascular disease, and it is
my pleasure to provide testimony in this area today.
There is a broad consensus in the scientific and medical
communities that ambient particles are harmful to human health.
For example, after reviewing the scientific evidence, the
American Heart Association recently stated that exposure to
fine particles, or PM2.5, is ``a modifiable factor that
contributes to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.''
The external panel of independent scientists that make up
the Clean Air Scientific Advisory Committee, or CASAC, and EPA
scientists concluded that a causal relationship exists between
ambient fine particles and both mortality and cardiovascular
effects and a likely causal relationship between ambient fine
particles and respiratory effects. This conclusion has been
endorsed by a number of scientific organizations including the
World Health Organization, the National Research Council, the
American Medical Association, the American Lung Association,
and the American Thoracic Society, to name a few.
As has been pointed out, the coarse and fine fractions of
particulate matter differ in their size, sources and
composition. In my written testimony, I provide further details
regarding the well-established health effects of ambient fine
particles. While fewer studies have looked specifically at the
health effects of coarse particles, the existing evidence
suggests that these particles can also be harmful to people's
health.
In the 2009 Integrated Science Assessment for Particulate
Matter, CASAC and EPA scientists concluded that the available
evidence is suggestive for a causal relationship between coarse
particles and mortality, cardiovascular effects and respiratory
effects. The available science indeed supports an association
between coarse particles and cardiovascular hospital
admissions. For example, a recent study in 112 U.S. cities
found that coarse particles were linked with higher risk of
premature death from all causes, stroke and respiratory causes,
even after accounting for levels of fine particles. Taken
together, the existing evidence suggests that exposure to
higher levels of coarse particles may increase the risk of
death, cardiovascular hospitalization and respiratory effects.
Now, most epidemiologic studies on coarse particles have
been conducted in urban settings. However, agricultural dust
can also be harmful to people. Field workers exposed to minimal
dust from agricultural sources experience more acute and
chronic bronchitis, chronic obstructive airway disease and
interstitial lung disease. Agricultural workers exposed to
organic dust have been found to have a higher risk of allergic
reactions, asthma, hypersensitivity pneumonitis and organic
dust toxic syndrome. A studying examining the lungs of
California farm workers found that their bronchioles had
accumulation of dust particles and thickening and inflammation
in the respiratory tissues.
Sandstorms and other dust events typically increase the
concentration of coarse particles much more than fine
particles. Studying these events provides information on the
potential health effects of coarse particles of non-urban
origin. For example, Asian dust storms in Taipei, Taiwan, have
been associated with increased rates of hospital visits for
ischemic heart disease such as heart attacks. Other studies
have linked dust events in Spain and Cyprus with increased risk
of hospitalization or death. These studies add to the evidence
of health effects of coarse particles and highlight that even
coarse particles from nonurban environments can have important
health effects.
In conclusion, Congress built into the Clean Air Act an
orderly process for the regular review of the scientific
evidence on health effects of air pollution. This process
includes multiple rounds of scientific peer review including by
CASAC and other scientists and the public. I strongly urge you
to preserve the authority of the EPA to periodically review the
available scientific evidence and when appropriate update the
air quality standards including for PM
10
and coarse
particles. This process is essential if we are to adequately
protect the public's health.
I thank you for your time and would be happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wellenius follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.269

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.270

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.271

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.272

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.273

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.274

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.275

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.276

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.277

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.278

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.279

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.280

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much for your testimony.
I will recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions. Mr.
Walke, you heard me in the very beginning talk about this
concern about the lawsuits being filed and so forth, and has
the Natural Resources Defense Council ever sued EPA over the
Clean Air Act?
Mr. Walke. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman, we have.
Mr. Whitfield. Do you know how many times?
Mr. Walke. You probably do if you have researched the
question. I have not, though, sir.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, I haven't either but----
Mr. Walke. No, I don't know.
Mr. Whitfield. And have you all been reimbursed for legal
fees?
Mr. Walke. When we win, yes.
Mr. Whitfield. Would you provide us with the number of
times that you all have filed suits against EPA and the number
of dollar value of the reimbursement for the legal fees?
Mr. Walke. I will do so the best of my ability. NRDC was
formed in 1970 or 1971, so----
Mr. Whitfield. Well, let us just say within the last 10
years.
Mr. Walke. OK.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Chairman, will you yield?
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. It would also be good to find out what was
their compensation out of the judgment fund that paid their
attorney fees.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, the amount of the legal fee reimbursed.
It comes out of judgment fund, though, doesn't it, or the
agency funds?
Mr. Walke. Sure. I mean, Mr. Chairman, I would just say
that the law only provides our ability to go to court and
regain fees when the government is breaking the law.
Mr. Whitfield. No, I understand.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Chairman, I just think we should have
those. For whatever reason, we want those dollar amounts.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes. We won't get into a discussion.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Whitfield. Yes?
Mr. Rush. I would also like, if I might, ask the gentleman
if he would include what his win-loss ratio is, the number of
times he sued, the number of times he lost and the number of
times he won against the EPA.
Mr. Whitfield. You want to know how many he won and how
many he lost?
Mr. Rush. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. He wants to know how many you have won and
how many you have lost.
OK. Anyway, so if you would--the number of lawsuits in the
last 10 years, the amount of money that you have been
reimbursed in legal fees when you have won, and how many cases
you consider you won and how many you consider you lost.
Mr. Walke. OK. It might take some time to do that, sir, so
I will just ask your indulgence.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rush. Is it OK if we give him 5 years?
Mr. Whitfield. You and I may not be here in 5 years. Thank
you so much.
Mr. Foglesong, now, you represent the National Cattlemen's
Association. Is that correct?
Mr. Foglesong. The National Cattlemen's Beef Association,
yes.
Mr. Whitfield. And are there cattle producers that are
struggling with meeting the current coarse particulate matter
standard?
Mr. Foglesong. You know, in particular, there are some of
those, you know, in the Southwest. Arizona is a good example of
that, you know, where they have got feed yards, and the expense
that they incur to try to complex is just enough to break them.
They just can't keep it going. But I think--and that what
sticks in your mind, but understand that it can happen anyplace
in the country. We had a map up there earlier that shows those
places that are at risk, but I am from Illinois and we get 40
inches of rainfall but I will guarantee you that last week I
was in that position because it hasn't rained there in 2 months
and the wind was blowing and we are all doing work. So I think
that is one of the things that is a challenge. Our outfit in
Georgia, it was the same thing. We had the worst drought there
in 100 years this spring. Driving up and down our country dirt
roads, every one of them was out of compliance. So all across
the country you run into that, yes, sir.
Mr. Whitfield. And there was great concern about the
strengthening of this emission standard on coarse particulate
matter because that would have changed the standard around the
country and then there would have been areas in nonattainment
and then there would be more enforcement mechanisms, and Mr.
Rogers, you have experienced that personally, it sounds like.
Is that correct?
Mr. Rogers. Yes, sir, that is correct. We farm in Maricopa
County in a nonattainment area.
Mr. Whitfield. So what enforcement mechanisms must you
comply with as a result of being in a nonattainment area in
this coarse particulate matter issue?
Mr. Rogers. Agriculture in Maricopa County was deemed
through modeling to be about 3 percent of the problem of the
Maricopa County area, which is probably a 75-square-mile
county. It is a very large county. We only have 15 counties in
Arizona. And so we were deemed to be 3 percent. You know, you
come to the table with EPA being the 500-pound gorilla because
what they hold over the State's head is the Federal tax
dollars, the highway dollars coming back to the State, so there
is motivation through your local government to come to the
table and participate and so that is what we have done. We have
had to come to the table and design a program with EPA looking
over our shoulder to make sure that every step of the way they
agree with what you are doing to put together your SIP.
Mr. Whitfield. And could you just quickly go through a
couple of----
Mr. Rogers. Sure. We developed a best management practice
program that is mandatory. Farmers do get to choose between
practices under three different categories, diligent
harvesting, cropland, non-cropland, so every part of my
operation I have to be doing something and so it could include
watering roads, it could include parking your tractors during
high wind events where the wind gets to 26 miles an hour, speed
limits on your farm roads where you have to regulate your own
roads that you are in control of, waiting until there is
moisture in the soil before you do tillage, waiting for rain to
bring that moisture, or if you choose to irrigate, that is your
option as well, but there is probably 40 best management
practices that we had to come up with to help agriculture come
to the table, to keep EPA happy and to keep our State happy
because at 3 percent of the problem, they determined that we
need to participate.
We do have a county just south of Phoenix, Pinal County,
which has been recently designated as nonattainment. That is
where the livestock operation is that we talked about before.
That particular livestock operation has taken it upon
themselves to figure out what they can do to get into
attainment. It takes 4 gallons of water per day per cow to meet
the standard, and it is going to be very costly for them to do
that.
Mr. Whitfield. Forty gallons per cow per day?
Mr. Rogers. Four gallons.
Mr. Whitfield. Four?
Mr. Rogers. Four gallons, but it is a large operation so it
is going to cost a lot of money, and with four gallons per day,
they were able to bring that under control and so they are
going to--as we move forward with bringing livestock into our
program, they are actually working with EPA and the State and
that will probably be a mandatory number.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Rush, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Walke, in your written testimony, you take
issue with using the phrase ``farm dust'' as H.R. 1633 is named
and say this bill is really an attempt to force EPA to ignore
harmful soot pollution emitted overwhelmingly by industrial
pollutants like coal-burning power plants, incinerators,
chemical plants and diesel vehicles. Can you explain why you
view this bill as a cover for abolishing the review of health
standards for industrial pollution?
Mr. Walke. Certainly, Mr. Rush. It is notable that the word
``farm dust'' doesn't actually appear in the bill other than
its title. The operative legal term of the bill in its most
harmful bill is in section 3 in the definition of nuisance
dust, and it is simple so I will just tell you the highlights.
Nuisance dust means particulate matter from activities
typically conducted in rural areas or windblown dust. Now, I
just selected out some of those from a string. You know, as I
showed in my testimony, activities typically conducted in rural
areas include power plants, incinerators and manufacturing
facilities and diesel vehicles, and, you know, by this very
short, crisp and overbroad definition, all of those activities
will be defined as particulate matter that could not be
regulated by the Federal Government if the States are doing so,
and the States are doing so, so this bill would deregulate from
Federal Clean Air Act authority those activities. That has
sweeping, sweeping implications that certainly aren't suggested
by the farm dust title and don't even appear to be intended by
some of the members from their statements here this morning.
Mr. Rush. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, earlier there was a line of questioning that
I thought was quite interesting, and it covered areas of legal
fees and the amount of money recouped through legal
representation, and in fairness and in full disclosure, I want
to ask the same question of all the members of the panel.
Please, if you will, provide the lawsuits brought against the
EPA by the American Farm Bureau Federation, the National Stone,
Sand and Gravel Association and the National Cattlemen's Beef
Association, and the fees that were obtained as a result of
those legal actions. And also, I understand that Mr. Blase is
being paid by the Coarse Particulate Matter Coalition, and
would you provide to the committee the full amount that you are
being paid to represent them?
Mr. Chairman, I think that that is for full disclosure, and
would you please provide those amounts for the record?
Mr. Olson. [Presiding] Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Foglesong. Sir, point of clarification. Do you want to
know also what we spent?
Mr. Rush. No, I want to know the fees that you were
provided, and I think that would cover the same territory that
was requested of Mr. Walke. We just want to make sure that
there is full disclosure and there is fair disclosure in terms
of fees that organizations are able to--or remunerations from
the EPA and the matter of lawsuits.
Mr. Burgess. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Rush. I don't know if I have any time.
Mr. Burgess. Well, I would be interested in what they
spent. If we are going to compile that information, let us be
complete.
Mr. Rush. Well----
Mr. Burgess. I would be interested in what you spent. I
will add that to Mr. Rush's request.
Mr. Rush. And so we will also add that to Mr. Walke's
request, what is the amount that your organization spent, the
amount that you spent in terms of court action.
Mr. Walke. On the litigation?
Mr. Rush. Yes, on the litigation.
Mr. Olson. Everybody follow that? Without objection, so
ordered.
Mr. Rush. I yield back.
Mr. Olson. The gentleman's time is expired, and the chair
recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. It is great to have the panel.
Can anyone define for me what ``at this time'' means? Mr.
Foglesong, do you know what ``at this time'' means?
Mr. Foglesong. At this time.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. I am making my point. The point is, when
the Assistant Administrator was here, in her testimony she
said--I read the letter and of course Administrator Jackson
said ``I am prepared to propose a retention with no revision of
the current PM
10
standard form when it is sent to
OMB for interagency review,'' and her response was, we are
going to abide by this at this time. ``At this time'' means
today, right? And there could be tomorrow would not be at this
time. Tomorrow would be tomorrow. Isn't that, for Mr. Foglesong
and Mr. Rogers, Mr. Lien, isn't that part of the risk, the
uncertainty that you are dealing with?
Mr. Rogers. That is completely part of the risk, and as the
monitoring network is developed across this country where there
may not be that intense monitoring network today, as those
monitors are enhanced, that is where ``at this time'' comes
into play. There may be a speed limit across this country but
if there is not an officer there to pull you over, he doesn't
know if you went five over or not. It is a monitoring issue.
Mr. Shimkus. And if you could pull up Mr. Blase's map on
the proposal? Half of the country under a proposed--that is
additional risk to agricultural America.
Everybody knows in this country jobs are impacted, and one
of the major impacts is risk, is uncertainty. That is why we
are doing this today, to at least give the agriculture sector
some certainty.
Now, Mr. Lien, you are from the sand and gravel. Two weeks
ago, I read, you know, the only sector in this country that
created jobs over the last quarter? You should.
Mr. Lien. I would say that----
Mr. Shimkus. It was the mining industry.
Mr. Lien. The mining industry.
Mr. Shimkus. The mining industry was the only sector in
this country that created jobs, and just yesterday, Caterpillar
gave its quarterly report, and Caterpillar did well. You know
what Caterpillar sells? Mining equipment. So there is a debate
on rules and regs and the cost of doing business based upon
uncertainty and job creation, and all this is about is
providing certainty. I would agree with Mr. Hurt that we can--
we are legislators. We sure can legislate when it has harm to
job creation in parts of the country. If she would pull up my
harvester cutting beans? Those are coarse particulates. They
are probably bigger than the PM
10
. Does anyone know
how far those coarse particulates travel?
Mr. Rogers. It depends on if there is wind activity or not,
but those coarse particulates that you can see normally will
settle back down within several hundred feet.
Mr. Shimkus. And that is all part of the rural debate
because there are not people around. In rural America, it is
not like a city. It is not a metropolitan area. In my new
Congressional district, parts of 33 counties, I think my
biggest community is going to have 33,000 people in it. It is
one-third of the State of Illinois. So if we are farming in my
district, which we do, and we are cutting beans, those coarse
particulates are going to fall to the ground way before they
reach any exposure, especially with the air conditioned cabs
these guys have now, so even the person on the harvester is not
going to be affected.
Let me go to Mr. Walke real quick. Administrator Jackson in
essence said that the PM
10
standard really by this
protects human health, the standard today. That is why she is
not going to submit to OMB. Is that the NRDC's position?
Mr. Walke. We are prepared to accept that when she proposes
the rulemaking to not change the standard if----
Mr. Shimkus. So your testimony is that you will not sue if
this continues to be promulgated and the Administration keeps
this as the standard?
Mr. Walke. Mr. Shimkus, that is the first time that word
has come out, and it was your mouth, not mine.
Mr. Shimkus. At this time?
Mr. Walke. At this time, today, now, I am not going to
discuss litigation before I----
Mr. Shimkus. So you might bring this.
Mr. Walke. Mr. Shimkus, if you want--if this is going to be
a----
Mr. Shimkus. No, I am just asking----
Mr. Walke. Let us talk about speculation----
Mr. Shimkus. Reclaiming my time. Mr. Walke, you are very
cavalier with the lives of rural America and agricultural
America, saying in respect to the testimony received that the
PM
10
standard affects their jobs and their economy
so I am just addressing the point that the NRDC is not on
record as saying whether they will or will not----
Mr. Walke. If I may, Mr. Shimkus, this bill removes Federal
Clean Air Act authority----
Mr. Shimkus. And I yield back my time.
Mr. Walke [continuing]. Over 80 percent of America. Eighty
percent of America has Federal----
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back his time.
At this time I recognize the----
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. For what purpose does Mr. Rush----
Mr. Rush. Regular order, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Regular order?
Mr. Rush. Regular order. Mr. Shimkus asked the gentleman a
question.
Mr. Shimkus. I did not, Mr. Rush.
Mr. Rush. Will the reporter please read the last question
that Mr. Shimkus asked?
Mr. Whitfield. Can we just stipulate that Mr. Shimkus did
ask a question----
Mr. Rush. But he----
Mr. Whitfield [continuing]. His time expired and then he
decided he didn't want to----
Mr. Rush. No. He cut him off in the middle of----
Mr. Shimkus. No, that is not true.
Mr. Rush. He cut him off in the middle of the answer.
Mr. Shimkus. That is not true.
Mr. Rush. Will you please give the witness the courtesy of
answering the question? We do that as a formality in this
subcommittee.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Chairman, if you will yield to me, I will
yield the witness 30 seconds to respond.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, Dr. Burgess, I am going to recognize
you for 5 minutes for questions and you can do what you want to
do with it.
Mr. Burgess. The committee has a long history of treating
its witnesses well. I want to recognize the gentleman for 30
seconds to respond.
Mr. Walke. Dr. Burgess, thank you for your professional
courtesy. I will only take 30 seconds of your 5 minutes.
The point I wanted to make in responding to Mr. Shimkus was
that in contrast to imaginary problems or imaginary lawsuits
that no one has any intention of bringing, this bill, if
adopted into law, would remove Federal Clean Air Act authority
over 80 percent of America, which is defined as rural by any
number of government metrics. That has nothing to do with farm
dust but it does have to do with deregulating industrial
pollution from power plants that causes premature deaths and
heart attacks, and that is the only thing I was trying to say.
Mr. Burgess. OK. Reclaiming my time.
Can we go back to that map that had half the country in
blue? Can we recall that slide? You know, I listened to the
testimony of Dr. Wellenius, and in your written testimony, you
talked about most existing epidemiologic studies in coarse
particles have been conducted in urban settings. Most of the
urban settings actually, though are removed from that map that
is covered by the footprint of the coloration. Is that correct?
Mr. Wellenius. So we do the studies where we have monitor
data existing primarily and the EPA sites those monitors. From
the research side, we don't have a say as to where those
monitors are sited. So there are parts of the country that----
Mr. Burgess. The real hot spots for cardiovascular disease,
lung disease, interstitial lung disease, industrial
pneumoconiosis, if you were to color those in on the maps, they
likely would be for the most part outside the blue footprint.
Is that not correct?
Mr. Wellenius. So there are several areas that are in blue
there that do have high air pollution. There are parts of
Texas, parts of Arizona, parts of southern California that do
have high air pollution.
Mr. Burgess. Texas is a huge State. Houston has a problem.
It is miniscule. It can be ignored most of the time as we in
the Dallas-Fort Worth area know well.
But I just would make the point, is there a cost-benefit
analysis you have done? I mean, you want to implement something
on vast swaths of relatively low density population. Have you
done a cost-benefit analysis on how this would affect people's
livelihoods and the status of people overall, the overall
health of people, and how can we be sure sitting here on this
committee that you are not double counting some of these people
that are saved in your studies? How can we be sure you are not
double counting those individuals?
Mr. Wellenius. Right. So----
Mr. Burgess. So there are people that might have been saved
anyway by the effects of the Clean Air Act where this
additional regulation would have only miniscule positive or
negative effect.
Mr. Wellenius. Yes. Thank you. You asked me first the
question of have I done a cost-benefit analysis, and the
response is, I have not. The scientific committee is large and
there are those of us that deal with the health effects of air
pollution, doing the health side, and there are people in the
cost-benefit business that certainly take those effects that we
estimate and also incorporate the costs of regulation and the
costs of lives averted or the hospitalizations averted. I am
not specifically in that area, so no, I have not conducted that
cost-benefit analysis.
Mr. Burgess. OK, so we don't know is the answer to that
question.
Now, Administrator McCarthy had a rather large compendium
of documents next to her as she testified, and this is
described as the Integrated Science Assessment for Particulate
Matter. Are you familiar with this document?
Mr. Wellenius. Yes, I am.
Mr. Burgess. My read of at least a portion of this is that
there is insufficient evidence to determine that coarse
particulate matter causes health effects. That is written on
page 219, third heading, maybe six lines from the end of the
page: ``To date, a sufficient amount of evidence does not exist
in order to draw conclusions regarding the health effects and
outcomes associated with long-term exposure to
PM
10
.'' Is that accurate?
Mr. Wellenius. That is accurate. For long-term effects of
coarse particles, there is next to no evidence in support of
long-term health effects.
Mr. Burgess. Well, and certainly we will stipulate your
credentials and the credentials of everyone at the witness
table today, but one of the tasks that we face is how do you
approach regulation in a way that does not further cripple the
economy, allows witnesses at the other end of the table to
continue their livelihoods and to support their employees and
their families. You know, forgive me, it looks like we are
going on some pretty thin evidence here with some fairly
sweeping regulations, and I guess that is overall what the
concern here is of the committee today, and I think the reason
that Representative Noem brought the legislation forward.
I thank the gentleman for his indulgence and I will yield
back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Dr. Burgess.
Mr. Wellenius. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Whitfield. Yes?
Mr. Wellenius. Thank you. So I agree, you do have an
enviable task and one that I am happy you are doing rather than
me in terms of balancing the public health benefit versus how
to impose those regulations in a sensible manner. You focused
on the long-term effects of long-term exposure to coarse
particulate matter. There is evidence on the short-term
exposure that that is associated with increased
hospitalizations, increased premature death. We need more
research for sure but the current evidence as the Integrated
Science Assessment concludes is suggestive of causal
association. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Olson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair. More importantly, I thank the
witnesses for your time and expertise today. And I am from
southeast Texas, Sugar Land, Texas. There is no equal. As you
guys know, Texas, all of Texas has suffered an historic
drought, excessive heat, over 100 degrees for almost the entire
month of August in Houston, which is unprecedented, and
wildfires all across our State, and ranchers and farmers have
been disproportionately hit by these disasters. And the theme
of this series of hearings that this subcommittee and the full
committee has had is about the uncertainty created by the
administration's regulatory agenda. I want to talk a little bit
about that.
I mean, there has been some testimony in the prior panel
and even on this panel about uncertainty and the fact that, you
know, EPA's promise not to revise the standards for 5 years
provides more certainly than a law, H.R. 1633, would provide,
and I am curious if some of the panelists honestly believe that
the Executive Branch agency action provides more certainty than
a law passed under our Constitution by Congress. I am just
asking for a simple yes or no answer. Mr. Foglesong?
Mr. Foglesong. I don't believe that is exactly how I would
put that out. We look to you all because we vote you into
Congress and we expect you to look out for us.
Mr. Olson. It sounds like Congress over the Executive
Branch agency.
Mr. Foglesong. Absolutely.
Mr. Olson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rogers. I would agree.
Mr. Olson. Yes, sir. Mr. Lien?
Mr. Lien. I would agree.
Mr. Olson. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Blase. I would agree.
Mr. von Wachter. Sir, if your question is whether
regulation reduces uncertainty, that is true. Whether
uncertainty has an impact on economic activity, that is from a
scientific point of view an open question.
Mr. Olson. My question is, what provides more uncertainty,
Executive Branch agency regulations or regulations by laws
passed by Congress? I mean, which one provides more certainty?
What is the more difficult process, going through the
Constitution or going through the Executive Branch? I think the
answer is the Constitution. Wouldn't you agree? Yes or no.
Mr. von Wachter. I think you are better qualified than me
to answer that question.
Mr. Olson. You are an American. You have an opinion.
Mr. Walke?
Mr. Walke. You know, as a matter of law, they are equally
lawful. If the legislative period of relief is short like this
one and the administrative period is longer, than it is the
longer period.
Mr. Olson. OK. And Dr. Wellenius?
Mr. Wellenius. I have no comment.
Mr. Olson. No comment whatsoever? OK.
My final round of questions is for Mr. Blase. Mr. Blase,
can you give a brief history of the last round of the PM
revision and this one, and specifically, is it possible for us
to be in the exact same position in 5 years with farmers,
ranchers and other rural businesses if the EPA chooses to lower
the standard on dust?
Mr. Blase. Oh, yes, absolutely. That is what happened the
last time. It is kind of a complicated thing and I won't go
into all the details, but there has been a debate over--you
know, the current standard for PM
10
includes PM2.5.
It includes fine and coarse. So there has been a debate over
whether the fine should just be kicked out and the coarse PM
standard should only be the top 2.5 to 10. I think my personal
view is, that is probably what is going to happen in the next
review. But in the last review, what happened was, EPA took a
stab at doing just that and regulating true coarse PM. The
problem with that was the concentration limit was way lower
than most of us thought we could meet. Therefore, there was an
exemption proposed for agriculture and mining activities. In
the end, EPA threw up its hands and said we don't know what the
numbers should be, we don't know what the exemptions should be
so we are going to retain the current standard. But yes, the
proposal--if the point is the final rule can look quite
different from the proposal, the last reviews proves that.
Mr. Olson. One final question about the rulemaking. I have
introduced a bill, H.R. 1341, which is called the Establishing
Public Accountability Act. It is very simple. It just requires
the EPA to do some study of the impact of jobs on regulations
and rulemaking, the proposed changes, and it requires them to
do this before the public comment period so the public will
have the opportunity to review what EPA is proposing. And so I
just want to ask all six of you again, seven actually, just yes
or no, do you think that bill will be something you support?
Mr. Foglesong?
Mr. Foglesong. Sure.
Mr. Rogers. Yes.
Mr. Lien. Yes.
Mr. Blase. Yes.
Mr. von Wachter. That was a bit quick for me, but it seems
that if EPA is supposed to look at both the costs and benefits
of their regulation, that that seems a good idea.
Mr. Olson. I will put you down as yes.
Mr. Walke?
Mr. Walke. Is that the Regulatory Accountability Act,
Congressman?
Mr. Olson. Establishing Public Accountability, H.R. 1341. I
can get you a copy of it. But it is very simple, just the
public has the right to know, you know, whether or not this
regulation, this new rulemaking, what the impact is going to be
on American jobs. Either is going to create jobs or kill jobs,
and that is what we need to address here. I think that is the
biggest challenge our country is facing is the lack of jobs in
this recession.
Mr. Walke. Well, I would love to read the bill before
answering that question, if I might.
Mr. Olson. We will hook you up.
And finally, Dr. Wellenius.
Mr. Wellenius. Again, I am here to comment on the science
and the health effects, not on the policy.
Mr. Olson. Thank you, sir.
And that is. I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Olson.
Mr. Pompeo, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Blase, Mr. Walke said that no one had contradicted sort
of the legal statements that Ms. McCarthy set out, and you are
counsel, so I thought maybe you could help me. He also made the
statement that 80 percent of Federal regulatory would be
stripped away by this bill. Would you care to comment on what
you think this legislation would do with respect to the scope
of the EPA's ability to regulate?
Mr. Blase. Yes, I think it is a carve-out for crustal
coarse particulate matter and nothing else is involved. I mean,
power plants, tailpipe emissions, it is all fine PM. I don't
believe these changes are necessary. People think changes are
necessity to this legislation to exclude fine PM. My group
would probably support that. But as I read it right now, I
think it is confined to coarse crustal emissions, which is what
is supported by the science and as it should be.
Mr. Pompeo. So your legal analysis is very different from
Mr. Markey's comments, Ms. McCarthy's statements and Mr.
Walke's testimony.
Mr. Blase. Very different, yes, sir.
Mr. Pompeo. So I have power plants not excluded, school bus
tailpipes, no impacts. This notion of because they are
windblown they will all get caught up in this and we won't be
able to regulate them so they will become law. Nonsense.
Mr. Blase. No, I don't believe it covers those at all.
Mr. Pompeo. OK. Great. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Pompeo.
Mr. Griffith, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Dr. von Wachter, your testimony mentioned
that those who lose their job can experience health problems
that can lead to significant reductions in life expectancy. I
have been concerned about a number of EPA regulations related
to similar things like what happens when you raise the cost of
electricity and the people my district can't afford to heat
their homes. So I would just ask you in regard to the job loss
and then significant reductions in life expectancy, can you
explain that and tell me what you mean by that, and can it
actually shorten a worker's life?
Mr. von Wachter. Absolutely. I would be happy to clarify.
So what we have done, we have looked at workers displaced in
large downsizing Pennsylvania in the early 1980s, and these
were workers at, you know, relatively large, stable firms and
stable jobs and they had very long-lasting earnings losses, and
over the next 20 years they also had increases in mortality
rates, and those who had the larger earnings losses had the
higher increases in mortality rates, and if you add those 20
years up and assumes that the mortality effect lasts until the
end of our lives, which seems to be a fine assumption because
the effects are very stable, then you get to 1.5-year losses in
life expectancy. So this one-time shock, what seems to be a
shock to earnings but also lifestyle, can have these long-term
effects. Now, Pennsylvania in the early 1980s is a very hard-
hit State with the reduction in steel and mining at that time,
so I would characterize that as worst-case scenario.
Mr. Griffith. So what you are saying is, if we are going to
study the health impacts of regulations, we ought to also look
at the unintended consequences if it does have a downturn in
jobs that that could actually negative impact the health of
workers and of a particular community.
Mr. von Wachter. Oh, absolutely. So regulations affecting
certain businesses certainly could lead to job displacement
that has been shown to lead to job displacement and this
displacement takes place in a very depressed economic
environment, that they could have large costs with the affected
workers in terms of earnings but also other outcomes.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Blase, did you want to respond?
Mr. Blase. Yes, I have a brief response to that. Our
coalition has spent some time looking at what is a great
developing body of scientific literature that suggests that
unemployment itself causes adverse health effects, which I
don't think takes an epidemiology study to show for most of us.
However, we have pressed that point with the agency but have
been told repeatedly that they have no legal authority to
consider that aspect. So we will be making the point in our
comments on the upcoming proposal and in other forums, but as
of now, EPA is telling us, you know, the health effects of
unemployment cannot be considered in this equation.
Mr. Griffith. And I know you don't have any study on it but
I think that plays into my fear that when we raise the cost of
goods and services, particularly goods--again, I get back to
heating but also we are talking about these things that could
raise the cost of food products. That makes it particularly
hard on the working poor or the unemployed, and that too would
by common sense seem to have a health impact. Wouldn't you
agree?
Mr. Blase. Yes, I would.
Mr. Griffith. I thank you very much for being here and all
your testimony, and I appreciate, Mr. Walke, there may be a way
to fix that concern of us although based on the definitions, I
recognize that it may not need fixing. That being said, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Rush, do you seek recognition?
Mr. Rush. Mr. von Wachter and Mr. Blase kind of touched on
something I am interested in. You said unemployment has health
consequences for the unemployed. Is that correct?
Mr. von Wachter. So what we can establish is that the job
loss has an effect on health.
Mr. Rush. On health.
Mr. von Wachter. Establishing that unemployment has an
effect is very difficult, because once you lose your job being
unemployed is partly a choice of the worker, so it is not clear
what is cause and effect at that point, but job losses have
been shown to have an effect on health in the short and long
run. It is possible----
Mr. Rush. Did your study include the chronically unemployed
and the underemployed?
Mr. von Wachter. As I said, it is difficult to establish
those effects for those who are chronically unemployed or
currently underemployed just from a statistical point of view.
We don't know what the right comparison group is. Now,
presumably, from what we know, these people are unlikely to do
better but one has to be very careful because unemployment is
itself an outcome. For example, a sick worker might become
unemployed and you don't want to conclude that unemployment
makes you sick, but if you are displaced from a large
downsizing, presumably you were a good worker and that being
displaced from the downsizing doesn't make you sick, so that is
a statement about causality that is easier to back up.
Mr. Rush. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Rush, and thank all of you
for your time and giving us your entire testimony as well as
your oral testimony. We look forward to working with all of you
as we move forward, and thank you very much for attending, and
with that, the hearing is concluded and the record will remain
open for 10 days for any additional materials. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 1:35 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.281

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.282

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.283

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.284

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.285

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.286

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.287

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.288

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.289

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.290

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.291

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.292

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.293

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.294

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.295

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.296

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.297

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.298

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.299

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.300

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6176.301


