- CREATING AN INTEROPERABLE PUBLIC SAFETY NETWORK

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CREATING AN INTEROPERABLE PUBLIC SAFETY NETWORK

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 25, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-51

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-992 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
MARY BONO MACK, California           BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                GENE GREEN, Texas
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
Vice Chairman                      LOIS CAPPS, California
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JAY INSLEE, Washington
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
(ii)

Subcommittee on Communications and Technology

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
LEE TERRY,                           ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Vice Chairman                      EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               DORIS O. MATSUI, California
MARY BONO MACK, California           JANE HARMAN, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                JOHN BARROW, Georgia
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire           Islands
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             HENRY A. WAXMAN, California, ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio
FRED UPTON, Michigan, ex officio

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     4
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, prepared statement......................................     7
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     8
Hon. Cliff Stearns, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Florida, prepared statement.................................   113
Hon. John D. Dingell, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Michigan, prepared statement................................   113

Witnesses

Joseph R. Hanley, Vice President, Technology, Planning and
Services, Telephone and Data Systems...........................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Answers to submitted questions...............................   114
Chris Imlay, General Counsel, American Radio Relay League........    27
Prepared statement...........................................    29
Paul Steinberg, Chief Technology Officer, Motorola Solutions,
Inc............................................................    42
Prepared statement...........................................    44
Answers to submitted questions...............................   123
Dennis Martinez, Chief Technology Officer, Harris RF
Communications Division........................................    55
Prepared statement...........................................    58
Answers to submitted questions...............................   149
Jeffrey D. Johnson, Chief Executive, Western Fire Chiefs
Association, on Behalf of the Public Safety Alliance...........    66
Prepared statement...........................................    68
Answers to submitted questions...............................   159
Joseph L. Hanna, President, Directions...........................    74
Prepared statement...........................................    76
Answers to submitted questions...............................   200

CREATING AN INTEROPERABLE PUBLIC SAFETY NETWORK

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 25, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:34 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Greg
Walden (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Walden, Terry, Stearns,
Shimkus, Bilbray, Bass, Gingrey, Scalise, Latta, Kinzinger,
Barton, Upton (ex officio), Eshoo, Doyle, Matsui, Barrow,
Christensen, Towns, Dingell, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Ray Baum, Senior Policy Advisor/Director of
Coalitions; Neil Fried, Chief Counsel, Communications and
Technology; Debbee Keller, Press Secretary; David Redl,
Counsel, Telecom; Tim Torres, Deputy IT Director; Alex Yergin,
Legislative Clerk; Charlotte Baker, Press Secretary; Phil
Barnett, Democratic Staff Director; Shawn Chang, Democratic
Counsel; Jeff Cohen, Democratic FCC Detailee; Sarah Fisher,
Democratic Policy Analyst; and Roger Sherman, Democratic Chief
Counsel, Communications and Technology.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. I call the hearing to order. Good morning
everyone and welcome. We are here this morning to have a
productive discussion of how spectrum policy can advance public
safety, promote broadband, generate revenue for the U.S.
Treasury, and create jobs. This hearing will focus on how we
can bring new and innovative tools to our Nation's first
responders.
Look, we all share the goal of providing America's first
responders with a state-of-the-art communications network. We
are by no means the first Congress to attempt to bring public
safety these tools. Interoperable public safety communication
has been an objective of this country since even before the
tragic events of September 11 of 2001. Yet even though Congress
and the FCC have tried time and again to provide the tools and
impetus to make this a reality, today's public safety users are
only marginally closer to the interoperable communications they
need. We are here to get it right this time.
Now, what we are not here to do is to point fingers for
past failures. Nobody doubts the good intentions and the hard
work of those who have worked on this issue in the past. But
the fact remains we have not been successful. Today's hearing
gives us an opportunity to hear the lessons of the public
safety community, the wireless sector, and the engineers who
make wireless networks work. Taking the innovation and
expertise of the wireless industry alongside the bravery and
knowledge of the public safety community, we can all work to
provide needed resources to both.
The successful creation and management of an interoperable
public safety network will need to focus on four elements:
spectrum, equipment, governance, and funding.We have provided
public safety with nearly 100 megahertz of spectrum for their
exclusive use. Given that fact, it is strange to me that the
debate on public safety communications has been so focused on
the 700 megahertz D Block. Public safety has more spectrum than
the vast majority of wireless providers, who, as it is oft
cited, provide a 16-year-old customer with more capabilities
than those available to our first responders. As recently as
our 2005 DTV legislation, Congress cleared 24 megahertz of
spectrum for an interoperable public safety network. Yet 6
years later, that spectrum lays woefully underused. In fact,
far from providing next-generation interoperable services, more
than half of that spectrum has been dedicated to the legacy,
narrowband voice communications that NYPD Deputy Chief Charles
Dowd called ``extremely limited'' at our April hearing.
Clearly, something in our approach isn't working. Could we be
better using that 24 megahertz for the broadband network that
public safety needs?
Congress has also tried to address the finances of a public
safety network. Chairman Upton's amendment to the 2005 DTV
legislation provided $1 billion to public safety to help defray
the cost of radios, and, according to the Congressional
Research Service, more than $13 billion in Federal funds have
been invested in public safety communications since 9/11. So I
look forward today to hearing how these resources have been
used to further their intended goals and what we can learn from
how those funds were spent.
Now, the last piece of this equation--the governance of the
network--may indeed be the most difficult and yet most critical
part. We need to figure out how this network should be built,
operated, and maintained. I continue to support the idea of a
public/private partnership between commercial wireless
providers and public safety to address first responders' needs.
Initial FCC efforts to hardwire such a partnership into the
auction of the D Block, however, failed to find a commercial
provider sufficiently interested in purchasing the license.
This failure is widely attributed to poor auction design that
asked bidders to sign up for a vaguely defined obligation to
negotiate with the Public Safety Spectrum Trust--an entity
created to govern the use of the 24 megahertz spectrum for
public safety. We should continue to examine better ways of
creating a public-private partnership.
Public safety radio networks have traditionally been
characterized by local control of nearly all elements of the
network, from choosing the equipment vendors to oversight of
the standards evolution. It is our goal to create a nationwide,
interoperable network, this kind of local communications
fiefdom cannot continue to dominate the public safety
communications debate.
We need to find the right balance between local input and
national coordination. That is why I am glad to see the Public
Safety Alliance has provided us a witness for the second
consecutive hearing on this topic. The Public Safety Alliance
represents a sweeping scope of public safety entities working
together toward a common goal, and interoperable communications
will require a level of coordination far above the local police
and fire chiefs, and a level of wireless expertise that,
frankly, few can provide.
To that end, I believe that any governance structure for
public safety communications should recognize the nationwide
scope of this critical issue and the incredible pace of
innovation in the wireless communications sector. Public safety
wireless devices have begun to lag behind the capabilities
available to commercial users. The end result has been
firefighters and police officers relying on their personal
wireless devices sometimes in times of emergency. That is not
what we want. This cannot be the ``new normal'' for America's
first responders.
I thank the witnesses for their participation today. I
think I can speak for all of us when I say we thank each of you
for your commitment to increasing public safety and look
forward to a vibrant discussion of the communications needs of
America's first responders. With that I yield to the gentlelady
from California, Ms. Eshoo, for her opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

We're here this morning to have a productive discussion of
how spectrum policy can advance public safety, promote
broadband, generate revenue for the U.S. Treasury, and create
jobs. This hearing will focus on how we can bring new and
innovative tools to our Nation's First Responders.
We all share the same goal: providing America's first
responders with a state-of-the-art communications network. We
are by no means the first Congress to attempt to bring public
safety these tools. Interoperable public safety communication
has been an objective of this country since even before the
tragic events of September 11. Yet even though Congress and the
FCC have tried time and again to provide the tools and impetus
to make this a reality, today's public safety users are only
marginally closer to the interoperable communications they
need. We're here to get it right this time.
What we are not here to do is point fingers for past
failures. Nobody doubts the good intentions and hard work of
those who have worked on this issue in the past. But the fact
remains, we have not been successful. Today's hearing gives us
an opportunity to hear the lessons of the public safety
community, the wireless sector, and the engineers who make
wireless networks work. Taking the innovation and expertise of
the wireless industry alongside the bravery and knowledge of
the public safety community, we can all work to provide needed
resources to both.
The successful creation and management of an interoperable
public safety network will need to focus on four elements:
spectrum, equipment, governance, and funding.
We have provided public safety with nearly 100 MHz of
spectrum for their exclusive use. Given that fact, it is
strange to me that the debate on public safety communications
has been so focused on the 700 MHz D block. Public safety has
more spectrum than the vast majority of wireless providers,
who, as it is oft cited, provide 16-year-old customers with
more capabilities than those available to our First Responders.
As recently as our 2005 DTV legislation, Congress cleared 24
MHz of spectrum for an interoperable public safety network. Six
years later, that spectrum lays woefully underused. In fact,
far from providing next-generation interoperable services, more
than half of that spectrum has been dedicated to the legacy,
narrowband voice communications that NYPD Deputy Chief Charles
Dowd called ``extremely limited'' at our April hearing. Clearly
something in our approach is not working. Could we be better
using that 24 MHz for the broadband network public safety
needs?
Congress has also tried to address the finances of a public
safety network. Chairman Upton's amendment to the 2005 DTV
legislation provided $1 billion to public safety to help defray
the cost of radios and according to the Congressional Research
Service more than $13 billion in Federal funds have been
invested in public safety communications since 9/11. I look
forward today to hearing how these resources have been used to
further their intended goals and what we can learn from how
those funds were spent.
The last piece of this equation--the governance of the
network--may indeed be the most difficult and the most
critical. We need to figure out how this network should be
built, operated, and maintained. I continue to support the idea
of a public/private partnership between commercial wireless
providers and public safety to address First Responders' needs.
Initial FCC efforts to hard-wire such a partnership into the
auction of the D block, however, failed to find a commercial
provider sufficiently interested in purchasing the license.
This failure is widely attributed to poor auction design that
asked bidders to sign up for a vaguely defined obligation to
negotiate with the Public Safety Spectrum Trust--an entity
created to govern the use of the 24 MHz of public safety
spectrum. We should continue to examine better ways of creating
a public-private partnership.
Public safety radio networks have traditionally been
characterized by local control of nearly all elements of the
network, from choosing the equipment vendors to oversight of
the standards evolution. If our goal is to create a nationwide,
interoperable network, this kind of local communications
fiefdom cannot continue to dominate the public safety
communications debate. We need to find the right balance
between local input and national coordination. That's why I am
glad to see that the Public Safety Alliance has provided us a
witness for the second consecutive hearing on this subject. The
Public Safety Alliance represents a sweeping scope of public
safety entities working together toward a common goal, and
interoperable communications will require a level of
coordination far above the local police and fire chiefs, and a
level of wireless expertise that few can provide.
To that end, I believe that any governance structure for
public safety communications should recognize the nationwide
scope of this critical issue and the incredible pace of
innovation in the wireless communications sector. Public safety
wireless devices have begun to lag behind the capabilities
available to commercial users. The end result has been
firefighters and police officers relying on their personal
wireless devices in times of emergency. This cannot be the
``new normal'' for America's first responders.
I thank the witnesses for their participation today and I
think I can speak for all of us when I say we thank you for
your commitment to increasing public safety and look forward to
a vibrant discussion of the communications needs of America's
first responders.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having this very
important hearing and to all the witnesses that are here today.
I can't help but think that the most common occurrence in our
hearings is that we're hearing from the private sector. But at
each table here, ours and yours, we are all public servants for
the most part in this. And the importance of what we do and
what needs to be built simply cannot be underscored enough.
This has great significance to our country, the creation of an
interoperable public safety network.
We are approaching the 10th anniversary of the horrific
attack on our country. It's not a source of pride to any of us
that first responders remain unable to seamlessly communicate
with each other. The attacks on 9/11, Hurricane Katrina, and
the shootings at Virginia Tech are among the incidences that
remind us why we need a robust, next-generation public safety
network. We owe it to our first responders. You put your lives
on the line for our country, for our communities every single
day. So there has to be a 21st Century network that's put
together so that you can really carry out what you do so well.
Over the past several years, we've grappled with the
question of how to best build and maintain such a network.
Should we reallocate the D Block or auction the spectrum and
use the proceeds to build out a public safety network as the
FCC's national broadband plan recommended last year? I've given
this question significant thought. And I think the plan we
commit to must be properly funded, which is a big thing. It's a
simple phrase but it needs to be properly funded. And use the
spectrum available to its maximum efficiency and bring forward
the expertise of those in the telecommunications sector as
well.
We have one chance to build this network and we need to do
it right. I don't want to have to revisit this. I don't want
you to come in and say it's broken. Congress does things and if
the legislation doesn't get it right, we don't get back to it
for at least another decade, and I don't think we can afford to
do that at this stage in the life of our country.
I think the recent draft discussion by Senators Rockefeller
and Hutchison offers a well thought out proposal that should be
given consideration within this committee. I strongly believe
that we have to leverage the strength of the private sector and
establish an independent entity that has the responsibility for
building and overseeing the network. I believe that public
safety in our country are expert at public safety. But I also
think that there are expertise that needs to be brought to
public safety that you simply don't possess. I mean there are
some that may know something about it, but our private sector
can really be highly instructive in this.
I want to hear from our witnesses today on how much
spectrum is really needed, what are the next-generation
applications that first responders expect to use, and are there
opportunities to use some of the spectrum to support commercial
broadband networks? We should also give significant
consideration to the devices that public safety will use once a
network is built.
By one estimate, approximately 80 percent of the public
safety narrowband equipment market is held by one company. Last
Congress I joined with Representatives Harmon and Shimkus as a
cosponsor of the Next-Generation Public Safety Device Act,
which would address this serious problem. Spectrum is the
foundation for any national public safety network, but without
a competitive device market, our efforts to achieve
interoperability and lower the cost of public safety devices
could be blocked. We're planning to introduce this legislation
and I would ask the chairman that it be considered as part of
the comprehensive public safety bill that this committee agrees
to.
As we work on the needs of our first responders, we can't
forget about our Nation's 9-1-1 call centers, which are often
the first line of defense for those in distress. Every day, 9-
1-1 call centers receive more than 650,000 calls across the
country. A next-generation 9-1-1 system will enable first
responders to receive photos, video, and text messages, which
can improve the quality and the speed of emergency response. I
think this all needs to be integrated. These upgrades should be
incorporated into comprehensive public safety legislation.
So I thank all the witnesses that are here today for not
only being here today to give us your testimony and your views
but also to the public safety chieftains of our country for
what you do for our communities and our country day in and day
out. I think that you are real heroes of our country. And in
response to your needs, I think that we can produce a
bipartisan, bicameral legislation that will honor your work and
give you the necessary tools to operate a robust interoperable
communication network for our country.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Walden. Thank you. And now I recognize the chairman of
the full committee, who has put an enormous amount of work into
this issue over many years, Mr. Upton, for his statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I share Ms.
Eshoo's enthusiasm and Mr. Walden's as well by putting together
a bipartisan plan that really gets to the finish line.
And today's hearing, as we know, is focused on the
technology and the expertise needed to produce an interoperable
communications network for our Nation's first responders. This
is by no means the first hearing on this issue, nor the first
attempt by Congress to give public safety the tools needed to
make interoperability a reality.
The '05 DTV legislation cleared a 24 megahertz block of
spectrum nationwide for the public safety's exclusive use--a
key recommendation of the 9/11 Commission. I proposed the
amendment that was successful and worked with my friend Mr.
Stupak to that legislation that provided $1 billion for
interoperable equipment. In all, CRS reports that public safety
has been given $13 billion dollars from the Federal Government
for radio equipment since 2001. But despite those tools, the
interoperable network still remains elusive.
The question is what will bring us closer to making
interoperable voice and broadband communications a reality?
Some say we should reallocate the D Block. But current law
requires that spectrum to be auctioned and doing otherwise
would create roughly a $3 billion hole in the budget that most
of us know that we cannot afford.
So today we will discuss ways to meet public safety's
technological needs while leveraging the competition and
innovation that have characterized the commercial wireless
marketplace. The dialogue is a critical component of a winning
public safety strategy. America's commercial wireless providers
are world leaders in technology for sure, spectrum efficiency,
and innovative services. Cooperation between the robust
commercial sector and the critical public safety sector will
not only permit each to focus on what they do best, but will
make both sectors stronger in the tough economy. I now yield to
Mr. Barton.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today's hearing is focused on the technology and expertise
needed to produce an interoperable communications network for
our nation's first responders. This is by no means the first
hearing on this issue, nor the first attempt by Congress to
give public safety the tools needed to make interoperable
communications a reality.
The 2005 DTV legislation cleared a 24 MHz block of spectrum
nationwide for public safety's exclusive use--a key
recommendation of the 9/11 Commission. I proposed the amendment
to that legislation to provide $1 billion for interoperable
equipment. In all, CRS reports that public safety has been
given $13 billion dollars from the federal government for radio
equipment since 2001.
Despite these tools, public safety's interoperable network
still remains elusive.
The question is, what will bring us closer to making
interoperable voice and broadband communications a reality?
Some say we should reallocate the D block. But current law
requires that spectrum to be auctioned and doing otherwise
would create a roughly $3 billion dollar hole in the budget
that we cannot afford.
Today we will discuss ways to meet public safety's
technological needs while leveraging the competition and
innovation that have characterized the commercial wireless
marketplace. This dialogue is a critical component of a winning
public safety strategy. America's commercial wireless providers
are world leaders in technology, spectrum efficiency, and
innovative services. Cooperation between the robust commercial
sector and the critical public safety sector will not only
permit each to focus on what they do best, but will make both
sectors stronger in this tough economy. I thank the witnesses
and look forward to their testimony.

Mr. Barton. Thank you, Chairman Upton. This is a very
important issue. It is a very vexing issue. I mean we can say
that back in 2001 there was a legitimate excuse not to have an
interoperable network, but 10 years later, and as Chairman
Upton just pointed out, $13 billion being spent at the federal
level, the Digital Transition Act, which I helped pass when I
was chairman that freed up 24 megahertz of spectrum for the
public sector, I don't see that there is any real excuse to not
have an interoperable network. And I am not sure it is a
spectrum issue.
In my congressional district in my home county, my firemen,
policemen, sheriff's department have double-digit number of
systems, very few of whom communicate with each other. It is
not a lack of spectrum. It may be lack of funding at the local
level. But, you know, this is an important hearing.
As the subcommittee chairman said, we need to get the
policy right, but we also need some honest answers from our
witnesses about what is going on in the real world. So I
appreciate the opportunity to be here and I appreciate the full
committee chairman and the subcommittee chairman giving this a
priority. And I yield to Congressman Terry of Nebraska.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Barton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joe Barton

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for bringing a comprehensive panel
before the committee to discuss a very important topic:
spectrum. I would like to thank all of our witness for being
here today, and I look forward to hearing from them.
The discussion of ``how to best use our spectrum'' is one
that I know all too well. As Chairman of this committee, I had
the privilege of ensuring that broadcast spectrum was cleared
for public safety and wireless broadband uses through the
passage of the Digital Television Transition and Public Safety
Act of 2005 (DTV). I heard from many public safety witnesses on
the importance of spectrum and the increased need for more
spectrum. The DTV legislation passed during the 109th Congress,
provided public safety with 24 MHz of spectrum, and made
available an additional 10 MHz of spectrum for commercial use
in the D-block.
I believe that before we allocate more spectrum, we should
look at the efficiency and current usage of the available
spectrum. It is to my disappointment to learn that public
safety officials have not effectively used the spectrum
allocated to them. We have yet to see a concrete plan of a
nationwide public safety network, but we hear that there is a
need for more spectrum. As for wireless broadband, I understand
that there has been a major increase in demand from our
consumers, but there is still unallocated spectrum available
that has yet to be successfully auctioned. I hope to gain a
better understanding of why this is the case from this hearing.
I yield back.

Mr. Terry. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I don't think anyone
here doesn't share in the same goal of an interoperable system,
but it is confusing to me as we sit here 5, 6 years after
supposedly putting us on a road to interoperable that we spent
$13 billion, we provided 24 megahertz, and now we are being
told that to solve this problem, we need more money, more
spectrum, and new governance by way of a new government agency,
bureau, whatever we want to call it. Frankly, I don't think any
of those solve the problems. I don't know what the problem is.
But that is why we are having these hearings.
If you aren't using the 24 megahertz properly or
efficiently, why would we give you 10 more? It doesn't make
sense to me. If 13 billion hasn't solved the problem, then what
is? These seem to be overly simplistic requests to solve a
problem. I think the problems are much deeper than this.
The second point I want to make is we have been pushed,
continually asked why don't we just take up the Senate bill?
Well, the Senate bill I don't think really attacks or goes to
the problem. And I am not going to apologize. I will defend
what this subcommittee is doing is deemed diligent, asking the
tough questions and trying to find the right answers to solve
this problem. That is what our job is. And so I want to thank
our subcommittee chairman and our full committee chairman for
being diligent. Yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman's time has expired. We will now
go to the witnesses.
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Walden. Oh, I am sorry. We won't go to the witnesses.
We will go to Mr. Waxman. My apologies. We now go to Mr. Waxman
for----

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for
recognizing me. We have to be diligent, but we have to do more
than that. We have got to solve this problem.
The 10th anniversary of 9/11 is approaching within a few
months. Our goal should be to have legislation on the
President's desk to provide public safety with nationwide
interoperable broadband before then as a tribute to the brave
first responders who risked their lives to save others.
Although there is a broad agreement that we need to get
this done, there are different views on the best way forward.
Some want the FCC to auction the D Block to a wireless provider
and encourage collaboration between the winning bidder and
public safety. Others want Congress to reallocate the D Block
to public safety. Both approaches could work, but recent
developments appear to favor reallocation. The reallocation
approach is strongly preferred by public safety leaders and
President Obama, and it has bipartisan support in the House and
the Senate.
In particular, I want to commend Senator Rockefeller and
Senator Hutchison for their leadership. Senator Rockefeller has
been a tireless champion of the reallocation approach and has
put forth a discussion draft with Senator Hutchison that is
worthy of our careful consideration. Their bipartisan draft
goes a long way towards addressing concerns about governance,
accountability, interoperability, and how we pay for the public
safety network.
Last month, I approached Chairman Upton and Chairman Walden
and suggested that we emulate our Senate counterparts and work
together on a bipartisan House bill that would provide for a
nationwide public safety network and make new spectrum
available through incentive auctions. I hope they will take us
up on this offer.
I appreciate the fact that doing this right is complex and
challenging. But with the 10th anniversary fast approaching, we
need to settle on a path forward and move quickly and the only
way that is going to happen is if we do it together on a
bipartisan basis. There is no reason why Congress cannot act
before this somber anniversary.
This hearing is an important step in this process. We have
a panel of distinguished experts before us today, and I look
forward to their testimony.
Mr. Chairman, I want to yield the balance of my time to my
colleague from California, Ms. Matsui.
Ms. Matsui. I thank the ranking member for yielding to me.
And I also would like to thank the witnesses for being with us
today.
This is our second hearing on spectrum this year, and I
understand we will have a third next week. As we continue to
consider spectrum policy, it is my hope that some of the
outstanding issues out there will be answered so we can move
forward and determine how best to proceed in a bipartisan
manner. I plan to follow up on my questions from the last
spectrum hearing we had last month regarding who will govern
and oversee the public safety network that would ultimately
possess significant responsibilities. It will have
responsibility over highly valuable spectrum and significant
public funding, not to mention needing to ensure the success of
this vitally important network for first responders.
That being said, we must provide public safety with
interoperable capabilities they need and deserve to protect our
Nation during challenging times. We are all very cognizant as
we approach the 10th anniversary of the tragic events of
September 11. It is not acceptable that our Nation does not
have a public safety communications system with a nationwide
level of interoperability in place. More recently, we are
seeing how tragic events such as the tornadoes in the Midwest
have hampered emergency communication efforts in some areas.
While we debate the merits on how to fund and construct a
nationwide public safety system, we can all agree that we must
find a path that provides the funding required to build an
interoperable system that fulfills the needs and securities of
our public safety goals. We must also do it in a fiscally
responsible manner. It won't be easy but we must get there, and
we must get there soon.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this important
hearing, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Walden. I thank the gentlelady. We will move on now to
the witnesses, get this order right.
We will start with Mr. Steinberg. We appreciate your
willingness to come and testify, the chief technology officer
for Motorola Solutions. Sir, you know how to use a microphone.
Yes, if anybody can't figure out the microphones, that is going
to be at least a 2-meg penalty on your spectrum.
Mr. Steinberg, go ahead.
Mr. Steinberg. Thank you, Chairman Walden, Ranking Member
Eshoo, and others members of the subcommittee.
Mr. Walden. But I think you actually have to push it. Does
it light up?
Mr. Steinberg. Yes, is green go?
Mr. Walden. You may have to get a little close to these
microphones.
Mr. Steinberg. Is that OK?
Mr. Walden. No.
Mr. Steinberg. The right green button?
Mr. Walden. No.
Mr. Steinberg. No?
Mr. Walden. Maybe we should grab that other microphone. Why
don't you just grab Mr. Martinez's microphone if it will move
there. Maybe we can get our technical people in here and rewire
the whole process.
Mr. Steinberg. Is that working? How is that?
Mr. Walden. Get real close.
Mr. Steinberg. Hello?
Mr. Dingell. Try and use your big boy voices.
Mr. Steinberg. It is also----
Mr. Walden. Well, exactly. Yes. No, we got to get a
microphone that works here. Mr. Hanley, will you try your
microphone? Why don't we start with Mr. Hanley and we will have
our technical operations officers come and fix Mr. Steinberg's
microphone and Mr. Martinez's microphone.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Chairman, we may be able to set an example
by sharing if we can't get it to work.
Mr. Walden. Yes, right. So let us go to Mr. Hanley first
while we get the mikes fixed. Vice president, Technology,
Planning, and Services for Telephone and Data Services. Mr.
Hanley, please go ahead.

STATEMENTS OF JOSEPH R. HANLEY, VICE PRESIDENT, TECHNOLOGY,
PLANNING AND SERVICES, TELEPHONE AND DATA SYSTEMS; CHRIS IMLAY,
GENERAL COUNSEL, AMERICAN RADIO RELAY LEAGUE; PAUL STEINBERG,
CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER, MOTOROLA SOLUTIONS, INC.; DENNIS
MARTINEZ, CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER, HARRIS RF COMMUNICATIONS
DIVISION; JEFFREY D. JOHNSON, CHIEF EXECUTIVE, WESTERN FIRE
CHIEFS ASSOCIATION, ON BEHALF OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ALLIANCE;
AND JOE HANNA, PRESIDENT, DIRECTIONS

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH R. HANLEY

Mr. Hanley. Thank you. Chairman Walden, Chairman Upton,
Ranking Member Eshoo, Ranking Member Waxman, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to provide U.S.
Cellular's perspectives on this important issue. Today's topic
is of great importance to all of us as citizens who rely on our
first responders for our safety and as consumers and businesses
that need mobile broadband to create jobs and compete in the
global economy.
The public interest requires a strategy that can deliver on
both of these goals. First, we must provide nationwide
interoperable broadband services for public safety. This
network must serve the entire Nation, not just a few select
communities, and it must be provided at the lowest cost to
taxpayers by leveraging commercial operators' networks,
capabilities, and shared use of the spectrum, as well as
harnessing market forces to reduce the cost of devices and
equipment.
Second, we must expand competitive broadband services for
consumers. Broadband is a powerful catalyst for economic
growth. However, spectrum is increasingly concentrated in the
hands of a few carriers, and more spectrum is needed to ensure
the availability of advanced services, competition, and
consumer choice.
The good news is that these two goals are highly
complementary, and your decision does not have to be couched as
for one and against the other. Shared networks and shared use
mean lower costs and better services for all users of the
network. Also, the D Block and the public safety block share
the same band class, band class 14 in the LTE standard.
In today's world, public safety agencies may pay several
thousand dollars for a single handset that works on public-
safety-only networks. The economies created by combined the
commercial and public safety user base will drive cost-
effective equipment for this band and enable public safety to
benefit from the ongoing innovation driven by the commercial
market.
FCC studies also point to the benefits of the shared
network approach. An FCC white paper concluded that a stand-
alone public safety network would cost as much as $20 billion
more by failing to leverage commercial resources and
technologies.
Now, a casual observer of this protracted debate might
conclude that it all boils down to a binary choice between
holding an auction for D Block licenses versus reallocating the
spectrum to public safety. In fact, neither approach ensures
nor precludes the optimal network build and operation. Rather,
each approach requires that Congress and the FCC adopt a
framework promoting regional partnerships that leverage the
best commercial networks in each area.
This framework must ensure that (1) sufficient funding is
available to build and operate and maintain a high quality
network in rural and urban areas; (2) public safety enters into
partnerships with commercial operators that leverage the
experience and network assets of those operators; (3) the
network is designed to be fully interoperable and is deployed
and used with spectral efficiency in mind, recognizing the
scarcity of this national resource; and (4) fair long-term
opportunities are provided for a range of qualified commercial
operators to partner with public safety and those operators can
use available capacity on the network wherever feasible.
In conclusion, Congress and FCC must go beyond choosing
between holding an auction of D Block licenses and reallocating
the spectrum to public safety. U.S. Cellular is prepared to
support either approach, provided the needed safeguards are
adopted. Without those safeguards, we all risk missing the
opportunity that is before us today. An incomplete solution
could result in sporadic coverage that favors urban markets and
leaves rural communities behind, needlessly inflates the cost
of equipment for public safety users, permits the inefficient
use of the spectrum, fails to spur competition, and adds to the
burden on the taxpayer.
The worst course of action, however, is continued inaction.
While we have studied and debated the right course to take, we
have left the D Block and most of the public safety block idle.
This inaction has meant no interoperable public safety network,
it has foreclosed spectrum from commercial uses, and is has
deprived the Federal Treasury as well as public safety of
revenues from this spectrum. Now is the time to advance the two
complementary goals of meeting public safety needs and
expanding competitive wireless broadband services for consumers
by adopting a framework that encourages shared public-private
networks and regional public-private partnerships.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this testimony and
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hanley follows:]

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Hanley.
We will go next to Mr. Imlay, who is the general counsel
for the American Radio Relay League, known more informally as
the Ham Radio Operators. So Mr. Imlay, we are glad to have you
here. We look forward to your testimony, sir.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS IMLAY

Mr. Imlay. Thank you very much, Chairman Walden and members
of the committee. Is it a great honor and a privilege to appear
before you today and to represent the interest of the 700,000
amateur radio operators in the United States. We are not first
responders, but we are proud to provide support communications,
emergency restoration communications, and emergency temporary
interoperability communications for first responders and for
those involved in local and regional disaster relief. The ARRL
has memoranda of understanding with FEMA, with the National
Communication System, and the Department of Defense, with the
American National Red Cross, the Salvation Army, and the
National Weather Service, and we routinely are involved in that
period of time during and immediately after the occurrence of a
natural disaster in the United States when communications
systems are disrupted, overloaded, or fail.
We are very much supportive of both the creation of a
nationwide interoperable broadband network for public safety.
It has been proven to be an absolute necessity. And we are also
supportive of the allocation of the D Block to public safety as
well. In the immediate aftermath of a natural disaster, the
ability of any network to provide interoperable communications
is going to necessitate a certain amount of bandwidth.
Bandwidth translates into the ability of public safety
officials to communicate large volumes of traffic which are the
inevitable need for immediate post-disaster communications.
There is before the subcommittee now H.R. 607, which
provides for both the creation of a nationwide broadband
network and for the reallocation of the D Block to public
safety. Those are admirable goals and the amateur radio
community supports them. The problem, though, with H.R. 607 is
that Section 207(d) of that bill provides uniquely for a
commercial auction and reallocation of the 420 to 440 megahertz
and 450 to 470 megahertz bands. They are referred to in the
bill as ``paired bands,'' but they are really not. The concept
apparently behind that Section 207(d) is that as a quid pro quo
for the allocation of the D Block, these 2 segments of spectrum
would be reallocated and auctioned as a means of paying for the
creation of the broadband network using the D Block.
The problem is that those frequency segments would displace
a number of critical uses. In addition to the amateur service
in the 420 to 440 megahertz band, the United States Government
uses that band for military radars, including PAVE PAWS radars
for early detection of offshore surface launch missiles. And
they also use the band for airborne radars for drug
interdiction purposes.
In the 450 to 470 megahertz segment, there are many
thousands of business and industrial radio uses which supports
small business in the United States for dispatch
communications. Broadcast radio stations use that segment for
remote pickup units to provide breaking news to the American
public. The band is used for security and alarm systems for the
station monitoring security industry. And they are many other
uses. These are not public safety allocations. And the
displacement of all of these important uses in these two band
segments is not necessary to the creation of an interoperable
public safety network.
We urge the deletion of Section 207(d) of H.R. 607 if the
subcommittee decides to use this version of this legislation in
any future markup.
And we are grateful for the opportunity to bring these to
your attention. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Imlay follows:]

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Imlay. We appreciate your
testimony. It is part of why we are having these hearings, to
find out who is using what spectrum and the various issues.
Mr. Steinberg, I have been advised you should test your
microphone to see if it works now.
Mr. Steinberg. How is that?
Mr. Walden. Keep talking.
Mr. Steinberg. Keep talking? I will keep talking. Still
talking.
Mr. Walden. All right. All right. Mr. Hanley, will you just
help us out here and move your mike down to Mr. Steinberg.
Mr. Steinberg. Would you like me to just speak loudly?
Mr. Walden. No, because----
Mr. Hanley. Testing.
Mr. Walden. There we go. Is yours working, Mr. Martinez?
Mr. Martinez. No, it is not.
Mr. Walden. Oh, OK. Don't pull too hard. You will have to
get out a soldering iron. Mr. Steinberg, please.

STATEMENT OF PAUL STEINBERG

Mr. Steinberg. Thank you, Chairman Walden, Ranking Member
Eshoo, and other members of the Subcommittee for this
opportunity to testify on the topic of Interoperable Public
Safety Communications. My name is Paul Steinberg and I am the
chief technology officer of Motorola Solutions, Incorporated.
Prior to my current position, I worked at Motorola Networks,
where I was their chief architect for cellular and broadband
commercial infrastructure products serving customers such as
Verizon.
Motorola Solutions--formerly Motorola, Incorporated--has
been committed to innovation in communications and electronics
for more than 80 years. Motorola has served the public safety
sector continuously over these 8 decades, and the company is
very proud of its history in this regard. Motorola has remained
committed to the marketplace and has listened closely to needs
of public safety and providing public safety with reliable,
state-of-the-art equipment and innovative solutions.
There are three key points that I would like to emphasize
from my written testimony. Point number one, based on a
detailed analysis, public safety will need broadband capacity
that will surpass what would be afforded by the 10 megahertz
the Public Safety Spectrum Trust sector below. We recently
confirmed this by working with public safety officials on
network capacity analyses to understand how broadband networks
can enhance emergency response and better protect the safety of
all involved. During these scenarios, we found that a network
infrastructure based solely on the existing 10 megahertz public
safety allocation will struggle to provide the necessary
capacity forthcoming. Adding the additional 10 megahertz D
Block spectrum would effectively double the network capacity
for public safety and improve incident response. It is
important to remember that not only does the catastrophic event
that benefits from this increased spectrum, day-to-day
situations ranging from an overturned gasoline tanker on the
expressway to storms and tornadoes, toxic situations in a
residence can all benefit from the enhanced situational
awareness, command and control, and that is enabled through
this additional spectrum.
Point number two, FCC Chairman Genachowski has stated as
recently as last Thursday at the CIA conference that broadband
spectrum needs are predicted to grow 35 times in the next few
years. Consumer use and demand for broadband application is
indeed exploding, as are public safety's broadband
requirements.
Point number three, there are additional costs that need to
be factored into an auction scenario that we believe will
quickly offset the proceeds of an auction. These costs are
driven by two main items: the need for additional capacity that
public safety will have to secure and pay for when carriers
exhaust their 10 megahertz of capacity. A little-known fact is
that today public safety spends about $2 billion handling for
carrier services and an independent analyst projects that this
will climb to over $5 billion handling in 5 years.
The second incremental cost is the need to mitigate the
interference between a commercially-operated D Block and the
adjacent PS base. The equipment cost or capital expenditure to
build out a 20 megahertz LTE network with the D Block allocated
is basically the same as to build out 10 megahertz LTE network.
However, the cost to build the network with 10 megahertz
initially and to add additional spectrum later would be
considerably more.
We all share a common goal of equipping our first
responders with the best and most innovative technology
possible so that they can safely and effectively perform their
mission. In order to achieve this, we at Motorola Solutions
certainly support the commitment for nationwide
interoperability, leverage of commercial standards such as
through the LTE and private-public partnership. These need to
be coupled with sound spectrum policy. We have a unique
opportunity to carve out spectrum that provides the best
current capabilities and economics for public safety while
maximizing future options as the technology evolves.
So in conclusion, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Eshoo, and
other members of the subcommittee, Motorola Solutions welcomes
the opportunity to compete in a standards-based environment to
help public safety realize its vision to have a truly
interoperable nationwide broadband network. We look forward to
working with the subcommittee to further realize our shared
vision of a competitive market providing innovative solutions
for public safety communications. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Steinberg follows:]

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Steinberg. We appreciate your
participation in the hearing. Dr. Martinez, we will go to you
next, the chief technology officer with Harris RF
Communications Division. We appreciate your being here as well,
sir.

STATEMENT OF DENNIS MARTINEZ

Mr. Martinez. Well, good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member, and members of the committee. First, let me thank you
for inviting me to testify about key steps that must be
achieved rapidly to develop and deploy a truly interoperable
nationwide public safety broadband network.
Let me begin by first introducing you to the Harris
Corporation. Harris is an international communications and
information technology company serving commercial and
government markets worldwide. Headquartered in Melbourne,
Florida, the company has approximately 16,000 employees, annual
revenues of approximately $6 billion, and nearly 7,000
engineers and scientists. Harris is a leading global supplier
of secure radio communications products, services, and systems,
embedded high-grade encryption software and products for the
military, government, and public safety purposes. Harris is a
pioneer in the development of internet protocol, or IP-based
networks for private radio and broadband applications. We
supply the industry with market-leading narrowband, broadband,
and multiband networks, services, and devices.
I serve as the CTO of Harris Corporation's RF
Communications Division. I also chair the FCC's Emergency
Response Interoperability Center, Public Safety Advisory
Committee, Security and Authentication Work Group. I have spent
most of my career bringing advanced technologies to public
safety, national defense, and homeland security markets. In
these roles, I have learned how leveraging commercial
technology innovation can have a profound impact on our
Nation's ability to procure and deploy state-of-the art
products and services for these mission-critical markets. I
have also seen that a robust supply chain fostered by
appropriate business models and multi-source procurement
practices must be implemented to ensure that all levels of
government will procure these capabilities in a cost-effective
manner.
Today, Smartphones, supported by a vast ecosystem of
application providers, have unleashed enormous capabilities of
modern 3G and 4G wireless networks. These capabilities
literally are revolutionizing the socioeconomic structure of
the world. However, our Nation's first responders, charged with
protecting lives and property, are not yet able to take full
advantage of this capability. Public safety must be enabled to
leverage broadband technology in ways that will leverage and
significantly enhance their ability to perform their missions.
It is time for our Nation to build this hardened nationwide
interoperable broadband network in the 700 megahertz dedicated
spectrum. We support the reallocation of D Block spectrum to
public safety and we commend Congress' examination of this
critical issue.
Two key ingredients--policies that have opened the 700
megahertz broadband spectrum to public safety and the
availability of broadband technology--now enable construction
of this nationwide network. It is now time to finalize two
final elements: governance and procurement.
The broadband network, properly constructed, will serve
first responders and government agencies charged with the
public safety mission, and this involves federal, state, local,
and tribal organizations. Establishing a governance structure
to ensure nationwide interoperability among these organizations
is essential. While we must provide this interoperability
capability, we must also ensure that we are addressing the
interoperability requirements that are unique to each of those
organizations.
For example, the city of Los Angeles, by virtue of its
size, population, and geographic location has needs that differ
from a smaller inland location such as Bend, Oregon. A key goal
in creating a relevant governance structure for all is to
ensure that these stakeholders can participate in the
establishment process and ongoing governance structure that is
created.
The activities of the FCC Commission in the past and
ongoing rulemakings are to be applauded. They serve as a model
for governance in matters outside of their jurisdictional
authority. A governance entity must oversee all aspects of the
network lifetime cycle, through design, implementation,
operations, and maintenance. That entity must ensure
implementation of a procurement model that ensures the
achievement of nationwide interoperability.
In this regard, we must now finalize a regulatory framework
and determine what interoperability means as a threshold
matter. Considerable time and effort has been spent defining
interoperability from technical and operational perspectives.
Here we want to discuss what interoperability means from the
perspective of governance and procurement. Indeed, technical
and operational considerations alone will not yield the desired
outcome. I do repeat, indeed, technical and operational
consideration alone will not yield the desired outcome.
We can draw from many examples of success in the commercial
world. As consumers and users in the commercial world, we
understand what this means. It means we can procure these items
in an open and competitive environment. Our expectations drive
the need not just for interoperability, but beyond that,
interchangeability. We choose the device that suits our needs,
on the network that provides the service we require, in a
highly competitive and innovative market. Market demands drive
commercial service providers to deliver interoperability. In
turn, commercial service providers drive interchangeability
throughout their supply chain to ensure uninterrupted
availability of competitive and innovative products. Their
business success relies on having multiple sources within their
supply chain. This is the model that should guide the
governance structure and procurement process for this network.
In this way, interoperability will become not just a mandate;
it will become the outcome.
Interoperability, therefore, is the ability to procure the
devices--network building blocks--that are fully
interchangeable. This definition will allow our first
responders to purchase equipment in a highly competitive and
innovative environment. They can purchase this equipment with
confidence that it will plug-and-play. Creating this market
dynamic will require funding mechanisms that drive this model.
And finally, let me close by saying that it is essentially
that we ensure economic viability of the public safety
broadband network. The need for federal funds to launch the
initiative is well understood. Also understood are the
challenges in this difficult financial time. Here, we want to
discuss how these challenges can be alleviated.
First is the benefit of leveraging a vast commercial
ecosystem. Second is to realize the savings that will come
about through a competitive business practice, a competitive
procurement practice. And third is that we will move to a
converged network with converged devices and that convergence
process itself will save enormous cost in the future.
In conclusion, the public safety broadband network will
bring unprecedented capabilities to our Nation's first
responders and agencies that support the public safety mission.
Built on a competitive market and the latest broadband
standards, supported by this ecosystem, this network will
enable interoperability to become a reality.
Once again, Mr. Chairman, I want to applaud the committee's
leadership on this issue, and I appreciate the opportunity to
testify today. I look forward to further working with you in
the future to make this a reality.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Martinez follows:]

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Dr. Martinez. We appreciate your
testimony and comments. We are going to go now to Mr. Johnson,
Jeffrey Johnson, Chief Executive, Western Fire Chiefs
Association on behalf of the Public Safety Alliance, Bend,
Oregon Fire League. So we are delighted to have you here.

STATEMENT OF JEFFREY D. JOHNSON

Mr. Johnson. Thank you, sir. Good morning, Chairman Walden,
Ranking Member Eshoo, and members of the subcommittee. I am
Jeff Johnson, immediate past president of the International
Association of Fire Chiefs and the chief executive of the
Western Fire Chiefs Association. And today I testify on behalf
of the Public Safety Alliance, which represents nine
associations representing all the leadership in the public
safety community.
In the past 50 years, America's domestic defenders have
been allocated thin slices of spectrum in each new band as it
became available. That is why today we have more than 55,000
public safety agencies each operating its own mission critical
radio system over six or more different radio bands. Connecting
disparate frequency slices among and between agencies and
jurisdictions to achieve interoperability requires the
purchase, programming, and deployment of electronic patching
equipment operating under a governing protocol. This makes our
goal of interoperability limited, difficult, and expensive.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Johnson. Let me stop you for a second. Can
you try your mike? Apparently, we are having--got it. All
right. Mr. Johnson, if you would like to resume your testimony.
I apologize for the interruption.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, sir. Following numerous major
events and other significant disasters which demonstrate
communications failures, we know that a new model is necessary.
Required is a national architecture for public safety wireless
communications.
To create and construct a nationwide public safety wireless
broadband network, three key ingredients are requisite: the D
Block spectrum, number one; number two, federal funding; and
number three, a governance structure which makes it all
operate.
To achieve connectivity coast-to-coast and border-to-
border, the 10 megahertz block of D Block spectrum, currently
slated for auction by the FCC, must be added to the 10
megahertz of spectrum licensed to Public Safety to build out a
network with sufficient capacity. Local control of the network
by public safety agencies is critical. Utilizing a single
technology with adequate spectrum will ensure nationwide
interoperability and allow us to effectively manage day-to-day
operations, as well as major events.
Public safety expects to enter into a public-private
partnership with states, counties, local governmental agencies,
federal partners, utilities, and other agencies such as water
and highways who respond to emergency incidents routinely. But
public safety must have control over the operation of the
network in real time to give public safety assurance that they
will have full preemptive priority over its spectrum on a when-
needed basis. The network must be ``mission critical'' from the
outset. In the beginning, this system will handle only data and
video. At some future time--years away--we believe there will
be a migration to mission critical voice over this broadband
network. This migration will happen only when technology is
developed and tested and public safety has confidence in it and
it is affordable.
Funding is important for the build-out of the public safety
broadband network. The Public Safety Alliance supports the
auction of spectrum by the FCC--from incentive auctions,
auctions of the unsold portion of the Advanced Wireless
Spectrum, or auctions of designated federal spectrum--with the
proceeds priority-marked for funding the construction,
operation, and maintenance of a nationwide public safety
network.
A governance structure must be created to manage and
operate this new nationwide public safety broadband network.
Key among the seven Public Safety Alliance guiding principles
listed in my written testimony are, number one, that Public
Safety First Responder delegates constitute a majority of the
governing body; and second, the Public Safety 10 megahertz and
the D Block megahertz would be combined under a single license
issued to the governing body.
Public safety is supported in its quest for the D Block by
the ``Big 7'', the seven national associations which represent
state and local governments. We also are supported by the two
top U.S. telecommunications carriers, as well as primary
manufacturers of telecommunications equipment.
The 9/11 Commission recommended in its report that an
interoperable communications system be established for public
safety. At a Senate hearing on March 30, former commission
chairman Governor Thomas Kean said, ``We support the immediate
allocation of the D-block spectrum to public safety. We must
not approach these urgent matters at a leisurely pace. We don't
know when the next attack or disaster will strike. Further
delay is intolerable. We urge the Congress to act.''
Mr. Chairman, I thank you and this subcommittee for today's
hearing on this vital issue for public safety. I am looking
forward to answering any questions you may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Johnson. We appreciate your
testimony as well. Now, we will go for our final witness, Mr.
Joe Hanna, President of Directions. Mr. Hanna, welcome, and
hopefully your microphone works.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH L. HANNA

Mr. Hanna. Let us hope so.
Chairman Walden and Ranking Member Eshoo, members of the
committee, my name is Joe Hanna and I currently serve as the
president of Directions, which is a public-safety-focused
wireless telecommunications consulting practice. Prior to
starting this practice, I retired from public safety
communications and the public policy arena after 30 years of
service. The comments I have prepared for today's hearing are
solely my views and should not be construed as representing any
client or past affiliation.
I operate from the assumption that everyone in this room
agrees that our first responders should have the tools they
need to serve the public, including access to state-of-the-art
communications systems. Some of us, however, fail to agree on
the fact that there are two distinct and viable paths that can
provide public safety with the wireless broadband services that
they need and deserve.
Congress has provided public safety with 24 megahertz of
spectrum in the 700 meg band. If prudently utilized, this
allocation can provide public safety with the capacity they
need for day-to-day needs. Using that capacity in conjunction
with commercial spectrum in the 700 megahertz band, as proposed
in the FCC's National Broadband Plan, will give public safety
the bandwidth necessary for situations in which the public
safety allocation may become overloaded. The difference between
those pressing the reallocation to the D Block to public safety
and that of the paradigm envisioned in the National Broadband
Plan is that the LTE platform now standardized as the
interoperable vehicle for a public safety network provides an
automatic, seamless, priority-accessible mechanism that can be
triggered in the event of an overload of the baseline public
safety network.
Equally as important, partnering with commercial entities,
a cornerstone to the National Broadband Plan, will allow first
responders to take advantage of both reductions in the cost of
building the core network while taking advantage of the
benefits of commercial networks and the economies of scale for
user devices needed by the first responders.
I wholeheartedly agree with my public safety counterparts
that the core of this proposed public safety broadband network
should be centered around a dedicated public-safety-grade
broadband network. And this network should recognize no
distinction between urban, suburban, and rural boundaries. My
fellow panelists and I also seem to agree that the widespread
financial crisis facing cities, counties, and States throughout
the Nation will now allow America to realize the nationwide
implementation of a dedicated public safety network without an
infusion of federal funds.
I would also like to note that several legislative
proposals that have emerged around this debate the past year
will help public safety use the spectrum that they have been
allocated more effectively by providing for the flexible use of
700 megahertz public safety spectrum currently allocated for
narrowband communications. Failure to provide this flexibility
will result in critically needed spectrum lying fallow in many
parts of the Nation.
The greatest flaw that I see in reallocation of the D Block
to public safety in lieu of the current law and the proposals
of a National Broadband Plan, however, will be the unintended
consequences of creating an island ecosystem. With no
commercial economies of scale, public safety will again find
itself held hostage by a limited number of providers resulting
in the same low-volume, high-cost marketplace faced every day
in the public safety land mobile environment.
Additionally, budget estimates for a public safety network
is calculated for the National Broadband Plan were based on a
model in which the dedicated public safety network would be
built in conjunction with commercial rollouts of LTE networks.
The broadband cost estimates for a standalone public network
more than triples the cost of a shared deployment. With a
shortfall in federal funds, public safety will be faced with a
difficult choice of determining either how to ask Congress for
billions of additional dollars of funding or to choose where
the network will be built and where it will not be built.
Instead of building a bridge to nowhere, we are now faced
with building half a bridge, then forcing you to the
unnecessary expenditure of additional billions of dollars to
complete the bridge or leaving a substantial portion of
America's first responders without the broadband service they
deserve.
One of the most significant issues that must be addressed
by any legislation considered by this Congress is the provision
for a well-defined governance and administrative structure that
will be required for the deployment of this initiative. Let
there be no doubt; this proposed multibillion-dollar venture is
massively complex. If we fail to adequately address the issue
of governance and administration of this effort at the outset,
we guarantee extended delays in implementation, massive
needless cost, and failure to have services implemented
nationwide in an acceptable time frame.
Last, we must be cognizant of the fact that we have other
equally-pressing public safety communication demands that must
not be overlooked as precious and limited federal resources are
budgeted.
Subcommittee Member Shimkus and Eshoo, who were both
cofounders of the Next Generation 9-1-1 caucus, they are well
versed in the needs of the Nation's public safety answering
points to upgrade their 9-1-1 capabilities to bridge this
critical length in the public safety continuum. At the end of
the day, we must all recognize the fact that there is a finite
pool of funds, and we must ensure that we responsibly address
the myriad telecommunications requirements needed to serve both
the public and our first responders.
Again, I would like to thank you for the invitation to
speak before this committee, and I would be glad to answer any
questions you have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hanna follows:]

Mr. Walden. Thank you very much, Mr. Hanna. I appreciate
your comments, your testimony. I really think we have got a
terrific panel of witnesses that really span the spectrum of
the topic we are discussing today, from the technical level to
the user level. And so we appreciate all your testimony.
I would ask unanimous consent--we have two letters from the
FCC Chairman Genachowski in response to congressional inquiries
on public safety equipment. We have Motorola's response to the
same letter to the FCC in a report from Congressional Research
Service on federal funds spent on public safety radios. I ask
unanimous consent that they be made part of the record. And I
would recommend to my colleagues on the committee on both sides
to take advantage of actually reading these documents. A lot of
work has gone into the answers, which I think will play into
whatever we do legislatively.
I will start off with questions.
Mr. Hanley, first of all, I want to confirm a statement
that you made that a standalone public safety network would
cost in the order of $20 billion. Is that what you testified
to?
Mr. Hanley. Thank you for the question.
Mr. Walden. Please turn on your----
Mr. Hanley. OK.
Mr. Walden. There you go. Just get real close to it.
Mr. Hanley. Better? OK.
I think I was referencing the FCC's analysis of that
question. You know, clearly, a network that leverages existing
cell towers, existing radio equipment is going to be much more
cost-effective than one that starts from scratch.
Mr. Walden. All right. I want to ask you and Mr. Hanna.
Part of what we are looking here at is the 24 megahertz that
public safety was given as part of DTV. Ten of it is currently,
as I understand it, being used for broadband. There is a 2
megahertz sort of barrier wall between that and push-to-talk
technology. As we look at that, it looks to me like at some
point in time, there is another at least 12 megahertz that
could be dedicated to broadband and perhaps LTE, whatever,
which is more than what we are talking about in D Block. So I
guess the question I am trying to resolve is what can be done
today with 10 megahertz of broadband spectrum? And might that
be enough to close this gap in terms of technology and migrate
everybody into an interoperable broadband network that uses
that 10 megahertz that is now, frankly, not being very
efficiently used, although push-to-talk is a communication. I
mean, I got all that with the new technology. So, you know, we
are talking 2 to 3 billion users, not 100 million users like
some of the commercial providers have on 10 megs. So could that
10 or 12 megs be used for broadband and satisfy this
interoperable need? Mr. Hanna, do you want to start? And then
Mr. Hanley.
Mr. Hanna. Well, I think the question is well asked. There
is, unfortunately, a conflict with part of the spectrum at 700
meg public safety allocation, and that is that there are--
although not widely deployed--there are a number of large 700
meg narrowband systems already deployed or in the process of
being deployed. So that spectrum is being built out already.
Mr. Walden. Is that an efficient use of that spectrum when
we look at LTE and all in the future? I mean, aren't we
creating new islands?
Mr. Hanna. I think in the long term--and Chief Johnson
mentioned this as well--in the long term, I think we could
certainly make better use of it if that were ultimately moved
into the broadband allocation. Unfortunately, right now, there
simply is not a technology in play that would allow broadband
mission-critical voice communications there.
Mr. Walden. Would that apply also, then, to the other 10 in
the D Block?
Mr. Hanna. Absolutely. At this stage, there is nothing on
the table for mission-critical voice in the broadband
allocation.
Mr. Walden. And so what would the time horizon be for
mission-critical voice in that allocation?
Mr. Hanna. As Chief Johnson mentioned, and I would echo, it
is down the road a ways because at this stage----
Mr. Walden. What does that mean, 3 to 5 years?
Mr. Hanna. I mean, I would say five to ten at least.
Mr. Walden. All right. I didn't mean to cut you off here,
but we have limited time here. Mr. Hanley?
Mr. Hanley. Yes, I would concur with what Mr. Hanna said. I
think that we should envision the narrowband spectrum being
used down the road to augment the broadband spectrum, and we
should have a definitive plan for addressing that migration as
soon as it is practical to do so. I think in the short run,
whether the 10 megahertz is sufficient depends on the model
that is built around it. If we have roaming capabilities with
other spectrum, that may be a way of augmenting the 10
megahertz. The way the network is designed and architected
could make more efficient use of 10 megahertz allocation.
Mr. Walden. You know, part of our discussion, too, is about
the equipment. And from my days either as an amateur radio
operator--as a broadcaster who sent both your companies money
over time, good equipment, the rock solid Motorola in the trunk
of the mobile unit we had at a base station--but I also know
that the commercial side spends that equipment a lot cheaper
for mass use.
We have got a letter--and maybe my colleagues can address
that as my time is running out--from the FCC that did that
evaluation where some of the hardened equipment for public
safety comes in at $5,000, and the same sort of communication
device in the private, commercial side may be a couple hundred
bucks. So I won't ask it because my time has expired, but I
think it is an issue I think we have to dig into. Say can you
get capability with greater innovation more often at 1/10 of
the cost of what we are all paying as taxpayers today?
My time has expired. I will recognize the gentlelady from
California for her questions.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to each
one of you for your excellent testimony today. I think it has
been highly instructive for the members of the subcommittee.
Let me just pick up where the chairman left off. This is a
report from the Federal Communications Commission. This is on
the cost of public safety communications. It says that ``This
is at least partly because public safety''--going back to the
cost--``is unable to capture the benefits of competition and
economies of scale associated with equipment and devices that
are manufactured for the commercial consumer marketplace.
Commission staff expect that leveraging the commercial mass
market could reduce cost for public safety devices
substantially.'' These are substantial cost differentials here.
So who would like to comment on this? Maybe we should go to
Motorola first, since there are some questions surrounding how
competitive, you know, this whole area is. You mentioned in
your testimony that you looked forward to a competitive market.
I don't know how you define that, but do you want to speak to
the costs on this just very briefly? And anyone else want to
lean in on it?
Mr. Steinberg. Sure.
Ms. Eshoo. It looks like we are going to be picking up the
tab on this, so we have to pay attention to the cost.
Mr. Steinberg. Is this working at all?
Ms. Eshoo. Yes, speak louder.
Mr. Steinberg. OK, thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. We are dying for your answer.
Mr. Steinberg. Thank you for the question. It is----
Ms. Eshoo. Sure. No, go ahead.
Mr. Steinberg. I think it is going around a lot and I
appreciate the opportunity to clarify.
The ASPs are thousands of dollars less on average than what
are typically quoted. And we do compete competitively for all
products, for example, with----
Ms. Eshoo. Well, where does this figure come from then? I
mean do you disagree with this with the FCC's estimates that a
state-of-the-art consumer cellular device typically costs a few
hundred dollars? A typical land-mobile radio for public safety
communications may cost as much as 5,000? Is that false?
Mr. Steinberg. So I disagree with the $5,000 number.
Ms. Eshoo. So how much is it?
Mr. Steinberg. It is considerably less than that.
Ms. Eshoo. What is considerably less?
Mr. Steinberg. If I could please----
Ms. Eshoo. No, I don't have a lot of time, so if you want
to answer it, fine. If not, I am going to go to someone else.
Mr. Steinberg. So we will be happy to get back to you with
the specific data.
Ms. Eshoo. Great. OK.
Mr. Steinberg. That is not my area of expertise.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you. To Dr. Martinez, thank you for your
testimony. And I think that you centered in on the two areas
that are so critical, and that is governance and procurement. I
think you really were helpful to us in how you built your
testimony.
Obviously, interoperability is vital to a seamless
communications system, and the FCC has recently mandated that
all public safety broadband networks adopt the LTE as a common
technology platform. What, in your view, are additional
safeguards that are needed to promote competition in the public
safety equipment market?
Mr. Martinez. Yes, Congresswoman, thank you. You know, we
need to learn from the success of the commercial telecom
industry. That industry has succeeded in innovating rapidly,
bringing capability to market quickly, providing a cost-
effective solution. And how have they done that? Well, they do
that through a very competitive process.
Ms. Eshoo. Um-hum.
Mr. Martinez. And we call that process multi-sourcing,
which means that they look at every major component, subsystem
of their networks, and they ensure that they have multiple
sources of supply. They do not engage in sole-source practices.
Ms. Eshoo. Um-hum.
Mr. Martinez. They frequently do not single-source. Multi-
sourcing is the answer because it provides for a competitive
environment----
Ms. Eshoo. If I might, how do we ensure that the equipment
market keeps pace with the innovation taking place in the
commercial sector?
Mr. Martinez. The first step, of course, was to adopt the
common platform, LTE. That was the first step. Pretty much
unanimous support----
Ms. Eshoo. Right.
Mr. Martinez. --in the record for that decision on the
Commission's part. Now, having done that, we can't do it
halfway.
Ms. Eshoo. Um-hum.
Mr. Martinez. And we discussed this just yesterday. And I
believe that was a comment from Mr. Steinberg. We must do it
all the way. We must continue to follow the standard as it
evolves. We must leverage the ecosystem as it continues to
develop. We must ensure that the same competitive practices
that have made the carriers so successful are applied as we
implement a governance organization or a structure for the
public safety network.
Ms. Eshoo. Great. I just want to get one more question in.
Thank you very much.
To Chief Johnson, thank you for your testimony. At the same
time that you advocate for local control of the network, which
is obviously very important, and you mentioned that in your
testimony, would there be tension between a national governance
structure and the local control that you testified?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Congresswoman. I think this is how
we see it operating. The national governance body would set
technology standards so that we have one technological approach
to make sure that things work as they should. They would set
standards and regulations for the network, but you are going to
need--in some cases it may be a large city; in other places it
may be statewide or may be regional. The end point is we need
local and regional presence for operating the dial as it were.
Public safety views these events and says we have to control
the dial. When we need the network, we have to reach up,
figuratively, and turn it over so public safety has access. And
I think I don't expect there will be tension between the two. I
think, in fact, the local presence will make the national
governance model stronger.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Thank you for your questions. We will turn now
to the vice chair of the subcommittee, Mr. Terry.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And if I can start off
with thanking everybody. I agree with Mr. Walden that this is a
pretty impressive panel and appreciate your expertise in
sharing it with us.
My question, it is really three parts to the same question
of the shared system. And it may be too long with these three
to actually get real answers from you, so if you guys would
like to submit longer answers. But specifically to Mr. Hanna
and Mr. Hanley, and I will ask Mr. Hanley if there is enough
time. Mr. Hanna, I will let you otherwise, you and others could
submit it. But can you comment on the specifics as to why a
shared system built out of a network is less expensive than the
one in which standalone public safety one would be? And would
this shared system also--we talked about the 12 for narrowband,
2 for guarding, and 10 for broadband of the current 24 that has
been set aside through the digital transition. Are you talking
about those 24 plus the 10 to set up a shared system? And then
last, I think one of the ultimate questions is taking all
levels of an emergency from your basic wreck on the interstate
to a 9/11 or Birmingham or Joplin where systems are wiped out
of a complete city, is there a risk in a shared system that at
a time of an emergency that public safety wouldn't have enough
of the spectrum to operate in both narrow and broadband areas?
So Mr. Hanley, three questions.
Mr. Hanley. OK. So first of all, I think the shared network
can be lower cost because it is going to leverage existing
assets of the network operators already have in place. It is
going to leverage the capabilities that those operators have to
efficiently operate networks and their knowhow in those areas.
I think those are the quick answers to that question. We can
provide more detail in writing.
To your second question, our vision of a shared network
involves the 20 megahertz of the D Block in the adjacent public
safety broadband license spectrum. So that is what we are
talking about when we envision the 20 megahertz shared network.
But other constructs certainly could be part of that as well.
And then I think to your last question about the different
types of emergencies, I think that you can envision a number of
operation constructs to be either developed in rules or
negotiated between operators and public safety agencies to go
as far as 100 percent utilization of the capacity in an
emergency situation. I think that that depends on the way the
model is set up and what other resources the other network
operator has to serve its base of commercial customers.
Mr. Hanna. Well, I think the first question certainly is
that, the cost-savings from co-location at the outset. I mean
if you are putting in two systems at the same time, same
location, obviously there are some savings there.
To the third question, I think there is a spin I haven't
heard yet. If you are co-located or have a commercial partner,
if you have a major disaster--so, for example, what we
witnessed the last few weeks with the tornadoes--in a public
safety environment, at least in the initial deployments that I
am looking at, in one major jurisdiction, public safety was
looking at building out 350 sites, which sounds like a lot. In
that same jurisdiction, that same coverage area, one commercial
carrier has 5,500 sites. So just by sheer numbers, if you have
something like a tornado or an earthquake or whatever, the
probability of having sites in play, as well as effective use
of spectrum in more sites I think certainly gives you an
advantage that you don't have in that standalone, you know,
purely hardened public safety network. There has to be that
core public safety piece. Don't get me wrong there. I support
that. But if you are co-locating and co-serving with a
commercial partner, you gain the access to, in this case,
thousands of additional sites that somebody else has already
paid for.
Mr. Terry. Thirty seconds, Mr. Johnson?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. I think the general discussion in
the public safety community is if we are allocated the 20
megahertz of spectrum, we fully intend to have a commercial
partner for all the reasons my colleagues here have
articulated. It would not be cost-efficacious to go out and to
replicate the kind of systems that exist out there. Some
jurisdictions may want to but we actually see, as part of the D
Block approach, having a commercial partner. The last thing I
think we want is to shut down and overwhelm a commercial system
because we are the output of the emergency response system and
the call from someone trapped in their collapsed house is the
input. And to shut down either of those at the expense of
either is not helpful to the system.
Mr. Walden. I believe next is Ms. Matsui from the list I
have. Go ahead for 5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I mentioned in my
opening statement, one of the important issues that I believe
has not been fully addressed but is central to ensuring an
efficient and effective public safety network is who will
govern and oversee this vast network that possess significant
responsibilities.
This question is to Chief Johnson and Mr. Hanley. In your
opinion, who should oversee and possess ultimate responsibility
and accountability for ensuring the development and deployment
of a broadband public safety network, an achievement of
nationwide interoperability? Chief Johnson?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Congresswoman. We think that the
provisions in S28, the Rockefeller bill, come very close to
what we envision, which is we wouldn't expect the Federal
Government to fund a network and then not have some presence in
terms of the governance model. So in that particular model
there are four cabinet-level positions in it.
Second, public safety needs to have a prominent position in
terms of the governance and so do local governments for all the
reasons I have articulated already.
But lastly, we believe strongly that our private-sector
commercial partners and the people that are manufacturing the
devices and can see over the horizon better than someone like
myself, they need to be present and active as part of the
governance model. So I think those are the three pieces.
Ms. Matsui. So is this like a public-private kind of a
nonprofit sort of partnership here you are talking about?
Mr. Johnson. Yes, I think, Congresswoman, I don't know if I
could articulate what is the best legal construct for the
governance model, but I do think those three pieces have to be
present in terms of who sets policy on the network.
Ms. Matsui. Mr. Hanley?
Mr. Hanley. I would agree that there needs to be some level
of national governance and the constitution that Chief Johnson
mentioned is probably an appropriate representation. A lot of
the standards work needs to be overseen at that level. There
may be applications that should be hosted on a nationwide
basis. So I think it is a federal system in the end with
governance from some type of national entity as well as a lot
of local flavor.
Ms. Matsui. OK. It seems like it is sort of floating at
this time. And we don't want it to keep floating like this.
Now, as we know, the current licensee of the existing 10
megahertz of the public safety broadband spectrum is the Public
Safety Spectrum Trust. Chief Johnson and Mr. Hanna, if a new
entity was to hold the license and/or be responsible for
governance and oversight of the network, would you support
transferring the Public Safety Spectrum Trust License to this
new entity?
Mr. Johnson. Yes, Congresswoman, we would.
Ms. Matsui. OK. And Mr. Hanna?
Mr. Hanna. Absolutely.
Ms. Matsui. OK. And what would need to happen to ensure a
smooth transition? Either of you want to comment on that?
Mr. Johnson. Congresswoman, I think we would have to lay
out a pretty rational and detailed plan about how you transfer
the license. There is all sorts of detail that have to be
vetted at your level, frankly, and at the administrative level
to make sure that we are legally going about it properly. And
then that governance body is going to have to go to work about
setting the standards and making sure that this thing deploys
effectively.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Now, if we create a new entity to manage
this public safety network, they will have awesome
responsibilities and have responsibility over highly valuable
spectrum and significant public funding, not to mention needing
to ensure the success of this vitally important network for
first responders. Mr. Hanley, Dr. Martinez, and Chief Johnson,
that said, how would we ensure accountability and success of
any new entity to manage the public safety network? And Dr.
Martinez first, if you would comment.
Mr. Martinez. If you create an independent entity, then
obviously, as you have stated in your question, then there is
therefore a need to have a responsibility and accountability.
That is certainly the challenge with an independent
organization, a nonprofit organization is how do you hold it
accountable for spending taxpayers' precious funds? I would
suggest to you it will require extensive oversight certainly
from bodies such as this one. It will require oversight and
participation from the states and local entities to ensure
that, first of all, their needs are being met in a responsible
way, funds are being responsibly spent. As I have advocated
earlier in my testimony, that their procuring equipment in a
competitive and open market. And therefore it is going to
require continued oversight from organizations such as this
committee.
Ms. Matsui. Right. OK. Mr. Hanley?
Mr. Hanley. First of all, clear objectives that are agreed
to by policymakers so that there is a clear benchmark against
which the organization can be measured. I think the examples
that Dr. Martinez cited are appropriate as well in terms of
oversight. I think some type of an audit process would also be
important to make that work.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Chief Johnson, just a quick comment because
I am running out of time.
Mr. Johnson. I concur. I just think that we are going to
have to lay this out very clearly when we charter the
governance body with what our expectations and timelines are,
and it has to have the mix we discussed and we have to hold
people accountable.
Ms. Matsui. Well, thank you very much. And I think we are
talking about something that is sort of theoretical now at this
point that we are going to have to figure out how we deal with
this. So I will continue to ask questions. So thank you very
much.
Mr. Walden. Thank you for your questions and for the
answers.
I believe Mr. Bass, actually, was here when the gavel fell
and so you would be up next, Mr. Bass.
Mr. Bass. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And it is an interesting
hearing and I appreciate the fact that the subcommittee is
addressing this complex issue in an orderly and pragmatic
manner. And I think these hearings are helpful to us
understanding, you know, what our side of the capital will do
with this issue.
Mr. Hanna and Chief Johnson and Dr. Martinez, can you
explain to us or give us your perspective on why we will don't
even have voice interoperability yet for public safety, let
alone any broadband network? Chief Johnson?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Congressman. I think it has its
roots in the thin slices of spectrum that have been given to
public safety over the years. And there were reasons that that
happened, but those reasons don't apply in this market today.
Technology has surpassed the reason for doing that originally.
So what happens is in the street equivalent, it is like
everybody is operating on their own road.
Mr. Bass. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. And then the public expects us to cooperate
and be co-productive at the local level when we respond. Now we
need to talk. So what we have had to do is we have had to build
lanes between our own roads. And it is such a broken model. I
think the public safety community's perspective on this is we
would love to stop spending money on interoperability, have a
vision for national architecture which we are articulating, and
spend our money there rather than connecting these thin slices.
And that makes so much sense on a lot of fronts. And most of
all of those is this D Block spectrum paired with the 10
megahertz we have eventually will be capable of radio-over-IP
communications, but it is capable of data. And it is contiguous
to the 700 narrowband channels which we have. And what that
allows us to do is it allows a single technological approach.
And I think that is why we are focusing on moving away from the
thin slices and spending money on interoperability and move to
one swath that will help us get all of it done.
And Mr. Chairman, if I might, with your pleasure, sir, we
would like to introduce one additional piece of communication
from the Public Safety Alliance into the record, sir.
Mr. Walden. Without objection.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. Bass. Mr. Hanley? I mean Dr.--well, either one of you
two guys.
Mr. Martinez. You know, if we look at how 13 billion plus,
that was at the federal level plus what was spent at the state
and local level, it is a large sum of money. The predominant
practice has been really one of looking backwards. And by that
we mean the predominant practice has been about focusing on
operability, not interoperability. Significant amount of energy
and emphasis spent on backwards compatibility as opposed to
future interoperability. The procurement process has gone
astray. It didn't focus on the core fundamental issue. We have
to procure systems that are interoperable. You have to drive
this car looking through the windshield, not through the
rearview mirror. And so sad to say that most of that money was
spent in a manner that did not move the ball as far forward as
it could have and should have. We have learned that. We must
not repeat that mistake.
Mr. Hanley. I think it is a question of priorities and
local resources. For the commercial sector interoperability was
essential from the beginning. Folks had to be able to roam and
have a seamless experience wherever they went. It was
imperative that we have interoperability. The focus has been on
operability in the local incident environments in public
safety, so I think that is the reason.
Mr. Bass. Mr. Steinberg, just a quick comment because I
have other questions. Do you have any comments on this?
Mr. Steinberg. I mostly would agree with Chief Johnson. It
is the fragmented spectrum that has been the root of the
problems that we have had from the beginning. The only thing I
would also offer is that we have made substantial progress,
maybe albeit not as rapidly as we would have liked on creating
interoperable networks with the deployment of the APCO-25
standard across 27 States. We cited several instances of good
practices where we are achieving many, many agencies of
interoperability within a State such as Michigan, Colorado,
Ohio, Minnesota, San Diego to name a few. So there has been
some progress made but more needs to be accomplished.
Mr. Bass. On the cost side, is there an appropriate
division in responsibility between the Federal Government and
state and local law enforcement or first responders? How much
should the States and localities be responsible for? And I have
14 seconds left so somebody answer it quickly.
Mr. Johnson. Any time you deploy a large system, this issue
comes up and the best way to answer it is I think all of us
will end up contributing to it. The formula, I don't have a
great recommendation for you on except that state and local
governments have infrastructure that will drastically lower the
cost of deploying if they share. And it is sharing backhaul, it
is sharing towers and infrastructure, it is sharing building.
All of those things will contribute to lowering the cost of the
system, and that may be the way they share. Or they may share
real dollars.
Mr. Bass. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Thank you for your questions. We go now to the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Doyle.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this hearing and
thanks to all the panelists for your testimony. It has been
very instructive.
Chief Johnson, there has been a lot of discussion in recent
years about the optimal nature of the spectrum at 700 megahertz
band for broadband. The propagation characteristics of these
frequencies allow wireless signals to penetrate buildings and
other topographic obstacles while transmitting high-capacity
data signals. If public safety owns the D Block on the 700
megahertz band through a reallocation solution, how are you
going to make sure that this spectrum will be used in the most
efficient manner at all times?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Congressman, for the question. The
spectrum that public safety has, we often hear about the 100
megahertz we have. About 50 megahertz of that is in 4.9, and
4.9 is really good short distance to backhaul data but is not
good for penetrating buildings. It is not good for going
through windows. And when the public safety community talks
about how we feel about the 4.9, we are often saying that is
one we are least likely to use because its short distance would
be cost prohibitive to build a tower network around it. So when
we start talking about that would be the one we would be
capable of relinquishing in terms of likelihood, the response
we usually receive is well, yes, you want to give us back the
one that isn't very useful on the street.
And that is kind of our point is it is not very useful. It
is allocated to us but it is not as useful as the 700
megahertz. So the 700 megahertz, the big advantage with that is
the data is likely to perform the same as the voice does, and
when the voice and the data perform the same at street level I
am talking, then the police officer or fire fighter are able to
count on having voice access and data access. The minute they
become dissimilar, then you quit relying on them. Say, voice
works and data doesn't. And that is a critical factor in terms
of people actually using it at the street level. The 700
spectrum is optimal. It is optimal because of how the wave
performs and it is also optimal because it is beside our voice
channels.
Mr. Doyle. So how do we make sure, though, when you are not
using it that we are getting the most efficient use of that
whole spectrum, though?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Congressman. I think the model we
envision with a commercial partner would allow roaming onto
that network while that spectrum is not being used. And what
that would do is that would generate some enterprise money,
which would help offset the cost of operating the system and
building the system and dealing with some of the technological
flip-overs that will naturally occur.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you. Mr. Steinberg and maybe Dr. Martinez
and Chief Johnson also, the size of the public safety community
is routinely described as consisting of about three million
first responders and, you know, if we look at a smaller subset,
maybe a half a million or so that actually are in the field and
are in need of mobile communications. So I am just curious, why
is Verizon's 22 megahertz of the 700 megahertz spectrum
sufficient to launch its 4G LTE service to 100 million
subscribers, yet you need almost that same amount for public
safety? Why is that?
Mr. Steinberg. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
There are several reasons why that is different. We are really
kind of somewhat comparing apples to oranges here if I may. The
public safety networks are built to be ultimately resilient and
reliable such that even if the complete network has failed, the
devices can communicate with each other. That is part of the
reason for the additional cost that was alluded to earlier in
the handsets. They are engineered to a different grade of
service, a different resiliency. So the way that they use the
spectrum and the mode of communication is considerably
different. The network service level that it is engineered to
is considerably higher, especially from a coverage point of
view and a grade of service that it provides to the end users
overall.
Mr. Doyle. Dr. Martinez, do you have any----
Mr. Martinez. You know, in scientific terms the problem is
that communications in public safety is very lumpy in time and
space. A good day is not when you use the spectrum efficiently;
i.e., you are utilizing it heavily. That is a bad day. That
means lots of things are going wrong. You can't apply the same
metrics to the spectrum efficiency utilization in a commercial
carrier network that public safety has. The issue in public
safety is not one of global capacity. It is when an incident
happens, you need localized, high-capacity communications. And
that is the problem. And you don't know where incidents happen,
so therefore, we have to create that capacity everywhere
because an event can happen anyplace, as we all know.
Mr. Doyle. Right.
Mr. Martinez. That is the fundamental problem in comparing
those two business cases.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you. Chief?
Mr. Johnson. Congressman, I think to compare commercial and
public safety use, I guess I would say commercial systems are
more likely to have broad use throughout the community. When
public safety needs a network, it is very likely to just
overwhelm a single site. When you land a plane in the Potomac,
that is not going to do much for us in New England. That is
going to light up that cell site and all the cell sites around
it. And the capacity is required to move that amount of traffic
at that site, and that site could be about anywhere in the
Nation. And I think the network engineers and architects could
attest to why you need that much from an engineering
perspective. As a practical perspective, you need that much
because when we need it, we need it.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, thank you so
much.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Hanley, did you have something you wanted
to add?
Mr. Hanley. I just wanted to add public safety networks are
engineered for the peak demand at its given time and place and
that is really one of the strongest arguments for making sure
that we have a mechanism for commercial utilization because
while you are engineered for the peak and you are going to
have----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Hanley. --incidents--you are going to have a lot of
spare capacity most of the time. We need to make sure that is
used effectively.
Mr. Walden. Well, I think that is part of our discussion
here is how often do you need that 10--you need it when you
need it, but how often is it just going to sit there fallow and
are there other uses during that period? Yes, well, I guess I
am chairman. Dr. Martinez?
Mr. Martinez. And the problem is that if you try to use
that capacity for commercial purposes, you devalue its
commercial value----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Martinez. --because it is subject to preemption. When
you need it in an event, a horrific event, then you will have
commercial users trying to communicate on a network that is
overwhelmed with public safety----
Mr. Walden. But it doesn't----
Mr. Martinez. That was the lesson learned from the D Block.
Mr. Walden. Well, that and the way it was structured and
the unknowns. You buy it and then we will tell you what you
have to do.
Mr. Martinez. Certainly as well.
Mr. Walden. I am going to get myself in trouble with my
colleagues here again. Mr. Bilbray, I think you are up next.
Mr. Bilbray. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
clarifying it. One of the big problems with the D Block is
nobody knew what they were buying, you know, especially when
you have other commodities on the market and that lack of
definitive explanation of what you were buying for your
constituency, you know, wasn't there.
I appreciate Mr. Steinberg being here because I just
remember 20 years ago we were putting in a unified system for a
county of three million people with federal and state agencies
in there down in San Diego, so I appreciate you bringing that
up. But I think that we have got some real challenges, and I
think a lot of it is not just technology. A lot of it is
mindset. I remember being mayor of a small city of 30,000, we
had a dispatcher for the police department, one for the fire
department, one for the public works, and one for the
lifeguards. You know, but each one of them had to have their
own little pie.
Chief, your comment about the need to have the private
sector at the table I think is quite appropriate, though,
understanding that those of us in government who use the system
won't even know what is possible if we do not have those guys
at the table, right?
Mr. Johnson. That is correct, Congress. That is our view.
Mr. Bilbray. Now, my question is we do have a vehicle--and
maybe I am dating myself--by the Disaster Preparedness Councils
in every region is sort of the hybrid between a local,
regional, and fed because it is actually a federally mandated
agency that really works with these problems. In fact, I think
that was really the key in San Diego we used to put it
together. Maybe that is a component of a hybrid between the
federal, local, and regional that needs to be considered of
rather than reinventing the wheel, take a look at what we have
restructured, used again, and move forward. A comment about
that, Chief?
Mr. Johnson. Sir, I am really not very familiar with who
comprises that. I guess I would say it is important at the
national level and at the local level, whatever that is, that
you have people on there that understand public safety and they
understand networks. And I think the same mix we talked about
has to be present at the local level as well because a network
operation is, after all, what we are after.
Mr. Bilbray. And that is really a challenge because those
two disciplines don't tend to meet very often.
Question, Mr. Hanna. We have allocated the 4.9 megahertz.
Should public safety be using that spectrum as part of this
solution?
Mr. Hanna. Oh, absolutely. As Chief Johnson said, at this
time, 4.9 is not really optimum spectrum for any type of broad-
based application. It certainly has great potential for
offloading traffic in hotspot-type zones. It has backhaul
provisions. In some areas, it is used widely. In many areas, it
is not used much at all. And I think there are a couple of
studies that have shown that 4.9, you know, if paired with this
network certainly can enhance the spectrum that we already
have. So I think if we just take a look at how we reengineer
that and build that into the network, I think we have great
application for that.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. Let me sort of throw something out, too.
Mr. Hanley, you are probably the youngest one on the panel,
wouldn't you guess? What do we got? How old are you?
Mr. Hanley. Forty-four.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. Is he the youngest, guys? OK. I just think
it is appropriate we bring up these items that we don't like to
talk about in proper company, but Chief, can we admit that
there may be a whole generational gap that we are ignoring here
and that is with data? I think you and I know we grew up not
texting our friends, not being comfortable in the text and the
data file, but I see that like the cruisers that we put
computers in, we never implemented the swipe card technology,
though it was there, you know, back when we were implementing
systems in the late '70s, early '80s. Don't you think that
there may be a heck of a lot more opportunity for data to be
used in public safety than what we accept now just because we
have always been used to grabbing that mike on our sleeve and
talking into it, and especially with the next generation who is
coming in with a whole new set of tools. These are videogame
kids that are flying Predators now, and I think just as much as
the old army didn't accept the Predator, now we embrace it. I
think there is a real challenge for all of us to sort of look
over the horizon and be able to see what the next generation
may take of this.
Mr. Johnson. Congressman, your observations are quite
insightful. The young firefighters we are hiring today are
astonished at the lack of technological capability that we
have. And the reality is is that because we don't have a
mission-critical grade data network today, it really is
impeding efficiencies. And I will be specific. If you don't
have the ability to receive and transmit GPS or automatic
vehicle location data in the field, then you can't efficiently
deploy your resources, which means that you deploy them
statically and you have holes that pop up and you have no way
to sense that and adjust to it.
Secondly, just even things like controlling traffic signals
as opposed to using light to get close to it and turn the
signal. The system ought to be able to sense we are coming, it
ought to know where we are going, and it ought to clear the
route and heal the route as we pass through it. I think, you
know, the networks that we deal with, the commercial partners,
they are quick to tell you that in the last 5 years, they have
grown between 5,000 and 8,000 percent in terms of throughput of
data on their networks. The same thing is going to happen in
public safety because the industry has not yet fathomed what
public safety needs and designed aggressively to it because we
don't have a network to put it on.
And I think you are correct in assuming that we are going
to see some amazing evolutions in terms of the technology
brought to public safety.
Mr. Bilbray. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to make
sure that as we move forward with a national upgrade that we do
not continue to try to apply an alpha code in the world of GPS.
And for those of you who don't know alpha code, you can go back
and study Lord Nelson and everything else. Thank you.
Mr. Walden. I didn't know you knew him. OK. And I just want
to say, Mr. Johnson, I think you are right on target, and this
is what we are trying to capture is that innovation and not
have an isolated network that fails to capture that. So we are
just trying to figure out how to get there because my iPhone, I
can plug in a coordinate and up comes the GPS and it walks with
me through town. There is ability there.
I am going to go Mr. Gingrey and that I think is our last
on the panel.
I will just tell you in advance and not on Mr. Gingrey's
time, we have got a whole bunch of questions. Remarkable panel,
thank you for your testimony. And we are going to submit those
because they do require longer answers than we have time for
today and I will do so formally later. But thank you.
Mr. Gingrey?
Dr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I agree. We do
have an excellent panel. Unfortunately, I have been going back
and forth between this committee and another subcommittee
hearing a markup. That happens a lot up here and I apologize
for that. But you have done a great job and we appreciate you
being here.
Mr. Hanna, I am going to turn to you first. How important
is it that public safety partners with commercial providers if
we are going to accomplish these goals that we all agree we
need to accomplish?
Mr. Hanna. I appreciate that question. When I first started
working with this issue about 6 years ago, I came to public
safety talking about broadband on the basis of that
relationship between commercial and public safety. I think it
is only through that relationship, particularly where you have
the economies of scale and the broader ecosystem that we really
take full advantage of what this has to offer. So I think that
element is really paramount to the success of this network.
Dr. Gingrey. Thank you. And let me go to Mr. Steinberg, Dr.
Martinez, and Mr. Hanley, and all three of you can respond. How
soon will voiceover internet protocol over LTE be available?
Are we talking 1 year, 2 years, 3 years? How soon could public
safety migrate from narrowband and utilize broadband for the
entire 24 megahertz, the DTV legislation cleared for public
safety?
Mr. Steinberg. I will start if you don't mind.
Dr. Gingrey. Yes.
Mr. Steinberg. Thank you for a very insightful question.
That is one that goes around a lot. It is difficult to predict
exactly when but let me talk to some of the things that have to
occur. Moving voice to broadband, commercial-grade voice, which
I think you will see carriers start to do. I have seen an
announcement even from one carrier recently that they are
heading in that direction in 2012. The difficulties of
transcending that to public-safety-grade mission-critical
voice, there are a few things we have to overcome to make that
occur. Most of them are nontechnical.
One is we need an interoperable standard. There is no
standards body in place today that specifies push-to-talk,
mission-critical voice type communications. So we would want
that in place and we want to make sure that we create
interoperability.
Two is we have to make sure that the network is built out
to the coverage requirements that are necessary to support
mission-critical-grade voice.
Three, there are few things in 3GPT standards, nothing
major, that have to occur to support that to actually function
properly.
And then four is we have to actually make sure that once we
get there, we truly do achieve interoperability, but not just
for voice. We need to think about, as I think the previous
question was instructive, about push to X, push to media, so
that are thinking about not just the past but we are thinking
about the future as well.
So how long will that take is difficult to answer. I heard
answers earlier in the 5- to 10-year range, perhaps while you
were out of the room. That is probably not unrealistic
considering the maturation that will be required to achieve
mission-critical-grade push-to-talk.
Dr. Gingrey. Let us have Dr. Martinez and Mr. Hanley
quickly.
Mr. Martinez. Yes. Congressman, we at Harris have been
delivering mission-critical voice over IP for over a decade. We
understand how to do that. We understand, too, Mr. Steinberg's
point that there is work to be done in developing of standards.
We believe the technology is here today to do that. We believe
it will take time to further develop the devices and to the
right form factors for our first responders and other public
safety organizations, but we believe that is going to take
about 2 to 3 years. We believe there is a point where you have
to mature the technology Chief Johnson made reference to
earlier. We must do this in a responsible manner.
I would say from an operational perspective, we are
probably 3 to 5 years away from that being an effective tool in
the field.
Dr. Gingrey. Mr. Hanley, would you tend to agree with that?
Mr. Hanley. I do agree with that. I think that we need a
resilient network that will support mission-critical
applications and we need voice quality that is acceptable. And
that is the time frame that is appropriate.
Dr. Gingrey. I will continue with Dr. Martinez and Mr.
Steinberg in my final question. Some have criticized the public
safety equipment community for using a narrow definition of
interoperability. How do you define interoperability? And would
your definition permit seamless use of competitors' public
safety radios with your company's network elements?
Mr. Martinez. Mr. Congressman, as I have testified earlier,
I believe we have addressed interoperability from a technical
and operational perspective, yes indeed. We believe that the
definition of interoperability really is the notion that you
can procure interchangeable equipment. Your own experience in
the use of cell phones and Wi-Fi devices, you already
understand this. You purchase it with confidence that it is
going to work. No matter which cell phone manufacturer I
purchase from or which operator I operate on, we have the
ability to communicate. We can text, we can send images, and so
on and so forth. Those are fully interoperable systems but they
are built on a base of interchangeable devices and
technologies. We believe that is the model going forward in how
we are going to achieve interoperability is to enforce the
procurement process to implement that model.
Mr. Steinberg. And if I could just amplify a bit.
Dr. Gingrey. Yes, please.
Mr. Steinberg. I believe Dr. Martinez spoke correctly that
I believe today we have the interoperable standards of the P25
APCO standards that allow this to occur. Interoperation does
occur on networks today between competitive handsets and
networks. I would just offer as well that Motorola solutions
offers at no charge to our competitors or other suppliers of
equipment an interoperability test facility that they may bring
the devices into and validate that they conform and work.
Dr. Gingrey. Thank you all. And Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Walden. Recognize the gentleman from Louisiana.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Steinberg, given that the absence of a nationwide
network both since September 11 as well as we experienced with
Hurricane Katrina, a time consideration clearly is going to
have to be a consideration in all of this. One of the things I
want to ask from a technical standpoint, what would promote a
quicker deployment of a nationwide network? Reallocating an
additional 10 megahertz to public safety for a new build-out or
supplementing public safety's existing spectrum working with
commercial providers to create that existing network?
Mr. Steinberg. That is an excellent question and thank you
for the opportunity to address it.
I think there are several factors that have to go into
achieving what you stated is an excellent goal. First, I do
believe that one of the problems we spoke of earlier that has
contributed to interoperability issues is the hodgepodge or the
fragmented spectrum that public safety has accumulated over the
years. So that is one of the reasons why we do face an
opportunity with the 700 megahertz spectrum band and the
opportunity to reallocate the D Block if we can work out all of
the other logistics to go with that to create a nice wide swath
of spectrum that everybody can operate upon in a consistent
fashion.
To your question about what actually gets us there quicker,
I think it is a combination of really both factors that have to
be brought to bear to actually move us along in that direction.
Mr. Scalise. All right. Mr. Hanna, from what I have been
hearing and, you know, whether it is testimony here just
talking with various groups, there are a number of ways to
achieve interoperability and I think some have been touched on
today, but if you could talk to me about the benefits of
creating a nationwide interoperable system in connection with
commercial spectrum in the 700 megahertz band as proposed by
the President's National Broadband Plan.
Mr. Hanna. Well, the concept is if you're working on a
common platform, which is the LTE platform, if you have the
network sharing agreements, then you have the ability to roll
over from one network to the other. So you are simply taking
advantage of each other's spectrum in that regard. And what we
have talked about earlier is on a day-to-day basis, public
safety does not need the entire block of spectrum. So on those
days that you have the bad days that were mentioned earlier,
then you can move into that spectrum, that commercial spectrum,
and vice versa in some circles as some people proposed. So I
think in that regard, you know, you are making maximum use. It
is good stewardship of the spectrum that we have.
Mr. Scalise. Do you have an idea of both low end and high
end when there is low utilization, high utilization how much
spectrum would be covered on each of those extremes?
Mr. Hanna. I don't think I could be in a position to tell
you, you know, how many megahertz we are going to be using in a
given day. That is a bit outside my expertise.
Mr. Scalise. OK. I don't know if anybody else----
Mr. Hanley. Let me just say it is a function also of how
densely the cell sites are architected as well, how much
capacity is deployed in a given location. So without seeing an
architectural design, it is hard to comment on that.
Mr. Scalise. Yes, and I know that is----
Mr. Hanley. I think you probably can use all the capacity
in a serious emergency concentrated time and place. You are
going to have a lot of times when you are using much less than
that.
Mr. Scalise. Yes, and I think that is one of the things
that the chairman talked about at the outset of the hearing is
the importance of putting a real structure in place so that you
are not just throwing money and maybe underutilizing spectrum,
not using it to the best of our ability when it is such a
scarce resource so that we can get the best bang for our buck
but also push those timelines so that we are not facing the
10th anniversary of whether it is September 11 or Katrina or
some other disaster and you still don't have that
interoperability where we can best achieve that goal.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Walden. I thank the gentleman. We recognize, now, the
gentleman from Florida, Mr. Stearns.
Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me also--I didn't
get a chance to welcome Dr. Martinez who is from a company in
Florida, Harris Corporation. He is the CTO. I have had the
experience of touring Harris, and actually, when I was an Air
Force officer when it was Radiation Incorporated I used to come
in there and fly and accept satellite ground stations for the
Strategic Air Command. So I want to welcome Dr. Martinez.
And one thought I was thinking about is assuming--in your
mind, what government oversight should there be to make the
interoperable system work? Maybe you can give us some ideas on
that, what oversight should be done.
Mr. Martinez. We, of course, recognize that this network
will serve federal, state, local, and tribal organizations.
Clearly, they all have to participate in a significant way in
the governance structure, however it evolves. It is important
that we don't get to a point that those organizations find
themselves looking at the structure from the outside in. They
have to be part of it, a fundamental part of it.
The National Broadband Plan articulated that 3
organizations in particular that were important: the Federal
Communications Commission and what it is doing, the Department
of Commerce, and the Department of Homeland Security. We
believe those three organizations must continue to play a
significant role and collaboration in defining the structure,
however it emerges. And those organizations continue to provide
oversight from regulatory perspective, from policy perspective.
But ultimately, we need to assure that those organizations, the
stakeholders are able to perform the day-to-day governance
functions.
Mr. Stearns. What would be the worse fear, the worst thing
that you would be concerned about?
Mr. Martinez. That is a great question. My worst fear is
this issue of economic viability. And I touched upon it very
briefly. We must ensure that this network remains economically
viable. And that means two things: that it is cost-effective
and affordable and that we never put it into a position where
we are unable to sustain it. And so I would say that my biggest
concern today would be that we wouldn't make the full
commitment to ensure that it remains adequately funded and that
we make the commitment to ensure that we are funding it
correctly.
And I have made the point repeatedly that we have to
procure it in a responsible way that allows for innovation and
competition and multi-sourcing we believe is the key vehicle.
Mr. Stearns. Anyone else on the panel who would like to
comment, perhaps what their worst fears are or what the role of
oversight should be on the interoperable system? Anyone else?
Yes, sir, Mr. Hanna?
Mr. Hanna. On the governance model, you know, I have had a
chance to look at great detail at the proposal you mentioned
earlier that has been presented to Senate. I would say that
while I am not enamored with all the provisions of the bill, I
am highly impressed with the governance model that they have
laid out in that document so far.
I am not quite sure if the rest of my panel shares my
concerns. I have deep concerns about a governance model run
strictly by the government because I think our record in that
area is rather replete with not being the most successful
models. And I think my public safety counterparts would agree
that a model run purely by public safety, you know, not
including people from industry and those people who are paying
for it also has its issues. So I would say that the model that
I have seen so far in Senator Rockefeller's bill or the draft
that has been presented I find I like it very much.
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Hanna, let me just follow up with a
question for you. We have provided the first responders with
approximately 13 billion in federal funding over the last
decade, as well as approximately 100 megahertz of spectrum for
their exclusive use. Where have those resources gone? What
worked, what didn't, and why?
Mr. Hanna. Well, that question has been--we have partially
addressed that. I mean, one of the unfortunate things is that
it has gone many places, and that is part of our problem. It
has been put out in piecemeal, fragmented basis. I would say we
have had a lot of jurisdictions who have received a lot of that
money. They have put it to good use in their local
jurisdiction. There has been no requirement, though, that they
have interoperability with others. And I would also suggest
that, you know, we have enabled--the Congress has enabled this
process by, you know, many times we kneejerk to a situation.
After 9/11 we put a great deal of money on the table, which was
admirable to respond to a need, but I don't know that it was
put out, you know, with the planning that was needed to ensure
a unified approach.
So I think the very fragmented nature of public safety
communications, we have soaked that in, it has been used
locally, but we haven't had the coordination that we would like
to see out of this bill.
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Chairman, I was just going to ask that
same question to Chief Johnson if I could.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Congressman. I think it has mostly
been spent looking backwards, but I think there has been 3
causal areas. One, interoperability, which everyone talks
about, and we use the name to do other things. I think there
has been plenty of this money spent on core operability and
buying equipment for core operability that is interoperable-
capable and therefore met the terms of the grant requirements,
for example.
And I think, second, the Federal Government has had a
little piece of responsibility here in that as we ask all the
public safety responders in the Nation to narrowband their
radios, for many of them, if not most of them, that meant a
wholesale replacement of their radios. So when you are facing a
wholesale requirement to replace your entire radios--
mountaintop, handheld, mobile, et cetera--to meet the
narrowbanding requirement, then you start looking for money.
And that money is either some of it earmarked for
interoperability, which you can do on your path to
narrowbanding, and some of it operability with interoperable-
capable. And I think it is worth adding that one of the
benefits for the Federal Government in narrowbanding is they
recapture the spectrum that is left behind when you narrow that
band. That band, I assume, will at some point in time be
repackaged, reformed at auction and in part offset some of the
expenses that have been made in this area.
Mr. Stearns. Good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Stearns. Gentleman, we really
appreciate your testimony, your insights. As I mentioned
earlier, we will have some additional questions we would
appreciate your response to. And I think I can speak on behalf
of the whole subcommittee how impressive this panel has been
and how helpful in our work you have been. And we look forward
to continuing the conversation as we work to get it right this
time and make sure that you have the interoperable network that
you need at a price we can afford and that we are maximizing
use of the spectrum along the way.
So thank you all, and with that, the subcommittee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:37 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Cliff Stearns

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to thank you for holding
this important hearing and all our witnesses for sharing their
insights, particularly Mr. Martinez, CTO of Harris Corp., which
is based in Florida.
With the ten-year anniversary of September 11th quickly
approaching, the time is now for Congress to act towards
creating an interoperable public safety network.
In the DTV legislation we cleared spectrum in the 700 MHz
band, known as the D Block, to be auctioned for commercial use.
Against my objections, the FCC moved forward with a conditioned
auction that, as I predicted, resulted in no bidders showing
up.
The D Block now sits fallow and valuable spectrum goes
unused while we face a looming spectrum crunch. I look forward
to hearing the testimonies of our witnesses as we explore the
best and most cost-efficient way to utilize the D Block and
build an interoperable public safety network.
----------

Prepared statement of Hon. John D. Dingell

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this important
hearing. I would also like to extend a warm welcome to our
witnesses this morning. Thank you for appearing before the
Committee to give testimony and answer our questions.
The problems with constructing a national interoperable
public safety network are not new. The debate about whether it
is better to reallocate or auction the D Block also has become
alarmingly long in the tooth. In brief, we have made precious
little progress since 9/11 in improving the resources available
to first responders.
I intend to use this morning's hearing to productive ends.
I will ask our witnesses questions about reallocating the D
Block and how to guarantee public safety has the resources with
which to construct and maintain a national interoperable
network. I also welcome our witnesses' opinions about how to
make certain cash-strapped municipalities do not face undue
burden in modernizing their communications equipment and
infrastructure, as well as how to strike an appropriate balance
between broadband and broadcast media in times of emergency.
I note that there are a number of public safety bills
circulating Congress. Many of them would reallocate the D Block
and pay--at least partially--for the construction and
maintenance of a public safety network by allowing the Federal
Communications Commission to conduct voluntary incentive
auctions of broadcast spectrum. I am deeply suspicious of what
the Commission would do with broad authority to conduct
incentive auctions. As such, I will not consider granting the
Commission that authority until the Commission has explained
sufficiently to this Committee how it would use it.
I look forward to a productive hearing and yield back the
balance of my time.
----------


