- DISCUSSION DRAFT OF H.R., A BILL TO REQUIRE GREATER PROTECTION FOR SENSITIVE CONSUMER DATA AND TIMELY NOTIFICATION IN CASE OF BREACH

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DISCUSSION DRAFT OF H.R. ___, A BILL TO REQUIRE GREATER PROTECTION FOR
SENSITIVE CONSUMER DATA AND TIMELY NOTIFICATION IN CASE OF BREACH

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 15, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-62

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
71-568 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
MARY BONO MACK, California           BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                GENE GREEN, Texas
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
Vice Chairman                      LOIS CAPPS, California
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JAY INSLEE, Washington
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

(ii)
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade

MARY BONO MACK, California
Chairman
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
Vice Chair                           Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       JIM MATHESON, Utah
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
PETE OLSON, Texas                    MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
DAVE B. McKINLEY, West Virginia      HENRY A. WAXMAN, California, ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan, ex officio

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Mary Bono Mack, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    33
Prepared statement...........................................    34
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    35
Hon. Cliff Stearns, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Florida, opening statement..................................    37
Hon. G.K. Butterfield, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina, opening statement.....................    38
Hon. Edolphus Towns, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New York, prepared statement................................   132

Witnesses

Edith Ramirez, Commissioner, Federal Trade Commission............    39
Prepared statement...........................................    42
Answers to submitted questions...............................   134
Jason D. Goldman, Counsel, Telecommunications & E-Commerce, U.S.
Chamber of Commerce............................................    78
Prepared statement...........................................    81
Robert W. Holleyman, II, President and CEO, Business Software
Alliance.......................................................    89
Prepared statement...........................................    91
Stuart K. Pratt, President and CEO, Consumer Data Industry
Association....................................................    99
Prepared statement...........................................   101
Marc Rotenberg, Executive Director, Electronic Privacy
Information Center.............................................   109
Prepared statement...........................................   111

Submitted Material

Discussion draft.................................................     2

DISCUSSION DRAFT OF H.R. ------, A BILL TO REQUIRE GREATER PROTECTION
FOR SENSITIVE CONSUMER DATA AND TIMELY NOTIFICATION IN CASE OF BREACH

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 15, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mary Bono Mack
(chairwoman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Bono Mack, Blackburn, Stearns,
Bass, Harper, Lance, Cassidy, Guthrie, Olson, Pompeo,
Kinzinger, Butterfield, Gonzalez, Dingell, Towns, Rush,
Schakowsky, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff Present: Allison Busbee, Legislative Clerk; Paul
Cancienne, Policy Coordinator, CMT; Brian McCullough, Sr.
Professional Staff Member, CMT; Gib Mullan, Chief Counsel, CMT;
Shannon Weinberg, Counsel, CMT; Michelle Ash, Democratic Chief
Counsel; Felipe Mendoza, Democratic Counsel; and Will Wallace,
Democratic Policy Analyst.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Good morning. The subcommittee will now
come to order. Today hackers and online thieves are giving more
meaning to the phrase silent crime. It is my hope that we will
join together, raise our voices and, like after Peter Finch in
the movie ``Network,'' shout out the window, we are mad as
hell, and we are not going to take this anymore. Americans
deserve nothing less.
[The discussion draft follows:]

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARY BONO MACK, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mrs. Bono Mack. The chair now recognizes herself for an
opening statement. Sophisticated cyber attacks are increasingly
becoming the greatest threat to the future of electronic
commerce here in the U.S. and around the world. That is why
Congress must take immediate steps to better protect the
personal online information of American consumers. It is time
for us to declare war on identity theft and online fraud.
The Secure and Fortify Electronic Data Act, which
established uniform national standards for data security and
data breach notification, is our opening shot. The SAFE Data
Act builds on legislation passed by the House in 2009 but never
acted upon in the Senate. Most importantly, it reflects the
changing landscape of data breaches and data security since
that time.
It is an upgraded 2.0 version of data security legislation,
encompassing many of the lessons learned in the aftermath of
massive data breaches at Sony and Epsilon, which put more than
100 million consumer accounts at risk, and those are just the
ones that we know about.
As subcommittee chairman, protection from identity theft
and online fraud is one of my top priorities. Just last week
Citigroup, which has the world's largest financial services
network, revealed a security breach in which hackers obtained
personal information from hundreds of thousands of accounts.
According to law enforcement officials, the hackers were able
to gain access to customer names, account numbers and contact
information, such as e-mail addresses.
Yesterday we learned that an external Web site operated by
the Oak Ridge Nuclear Weapons Plant was victimized by a cyber
attack, and earlier this week, the same group which claimed
responsibility for attacks on Foxx, PBS and Sony also hacked
the Senate's public Web site.
In recent years carefully orchestrated cyber attacks
intended to obtain personal information about consumers,
especially when it comes to their credit cards, have become one
of the fastest growing criminal enterprises here in the United
States and across the world. The FTC estimates that nearly 9
million Americans fall victim to identity theft every year,
costing consumers and businesses billions of dollars annually.
And the problem is only getting worse as these online
attacks increase in frequency, sophistication and boldness. As
I have emphasized throughout our previous hearings e-commerce
is a vital and growing part of our economy. We should take
steps to embrace and protect it, and that starts with robust
cybersecurity.
Most importantly, consumers have a right to know when their
personal information has been compromised, and companies and
organizations have an overriding responsibility to promptly
alert them.
To that end, the SAFE Data Act first requires companies and
other entities that hold personal information to establish and
maintain appropriate security policies to prevent unauthorized
acquisition of the data.
It also requires notification of law enforcement within 48
hours after discovery of a breach, unless it was an accident or
inadvertent and unlikely to result in harm.
It requires companies and other entities to begin notifying
consumers 48 hours after taking steps to prevent further
breaches and determining who has to be notified.
The SAFE Data Act also gives the FTC authority over
nonprofits for purposes of this act only. These organizations
often possess a tremendous amount of consumer information, and
they have been subjected to numerous breaches in the past.
At the same time, we want to work with those affected, as
well as with the FTC, to make sure any new regulations are not
burdensome for small businesses, especially during these
difficult economic times.
In addition, we are granting the FTC authority to write
rules that take into account the size and the nature of the
data that is being held online. Clearly, there are obvious
differences between information brokers and local retail
businesses, and the rules should reflect those differences.
The proposed legislation also requires all covered
businesses to establish a data minimization plan providing for
the elimination of consumers' personal data that is no longer
necessary for business purposes or for other legal obligations.
And finally, the SAFE Data Act preempts similar State laws
to create uniform national standards for data security and data
breach notification. We learned during our recent hearings that
consumer notification is often hampered by the fact that
companies must first determine their obligations under 47
different State regimes.
At the end of the day I, believe this legislation will
greatly benefit consumers, businesses and the U.S. economy.
Given the growing importance of e-commerce in nearly
everything, we do we can no longer afford to sit back and do
nothing. The time for action is now.
And at this point, the gentleman from--OK. And inform
people that we do have an overflow room in 2123 for those
standing who prefer to be sitting; again 2123 is the overflow
room.
So, at this point, I would like to recognize the gentleman
from California, Mr. Waxman, for his opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Bono Mack follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Mary Bono Mack

Sophisticated cyber attacks are increasingly becoming the
greatest threat to the future of electronic commerce here in
the United States and around the world, and that's why Congress
must take immediate steps to better protect the personal online
information of American consumers. It's time for us to declare
war on identity theft and online fraud.
The Secure and Fortify Data Act--which establishes uniform
national standards for data security and data breach
notification--is our opening shot.
The SAFE Data Act builds on legislation passed by the House
in 2009 but never acted upon in the Senate. Most importantly,
it reflects the changing landscape of data breaches and data
security since that time.
It's an upgraded, 2.0 version of data security legislation,
encompassing many of the lessons learned in the aftermath of
massive data breaches at Sony and Epsilon, which put more than
100 million consumer accounts at risk--and those are just the
ones we know about.
As Subcommittee Chairman, protection from identity theft
and online fraud is one of my top priorities. Just last week,
Citigroup--which has the world's largest financial services
network--revealed a security breach in which hackers obtained
personal information from hundreds of thousands of accounts.
According to law enforcement officials, the hackers were
able to gain access to customer names, account numbers and
contact information such as e-mail addresses.
Yesterday, we learned that an external Web site operated by
the Oak Ridge Nuclear Weapons Plant was victimized by a cyber
attack, and earlier this week--the same group which claimed
responsibility for attacks on Fox, PBS and Sony--also hacked
the Senate's public Web site.
In recent years, carefully orchestrated cyber attacks--
intended to obtain personal information about consumers,
especially when it comes to their credit cards--have become one
of the fastest growing criminal enterprises here in the United
States and across the world.
The Federal Trade Commission estimates that nearly nine
million Americans fall victim to identity theft every year,
costing consumers and businesses billions of dollars annually.
And the problem is only getting worse as these online attacks
increase in frequency, sophistication and boldness.
As I have emphasized throughout our previous hearings, E-
commerce is a vital and growing part of our economy. We should
take steps to embrace and protect it--and that starts with
robust cyber security.
Most importantly, consumers have a right to know when their
personal information has been compromised, and companies and
organizations have an overriding responsibility to promptly
alert them. To that end, the SAFE Data Act:
Requires companies and other entities that hold personal
information to establish and maintain appropriate security
policies to prevent unauthorized acquisition of that data;
Requires the notification of law enforcement within 48
hours after discovery of a breach, unless that breach was an
innocent or inadvertent breach unlikely to result in harm;
And it requires companies and other entities to begin
notifying consumers 48 hours after taking steps to prevent
further breach and determining who has to be notified.
The SAFE Data Act also gives the Federal Trade Commission
authority over non-profits for purposes of this act only. These
organizations often posses a tremendous amount of consumer
information, and they have been subjected to numerous breaches
in the past. At the same time, we want to work with those
affected, as well as the FTC, to make sure any new regulations
are not burdensome for small businesses--especially during
these difficult economic times.
In addition, we are granting the FTC authority to write
rules that take into account the size and nature of the data
that is being held online. Clearly, there are obvious
differences between information brokers and local retail
businesses--and the rules should reflect those differences.
The proposed legislation also requires all covered
businesses to establish a data minimization plan providing for
the elimination of consumers' personal data that is no longer
necessary for business purposes or for other legal obligations.
And, finally, the SAFE Data Act preempts similar state laws
to create uniform national standards for data security and data
breach notification. We learned during our recent hearings that
consumer notification is often hampered by the fact that
companies must first determine their obligations under 47
different state regimes.
At the end of the day, I believe this legislation will
greatly benefit consumers, businesses and the U.S. economy.
Given the growing importance of e-commerce in nearly everything
we do, we can no longer afford to sit back and do nothing. The
time for action is now.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
I have said this at our previous hearing, and I want to
repeat it today: Data security is not a partisan issue; it is
something all of us should care about.
Last year, there were over 597 data breaches that affected
over 12.3 million records. Last Congress, this committee worked
together to pass with bipartisan support a data security bill
introduced by Representative Rush. Our bill passed the House in
December of 2009, but the Senate never took it up, so it was
not completed.
The bill we are considering today is based on our
bipartisan House bill from the last Congress. It contains
important provisions that require companies to secure
consumers' personal data and notify them in the case of
breaches.
And I commend Chairman Bono Mack for using last year's
bipartisan bill as a starting point. There are new provisions
in the chair's draft that strengthen last Congress' bill. For
example, the draft contains a potentially valuable new
provision requiring companies to have plans to minimize
personal data they retain on individuals.
Unfortunately, there are some changes in the bill that I
fear weaken the bill rather than strengthen it. And this is a
mistake and one I hope we can fix as we consider this
legislation.
Let me raise some of the concerns I have: Under this
legislation before us, Sony still would not have to notify its
customers about its recent security breach. It did not restore
the integrity of the data system for at least 43 days after
Sony discovered the breach, and it still has not fully assessed
the nature and scope of its breach. Notice is not required to
the FTC and consumers under the draft until those steps have
been completed.
Well, that is far too long. It does little good to notify
consumers after their identities have already been stolen and
make them wait such a long period of time.
This bill deletes key provisions on information brokers,
which are companies that aggregate personal data about
individuals and make a profit selling that personal
information.
It adds unnecessary burdens to the Federal Trade
Commission's rulemaking process, making it more difficult for
new pieces of data to be deemed, quote, personal.
And there is significant ambiguity regarding the scope of
personal information that a company is required to protect.
Under this legislation companies, including an aggregator of
data, are exempted from the requirements to safeguard personal
information any time that same data can be found in various
local county government buildings.
Furthermore, this draft creates an uneven playing field
with potentially stronger data security and breach notification
requirements for retailers than for nonbank financial
institutions. There is no reason why financial institutions
should be subject to smaller penalties for violations than
retailers.
So I look at it as not a balanced bill overall. It gives
businesses too many protections and consumers not enough. It
preempts strong State laws and replaces them with a weak
Federal one.
I hope these deficiencies in the bill can be fixed, and I
want to work with the chair and other members of this committee
to pass as effective a bill as possible, and I am looking
forward to the promised stakeholder process. Today's hearing
will give us a chance to get further information about what a
bill should and should not have in its details.
We have a chance to pass meaningful legislation that
actually could make a positive effect on everyone, and we
shouldn't pass up this opportunity.
I look forward to working with you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman.
And the chair now recognizes Mr. Stearns for 2 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CLIFF STEARNS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
And thank you very much for calling this hearing.
Obviously, as pointed out by yourself and the ranking member,
Mr. Waxman, this is very important that we try to get a
bipartisan support for this.
When I was chairman of this subcommittee, I introduced the
Data Act in 2005, 6 years ago, established to protect
unauthorized access to consumer data. This bill was co-
sponsored by both sides when we marked it up, it was reported
out of the full committee by unanimous consent.
Now, obviously, I would have preferred that we started with
my bill, which is, I think, a bipartisan support product of a
broad understanding of the security issues back in 2005. Now we
are working with possibly a slightly different focused bill,
which could be good, that addresses the recent breaches that
occurred both in Sony and Epsilon. I think we have to be
concerned that we not overreact based upon those two cases.
In both 2006 and 2009, there was bipartisan support for the
Data Act that I had. Now we debate the SAFE Data Act, a bill
that I am concerned has some very good points but also perhaps
might be go too far in some other areas.
Obviously, I will work with the subcommittee, the chair
lady, to improve the bill so it can pass with bipartisan
support, like we have done in the past, so that the committee
and the full House have an opportunity to vote on this. And so
I look forward to the debate, and I look forward to our
witnesses.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes Mr. Olson for 1 minute.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair for her tenacious leadership
in bringing forth this draft bill.
I think there is strong agreement that we need to move
forward with Federal data security legislation. Support for
Federal legislation has been bipartisan. My colleague from
Florida, Mr. Stearns, put forth a data security bill in the
109th Congress, which Mr. Rush introduced in the 110th and
111th Congresses.
And now our chairwoman, Mrs. Bono Mack has put forth a bill
in the 112th Congress.
I appreciate all of the efforts to help move us forward on
this important issue, and I hope we can arrive at a truly
bipartisan balanced bill that protects consumers without
putting unnecessary burdens on companies or hindering important
uses of data.
I look forward to continuing our discussion today and hope
to be able to flesh out some issues that have been raised in
testimony. I thank the chair and yield back my time.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman.
And the chair recognizes Mr. Butterfield, the ranking
member of the subcommittee, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. G.K. BUTTERFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA

Mr. Butterfield. I thank the chairman and apologize for
being late.
The only thing I can say is don't try to go to Union
Station at 10:00 on a Wednesday morning.
Madam Chairman, thank you for holding today's hearing on
the Secure and Fortify Electronic Data Act. This bill includes
some of the same provisions that we saw in H.R. 2221, which
passed the House in the 111th Congress.
However, this draft also removes key consumer protection
provisions that weaken the bill and make it less effective.
Americans' embrace of technology have served as the impetus
for rapid growth of online businesses and services. I can buy a
car without ever seeing it in person. I can pay my bills from
one Web site, and I do it monthly. And I can even have all my
data reside in a cloud, so it is accessible from absolutely
anywhere.
In order for e-commerce to work, there must be data
exchange between customer and businesses, including names,
addresses, Social Security numbers, dates of birth and so on.
The ability to conduct business in an online space is an
amazing convenience. No one I know could do without it.
But the failure of some of these businesses to protect
their own network infrastructure and the information demanded
of their customers has led to opening--to an opening for small
but not insignificant group of criminals to exploit and profit
from the data these companies hold. And even those with strong
security systems in place must be vigilant and adaptable to new
threats.
During the 109th Congress and subsequent Congresses,
members of this committee worked in a bipartisan fashion to
develop the Data Accountability and Trust Act to address the
issue of data security. In the last Congress, my friend and
former chairman of the committee, subcommittee, Mr. Rush,
introduced the data bill, which ultimately passed the House,
but the Senate failed to act. That bill included special
requirements for information brokers, including requiring
brokers to submit security policies to the FTC and requiring an
annual audit of broker security practices, among other things.
Striking those key provisions from the bill significantly
weakens the consumer protections it is supposed to provide.
Further, the draft bill defines personal information to exclude
information that is publicly available. In doing so, the bill
gives the green light to data aggregators to continue with
business as usual without being required to have any safeguards
in place to protect the data.
Madam Chairman, with over 2,500 data breaches having
occurred since 2005, it is clear that the serious work of
protecting consumers' data is something that has taken a back
seat in Congress for too long. A Federal standard is important.
I will say that again: A Federal standard is important, and the
SAFE Data Act is a start. I am sorry we are not starting with
the text that passed the House in the last Congress.
Over the next few weeks, Madam Chairman, I hope you will
work with me and my staff to strengthen this draft bill.
Together we can ensure consumer protections while allowing
businesses the flexibility to adapt their policies and
procedures in today's rapidly evolving information age.
So thank you for having this hearing. I thank the
commissioner for her presence today. And I think I might
reserve my time. I am told that the gentlelady from Illinois is
coming. She is not here. I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman.
I just want to remind and reinforce to the entire panel
that we intend fully on having a bipartisan product to the best
of our ability and that will be our goal.
So now I would like to turn our focus to the witness table.
We have two panels today. On the first panel, we are honored to
have the Honorable Edith Ramirez, Commissioner at the FTC.
Thank you very much for being here today. You will be
recognized for 5 minutes to summarize your statement. And just
to--I am sure you are familiar with the time clock, it is
yellow, green, red, kind of concept. When the light turns
yellow, that means you have 1 minute to start your close.
So, at this point, we are happy to recognize you for your
5-minute statement.
Ms. Ramirez. Good morning.
Mrs. Bono Mack. And, please, remember to turn your
microphone on.

STATEMENT OF EDITH RAMIREZ, COMMISSIONER, FEDERAL TRADE
COMMISSION

Ms. Ramirez. Good morning.
Chairman Bono Mack, Ranking Members Butterfield and Waxman,
and members of the subcommittee, I am Edith Ramirez, a
Commissioner of the Federal Trade Commission. I appreciate the
opportunity to present the commission's testimony on data
security.
I want to thank you, Chairman Bono Mack, and the committee
for your leadership on this important issue.
Before I continue I would like to note that my written
testimony represents the views of the Federal Trade Commission,
but my oral remarks and responses to questions are my own and
may not reflect the views of the commission as a whole or of
other commissioners.
As the Nation's consumer protection agency, the FTC is
committed to protecting consumer privacy and promoting data
security in the private sector. If companies do not protect the
personal information they collect and store, information could
fall into the wrong hands, resulting in fraud and other harm
and consumers could lose confidence in the marketplace.
Although data security has recently been in the news, this
is not a new priority for the FTC. To the contrary, for a
decade, the FTC has undertaken substantial efforts to promote
data security in the private sector through law enforcement,
education, policy initiatives, and recommendations to Congress
to enact legislation in this area.
Since 2001, the FTC has brought 34 cases charging that
businesses failed to appropriately protect consumers' personal
information. This includes a final settlement the commission is
announcing today against Ceridian Corporation, a large payroll
processor. Ceridian's clients upload their employee sensitive
information, including Social Security numbers and bank account
numbers, which are stored on Ceridian's network. The FTC's
complaint charged that Ceridian didn't maintain reasonable
safeguards to protect this employee information. As a result, a
hacker was able to gain access to it.
The FTC's order requires Ceridian to implement a
comprehensive data security program and obtain independent
audits for 20 years.
The commission also promotes better data security through
consumer and business education. For example, on the consumer
education front, we sponsor OnGuard Online, a Web site to
educate consumers about basic computer security. Since its
launch in 2005, there have been over 14 million unique visits
to OnGuard Online and its Spanish language counterpart, Alerta
en Linea.
We also conduct outreach to businesses, especially small
businesses, to provide practical advice about data security.
The commission also engages in policy initiatives to promote
data security.
Last December, FTC staff issued a preliminary report
proposing a new framework to improve consumer privacy and data
protection. Among other things, the report advocates privacy by
design, which includes several principles essential to data
security. First, companies, no matter what their size, should
employ reasonable, physical, technical and administrative
safeguards to protect information about consumers. Second,
companies should collect only that consumer information for
which they have a legitimate business need. Third, businesses
should retain data only as long as necessary to fulfill the
business purpose for which it was collected and should promptly
and securely dispose of data they no longer need.
As to legislation, the commission generally supports
Federal legislation, similar to your draft proposal, that would
impose data security standards on companies and require
companies in appropriate circumstances to notify consumers when
there is a security breach. Reasonable security practices are
critical to preventing data breaches, and if a breach occurs,
prompt notification to consumers in appropriate circumstances
can mitigate harm such as ID theft. For instance, in the case
of a breach of Social Security numbers, notified consumers can
request that fraud alerts be placed in their credit files,
obtain copies of their credit reports and scrutinize their
monthly account statements.
The commission is pleased that your draft legislation
includes civil penalty authority to deter violations, APA
authority for rulemaking and jurisdiction over nonprofit
entities for data security purposes. I would also like to note
that both your draft legislation and the commission staff's
recent privacy report underscore the importance of data
minimization to sound data security practices.
The FTC looks forward to working with this committee as it
moves forward on the SAFE Data Act. Thank you, again, for
inviting me to be here and for your leadership on these
important issues, and I am pleased to answer any of your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ramirez follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much.
The chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes for
questioning. The first question I have, you state the
commission's support for prompt notice to consumers. I think it
is the crux of what we are all about here. What do you consider
prompt, and do you think the consumer notification requirement
in the legislation is quick enough?
Ms. Ramirez. I believe that notification needs to be
provided as soon as practicable. I do have some concerns about
the provision relating to notification in the draft bill. And
let me highlight the two key concerns. My first concern is that
the bill requires that there be a risk assessment performed,
and then, at the conclusion of that risk assessment, a company
is then obligated to provide notification to consumers and to
the FTC 48 hours, within 48 hours following that.
My concern is that the requirement, that there is no
deadline on which to complete a risk assessment, and therefore,
that could take an indefinite amount of time. Without there
being some type of limit that is placed on that, I think it
places consumers at significant risk.
Another concern that we have is that there is also no time
limit that is placed in connection with law enforcement, that
it could also be an open-ended deadline that could delay prompt
notification to consumers. And again, there ought to be some
form of a cut-off period to ensure that consumers received
appropriate notification within an appropriate amount of time
so that they can take steps to mitigate any harm that may
result from a data breach.
I would also like to emphasize that providing prompt notice
to the FTC is also very critical, and in our view, notice to
the FTC should be provided at the same time that it is provided
to other law enforcement agencies.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you.
And the FTC has experience under Gramm-Leach-Bliley with
the implementation of the safeguards rule for financial
institutions under its jurisdiction. The FTC also provided
comprehensive guidance for entities to understand how they can
comply with the rule. Do those guidelines provide a sufficient
indication of the rules for data security the FTC would write
under Section 2 of this legislation?
Ms. Ramirez. I think they do provide good guidance to
companies. In addition to the to particular enforcement matters
and consent orders that the commission makes public, the
commission provision many, many different resources online to
companies so that they can take appropriate measures to
adequately protect consumer information.
Mrs. Bono Mack. So, under Section 2 security requirements
of the draft legislation, does the FTC have the latitude to
write rules that take into account the different types of
entities, their level of sophistication and the amount of type
of information they hold?
Ms. Ramirez. It does. And we appreciate that authority
being provided to the FTC to promulgate rules detailing those.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Do you envision writing different rules or
different guidance to address the concerns that a one-size-
fits-all approach is not appropriate?
Ms. Ramirez. During the rulemaking process, we would be
seeking input from stakeholders and fashioning rules that, in
light of the input that we received, that we believe would be
appropriate to protect consumer information.
Mrs. Bono Mack. So do you see different standards, then,
for information brokers and small nonprofits, for example?
Ms. Ramirez. We believe that companies, no matter what the
size, need to provide solid and good data security measures. At
the same time, the standards that the FTC employees in its
enforcement work is a reasonableness standard, so we do take
into account the size of a company, the nature of the
information that has been placed at risk and other factors that
may weigh in on that calculus.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Since we first started this process 6 years
ago, 46 State laws have emerged. Nearly every one of them,
including California, have exemptions from the definition of
personal information for information made publicly available by
the government and, in some cases, information made public by
the media.
The exemption included in this draft is confined to
information made publicly available by the government.
Have you seen any problems of unlawful activity associated
with the publicly available information?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes. We do have concerns about there being an
exemption for public, for all public information. The
difficulty is that these days there are data brokers that
collect information that in the past, one would have to go to
very significant measures to collect. You would have to go--you
could go to the courthouse; you could collect information
through other means. But data aggregators then aggregate this
information and when the information, which may very well be
public, is then collected, gathered and aggregated, it can then
pose very unique privacy challenges. So we do have concerns
about there not being a mechanism to address those issues
relating to data brokers.
Mrs. Bono Mack. You said privacy challenges. Do you mean
security challenges?
Ms. Ramirez. Security challenges.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. All right.
I yield back the 5 seconds of my time.
And the chair recognizes Mr. Butterfield for 5 minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Commissioner. The Republican discussion draft
makes a change from H.R. 2221 to the definition of personal
information. That seems like a simple and minor change, but it
actually is not. It excludes public record information from the
definition of personal information.
Given that technology has made access to an aggregation of
numerous of types of records very cheap and easy the
consequences of this change are quite significant. Before it
became cheap and easy to store vast amounts of this information
in one place, no one thought about going out and collecting
these records. To see these records, you had to, as you said a
moment ago, go from town hall to town hall or courthouse to
courthouse and look at them one at a time. But now, millions
and millions of records regarding millions of our constituents
are being kept on servers usually belonging to information
brokers.
If you are a criminal wanting to do harm to lots of people
in one swoop, the Republican discussion draft will be an
advantage to you. This collection and aggregation in one place
has changed the value of this information and its
susceptibility to criminal misuse, and it concerns me that this
draft bill leaves this information unprotected.
Because of the change to the definition of personal
information to exclude public record information, there is no
longer an obligation to provide any protection at all for this
information.
Have I said it correctly, Commissioner, or have I
misspoken?
Ms. Ramirez. We agree with that concern yes.
Mr. Butterfield. Do you believe that just because that
information could have been collected elsewhere, a covered
person should be relieved of the obligation to protect its
information when they collect and aggregate the information in
one place and make it more valuable and potentially more
dangerous? Please help me with that.
Ms. Ramirez. I believe that information, even if it is
public information, if it is personal information of the
consumer, that information ought to be protected, and there
ought to be appropriate data security measures in place to
protect it.
Mr. Butterfield. All right.
I want to take your attention to notification. Do you
believe notification to consumers should also be required for
breaches involving this kind of information?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Butterfield. The Republican discussion draft, like H.R.
2221 before it, provides the FTC, your commission, with the
ability to modify the definition of personal information. Only
information that is within the meaning of that term is covered
by the bill's data security and breach notification
requirements.
But unlike 2221, the discussion draft seems to set up an
overly burdensome and unclear process for modifying that
definition. If the FTC wanted to change the definition for the
purposes of either the data security or notification sections,
it would have to find, among other things, that modification
would not unreasonably impede Internet or other technological
innovation or otherwise adversely affect interstate commerce,
end of quote.
Question, do you believe this language regarding
impediments to innovation provides the FTC with much of a clear
standard against which to determine whether a modification is
appropriate?
Ms. Ramirez. I do have concerns about the standards that
are imposed. In addition to the limitation on changes to the
definition that could impede innovation, as you mentioned, it
also requires that the commission only make a change when there
is a technological change at issue, and that is in connection
with the data security piece of the proposed bill. So that does
raise concerns because we feel there are issues with the
definition of personal information. It is too narrow, and we
would not be able to address those concerns.
Mr. Butterfield. Well, what would you do? How would you
make that determination if you were called upon to do so?
Ms. Ramirez. Well, again, we would want to work with the
committee on establishing an appropriate limitation. But let me
articulate a couple of concerns that we have with the personal
information limitation, in addition to the public records
exemption.
Two things: First, we believe that the financial, that the
provision focuses solely on financial related information and
doesn't take into account, for instance, other information that
would be sensitive to a consumer. For instance, health
information that would not otherwise be protected under HIPAA
would not be covered by the language in the draft bill. So that
would be a concern that we would not be able to address through
the rulemaking that is provided in the draft bill.
Mr. Butterfield. And what about the language that speaks to
impeding innovation? I don't know how you define that.
Ms. Ramirez. That would be a difficult standard also to
apply, and so, arguably, rules by the commission could be
challenged by parties arguing that the change in definition
could impede the growth and make other arguments, so it would
place an undue burden, we believe, on the commission.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman and want to thank him
very much for pointing out the few bracketed points in the
legislation where we specifically bracketed them because we,
too, have questions in the draft, so I appreciate the
clarification in your input, and I appreciate the gentleman
taking the opportunity to raise that.
The chair recognizes Mr. Stearns for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Madam Chair.
One thing I just thought we would clear, that I think the
Federal preemptions that it had in my bill in 2005 and the bill
that passed in the Rush haven't changed. So as I understand, I
just want to ask counsel, is that true that the Federal
preemption have not changed, so that any criticism that would
be brought from that side because of that, that they haven't
changed at all?
The Counsel. Yes, sir, that is correct.
Mr. Stearns. Ms. Ramirez, as you are aware, in the bill,
the Federal Trade Commission has the authority to change the
very fundamental definition of personally identifiable
information. So this gives you this broad latitude, I think a
lot of us are a little concerned about. Do you think there is
an opportunity where the Federal Trade Commission under any
circumstances would trigger the need for them to alter, to
update, to change that basic definition how it is currently
drafted in the bill now, because you have got this definition
that people understand in the bill, yet you have the authority
to change it? Under what circumstances would you change it, and
perhaps you could explain what would cause it?
Ms. Ramirez. One circumstance that could arise is there
could be changes in technology that could require additional
information being needed.
Mr. Stearns. But isn't personal identifiable information
pretty much policy-neutral because it represents an
understanding of the privacy of the individual?
Ms. Ramirez. I think the precise scope may be hard to
define. But the commission is absolutely willing to work with
the committee to come up with a definition that would meet
every one and satisfy everyone's concern. The current condition
we believe is to narrow. We also believe that the ruling
provided is too limited.
I will say that the rulemaking process that the commission
employs is a process by which we do seek input from
stakeholders. And we believe that through that rulemaking
process, we will be able to address any need for change, at the
same time taking into account any concerns that you and others
may have, Congressman.
Mr. Stearns. Well, I think that probably if I was in
industry, I would be concerned that the government, the
Congress, is turning over this power to you and you might make
these changes without a comment period. There might be changes
that would affect a business that would make it much more
difficult.
Let me go on to my second question. In the bill, they added
data minimization provisions. Now, this is something new from
my bill, and also it is new from the Rush bill. How do you see
this provision playing out? For members and people who don't
understand, this is basically forcing industry to get rid of
information that perhaps they would like to keep. It is not a
decision they make, it is a mandated mandate, which is included
in the bill, as I understand it. So I guess the question is,
how do you see this provision playing out, and what role do you
believe, if any, the FTC should have in ensuring that companies
are complying? So you have this mandate; the companies might
not agree, so if they don't do it, how are you going to check
it, and how are you going to make them comply?
Ms. Ramirez. What the commission advocates is that
companies only retain information that they have a legitimate
business need to retain.
Mr. Stearns. And who determines that?
Ms. Ramirez. And that they also only retain it for the time
period they need it. I think we would apply a reasonableness
standard.
Mr. Stearns. What kind of standard?
Ms. Ramirez. A reasonableness standard, which is a standard
that the FTC has employed throughout the course of its
enforcement in this arena.
Mr. Stearns. So this reasonable standard in your mind is
been pretty much established at the FTC so everybody in
industry would understand today what it is?
Ms. Ramirez. What I am saying is that the standard that
would be applied would be a reasonableness standard, and I
believe--it is an issue that may need to be fleshed out. And
again, the commission is willing to work with the committee in
order to do that. Any rulemaking that does take place would
entail a comment period, absolutely entail a comment period. I
believe that the FTC has a very solid track record in terms of
its rulemaking. So I think this is an area, again, that the
standard that the FTC has always applied in the area of data
security is one of reasonableness, taking into account the
nature of the information, how sensitive it is, the potential
risks to consumer. So it would be a reasonableness standard
that would be applied.
Mr. Stearns. Do you think that Congress should set the
broad outline for this data minimization provision and not give
it any authority to the FTC, or do you think you need to have
that authority to make that decision?
Ms. Ramirez. I think it would be appropriate to give
authority and flexibility to the FTC to provide additional
guidance to companies as to how to effectuate those
requirements.
Mr. Stearns. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. The gentleman's time is expired. The chair
recognizes Mr. Waxman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Madam Chair. Again, looking at this
draft bill, I have some questions, so that we can get your
input on it. As I look at the draft bill, there is a notice
that must be given to the Federal Trade Commission and the
consumers when there has been an electronic data breach. But it
is only required after the covered person, the people who--a
company who has the identifying information has done certain
things in connection with the breach. The covered person must,
one, assess the nature and scope of the breach, that makes
sense, take steps to further prevent breach orunauthorized
disclosure, and then, three, restore the integrity of the data
system. Those clearly are the priorities for the company
itself.
After they have done all that, the covered person must
determine the risk to the consumer. And after they have reached
that conclusion, within 48 hours, they are supposed to give the
notice to the FTC and the consumer. But there is no limit in
this draft bill for how long a person can take to complete
steps one, two and three. There is just no limit. The covered
person, company, knows about a breach, could take a week, a
year, maybe 5 years and then, within 48 hours of that, provide
notice to the Federal Trade Commission and the consumers.
The bill from the last Congress included an outer limit of
60 days from the discovery of the breach to provide notice of
the breach. That outer limit has been dropped from this
discussion draft. If we were to include an outer limit, how
long should that limit be, in your opinion.
Ms. Ramirez. In my view, and the commission's view, is that
the time for notification should be as soon as practicably
possible. That may differ depending on the circumstances. I
believe that 60 days should be at most an outer limit. Again,
our view is that the sooner, the better. The sooner the notice
is provided, the sooner that a consumer can take appropriate
steps to protect and try to mitigate any harm that may result
from a breach.
I don't believe there is a particular number that I can
give you sitting here today because it may depend on the
circumstances, the nature of the breach, the size of the
company, but I would say that 60 days would be at most an outer
limit.
Mr. Waxman. Sixty days would be an outer limit, but as soon
as practicable?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Waxman. That the information should go to the consumer
that their identity has been compromised?
Ms. Ramirez. That is correct.
Mr. Waxman. A security leak. Thank you for that.
The discussion draft provides an exemption from the bill's
data security requirements for entities that are subject to
data security requirements under different bills, the Gramm-
Leach-Bliley or the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act, for any activities governed by GLB and
HIPAA. Now, this is a departure from last year's bill.
Last year's bill only said that compliance with these two
other statutes meant you were in compliance with the
requirements of this legislation as it was drafted, provided
that the requirements of GLB and HIPAA were similar or greater
than those required under last year's bill. The language was
not phrased as exemption for entities subject to FTC
jurisdiction but rather as an alternative means of compliance.
It is unclear to me whether under the draft bill, the
Federal Trade Commission maintains the ability to enforce any
data security requirements against those entities or if the
safeguards in those other laws must meet or exceed those in the
discussion draft. Do you believe that this exemption could
potentially limit the Federal Trade Commission's enforcement
abilities with respect to entities subject to the other two
statutes, those other two statutes, and could you explain your
answer to that?
Ms. Ramirez. Under my reading of the bill, I do believe
that it creates, potentially creates a gap in authority,
because it does exempt entities that are subject to FTC
jurisdiction from having breached notification requirements
which are not required under Gramm-Leach-Bliley. So that is a
concern about there being a potential gap in authority.
Mr. Waxman. And do you believe this exemption could
potentially lead to a disparity in the security requirements
for nonbank financial institutions and everyone else under
the----
Ms. Ramirez. I do.
Mr. Waxman. And what is your understanding of the effect of
the phrase ``any activities governed by GLB or HIPAA'' on the
scope of this exemption? What is the Gramm-Leach-Bliley
activity, is that just issuing privacy notices? Is that
following the FTC's safeguard rule, or is that marketing?
Ms. Ramirez. Again, that activity-based exemption, it is a
little bit unclear exactly how broadly it might be interpreted.
But I think that the key point is that it does create a
disparity between the obligations of certain financial
institutions so that it is a concern about in connection with
the authority that is provided.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I just want to point this out as an area where
we need to work together to make sure that there is no
ambiguity or poor drafting that would undermine what we are
trying to do.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman very much. I agree
with his questioning and agree with his assessment about where
we can fortify the bill, and I look forward to working with you
on that.
And the chair is happy to recognize Mr. Olson for 5
minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair.
Commissioner Ramirez, welcome. Thank you for your time
today. As you know the SAFE Data Act would require an entity to
begin to notify as promptly as possible, and that is a quote,
individuals whose personal information was acquired or assessed
in a breach following an assessment, and a notification should
be based on risk of harm, not just on the fact that a breach
had occurred. Otherwise, we may find ourselves in a situation
where consumers are flooded with notices by companies, become
desensitized, and then may not take action to protect
themselves when there is a real risk due to a significant
breach where personal identifiable information was stolen, and
identity theft could occur.
As currently drafted this legislation standard for risk is,
quote, reasonable risk of harm. In response to my colleague
Congressman Stearns' questions, you said that that is the
standard that the FTC supports. Do you think consumers would be
better served in the long run if the standard were changed to,
``significant risk of harm''? And what in your opinion is the
difference between a reasonable risk of harm and a significant
risk of harm?
Ms. Ramirez. I don't think that consumers would be better
served if the standard were to be elevated to a significant
risk. I think the key objective, as I understand it, of the
draft bill is to ensure that consumers are appropriately
protected if there is a breach. And my concern would be that by
imposing a higher standard, that key objective would be
undermined.
So I think it is appropriate to apply a reasonableness
standard. But my fear is that by using the word significant it
might just be a standard that might be too high and that it
would risk undermining the ability of consumers to take
effective steps to protect themselves if there is a breach in
security.
Mr. Olson. And one more question, commissioner, a couple
more. Does the commission see the concerns about the dangers of
over-notification or, as my 14-year-old daughter and 11-year-
old son would say, spam?
Ms. Ramirez. In my view, the greater danger is that
consumers not be provided adequate notice to protect themselves
against data breaches, so I don't believe that over-
notification is a serious issue. I would be more concerned
about not providing adequate protection if the standard were to
be elevated.
Mr. Olson. I am sure that we can agree that there is some
balance there between over-notification and timely
notification?
Ms. Ramirez. That is right. And I believe the
reasonableness standard accommodates that.
Mr. Olson. OK. Thanks for that. And one final question, why
does the FTC feel so strongly about obtaining authority over
nonprofits and universities for data security breaches?
Ms. Ramirez. The issue there is that, regardless of the
nature of the particular entity, if the entity does have
personal information about a consumer and there is a data
breach, there is harm to the consumer regardless of whether
that entity is either a nonprofit or a for-profit entity. So
that distinction, in our view, would not provide adequate
protection. So we are pleased to see that the draft bill does
provide coverage for nonprofits.
Mr. Olson. Yes, ma'am. Well, I am hearing some concerns
from the nonprofit sector and the universities about this
provision, and I would like to work with you forward and work
with the chairman to resolve these concerns back home for the
people I represent.
Ms. Ramirez. We would be pleased to do so.
Mr. Olson. Thank you, ma'am. I yield back my time.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman. And the chair
recognizes Mr. Gonzalez for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
To my colleagues who have worked on this for the past few
years, again, just that we continue down this road and haven't
been successful yet, we passed things out of the House, and
then we can't say that much about controlling anything that the
Senate does, but it does mean that we will not be moving timely
and aggressively.
To Mr. Stearns, thank you for his leadership. I still
remember way back then, Cliff, when we used to say, don't
collect it if you can't protect it. Remember we used to say
that? And I think we are still saying that. And what has
transpired since that time is that we haven't had the
safeguards. We haven't had the review and the protections, of
course. And we have just had--what have we had? We have had
more breaches. I would like to think that had we had something
in place, we would not have had the occurrences that have
transpired recently.
Commissioner Ramirez, thank you very much for being here
today. My questions are going to go to information brokers. And
I do want to compare past efforts with the present effort, and
hopefully, we can even improve what we have in the initial
draft. H.R. 2221 had a lot as it related to information
brokers. And I just want to get your opinion as to whether any
new version of legislation should maybe also include some of
these responsibilities that information brokers should be
charged with. We had accuracy access and dispute resolution
aspects or provisions when it came to brokers, but I am going
to be a little more specific on some things that I believe at
this early date the draft would not include, and I am going to
ask whether you think it would be important that we would
include these particular provisions: 2221 required information
brokers to submit its security policies to the FTC, is that a
good idea?
Ms. Ramirez. I think generally data security brokers need
to be covered under any appropriate legislation, just as any
other entity would be. If they collect information about a
consumer, they ought to be covered.
Mr. Gonzalez. 2221 permitted the FTC to conduct an audit or
require each information broker to conduct an audit of its
security practices, good provision?
Ms. Ramirez. Again, I think the data security measures that
apply to other entities ought to apply equally to data brokers,
because any entity that collects, gathers and uses personal
information of consumers need to have appropriately protective
data security measures.
Mr. Gonzalez. Maybe even more so since that is your primary
objective and activity, is it not, as opposed to someone else
that, again, relative to their own commercial transaction may
require certain information that is personal in nature and
needs to be protected? But we are talking about information
brokers. The very purpose of their existence is to do what?
Ms. Ramirez. I understand the point. All I am trying to say
is that all entities that gather information that is personal
to consumers create a potential risk of harm when there is a
data breach. So, from the commission's perspective, we don't
want to draw distinctions. If an entity collects and uses
consumer information there ought to be appropriate data
security measures and absolutely they ought to apply to data
brokers.
Mr. Gonzalez. And that is the reason it was in 2221, and we
would agree with you of course. The last two, because I have
about a minute and a half, required the FTC to promulgate rules
requiring information brokers to establish measures
facilitating the investigation of breaches. Would that be
important?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Gonzalez. And lastly, prohibit information brokers from
pretexting, the practice of obtaining information through false
representations?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you very much.
And I yield back Madam Chair.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman.
And the chair recognizes Mr. Pompeo for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Thank you for being here today, Ms. Ramirez. You talked
about your concern for the exemption for publicly available
information that you said that now with current technology, it
has increased the value of that information. Can you give me an
example of what you are thinking of?
Ms. Ramirez. I think there are a number of companies that
gather information about consumers because it may aid, for
instance, in connection with advertising and online behavioral
advertising in particular. I know that the Wall Street Journal
series has identified a number of companies that do this. It is
an area that is of significant concern to the commission. And
again, regardless of the fact that the information may be
publicly available, given that it is now aggregated and it can
be accessed technologically and much more easily, it raises
significant data security concerns.
Mr. Pompeo. And what kind of information are you concerned
about? Is it addresses? Tell me what it is that is publicly
available that you are concerned about this aggregation of this
information in the hands of these people you think are going to
do harm.
Ms. Ramirez. It could be addresses. It could be names,
family members that reside in a house. That combined with other
information could potentially lead to security concerns.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you.
I want to come back to something Congressman Stearns was
speaking of. He was talking about the definition in the draft
of legitimate business purposes. And if I understood your
testimony correctly, you want to retain the authority, that you
want the FTC to retain the authority to define that, that is to
say we are going to apply a reasonableness standard, is that
correct?
Ms. Ramirez. That is right.
Mr. Pompeo. Forgive me for my skepticism. I have been 16
years in business, and when the Federal Government says, don't
worry, we will be reasonable, it causes alarm bells to go off
in my head.
Ms. Ramirez. Perhaps it might help if I can articulate a
concern. In many of these data breach cases, we find that
information has been maintained for very lengthy periods of
time when in fact the company really had no reason to maintain
that information. So that is why we, and I personally, believe
that companies need to take greater care in ensuring that the
consumer information that they maintain is needed. And if it is
no longer needed, they should dispose of that information
safely; otherwise, it just increases the potential for harm
should there be a breach.
Mr. Pompeo. Suppose a company had some information, and
they had no real current use for it, but they thought there
might be value in that information 20 years from now. They
might be able to sell their business, and somebody else might
be able to use that information, but they couldn't touch today
what exactly it is they thought the value of that was. But a
legitimate business person, at least in that business owner's
mind was, you know, I think there is value there. I worked to
get that information. I obtained that information lawfully, and
I now possess it, and I would just like to hang onto it because
I think there may a good lawful use of that information
sometime down the road. Would you consider that, after 10 or 20
years, would you consider that a legitimate business purpose in
retaining that information?
Ms. Ramirez. I would be concerned that--there are many
companies that do make that statement. My concern is that that
is at odds with the desire to have adequate security. Because,
again, the more that you keep information, the greater danger
that it creates. So I am not going to sit here and say, it can
only be after 5 years. I think there needs to be an appropriate
assessment under particular facts and circumstances. But what
we do advocate and I personally believe is that companies need
to take a greater look at their practices, at their data
security practices, to ensure that they minimize the possible
risks of harm to consumers.
Mr. Pompeo. Right. I am not speaking to their practices in
terms of securing that data. I am simply speaking to their
desire to hold onto this thing that they view as their
property, this thing that they have paid for and worked for and
worked really hard to maintain, and they are engaged in the
most capable security process you can imagine; they have not
had a breach, and all they want to do is hold onto their
property. But as I hear you, there is some risk that the FTC is
going to come in and say, sorry, not legitimate?
Ms. Ramirez. No. Again, I think the standard to be applied
is reasonableness. I think what the FTC and I personally
believe is that companies simply need to take a stronger look
and ask the question, do we really truly need this information,
and not just simply use the concept of, oh, we may need it down
the line without care to ask important questions about whether
that information is entirely needed.
Mr. Pompeo. Great. Thank you.
Ms. Ramirez. And again, our focus is on information. I can
just give you an example. I highlighted one case today,
Ceridian, where Social Security numbers were being retained for
a period when they were no longer needed in that particular
instance. Again, there was no need to maintain those.
Mr. Pompeo. And when you say needed, you mean, in your
mind, as opposed to in the company's mind?
Ms. Ramirez. The company no longer had reason to maintain
those Social Security numbers, and unfortunately, there was a
breach, and it created significant risk of harm to consumers.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you. My time is expired.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman.
The chair is pleased to realize the chairman emeritus of
this committee, Mr. Dingell, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Welcome,
Commissioner Ramirez. I will be asking yes and no questions so
I would appreciate your cooperation because time is short. Now,
the draft legislation pending, our consideration exempts
entities that must comply with the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act or
GLBA. The Federal Trade Commission's role to implement the data
privacy requirements of GLBA is known as the safeguard rule, is
that correct?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Commissioner, does the safeguard rule
require that covered entity, that a covered entity under the
jurisdiction of the FTC notify a consumer of a data breach
within a certain period of time, yes or no?
Ms. Ramirez. No, it does not.
Mr. Dingell. Commissioner, so an entity regulated by FTC
that is covered under GLBA, but not the draft bill, is under no
statutory or regulatory obligation to notify consumers of a
data breach within a time certain; is that correct?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, it would seem to me that we should
consider removing the draft bill's GLBA exemption as well as to
include H.R. 2221 60-day backstop notification in the interests
of improving consumer protection. Now, the draft bill allows
the Commission to modify the definition of the term ``personal
information'' according to the Administrative Procedure Act, or
APA, which I applied. I am worried, however, though, that the
bill imposes vague conditions on the Commission to be satisfied
before it could commence a rulemaking.
I fear that the effect would be that the Commission may
never amend the definition of ``personal information.''
Now, Commissioner, has the Commission examined this matter
and, if so, does the Commission share my opinion on the matter?
Ms. Ramirez. We do have concerns about the ability of the
FTC to modify the definition of ``personal information'' as I
articulated earlier in my testimony.
Mr. Dingell. Now, I would request that the Commission
submit its comments for the record. Would you do that for us,
please, on this question?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes, of course.
Mr. Dingell. Now, I understand the draft bill does not
treat data brokers any different from other entities that
collect and store personal information. This is a change from
H.R. 2221, which by the way passed the House overwhelmingly,
which describes additional requirements for data brokers.
The bill does not contain provisions that allow consumers
to have reasonable access to information data brokers who
collect information about them; is that correct?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Commissioner, does the Commission believe
that brokers should be subject to more stringent data security
and breach notification requirements than other entities that
collect and store personal information; yes or no?
Ms. Ramirez. In my view, yes.
Mr. Dingell. Would you submit such amplification of that as
you might deem appropriate?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Commissioner, does the Commission believe
that consumers should have a statutory right to reasonable
access of the personal information that data brokers collect
about them; yes or no?
Ms. Ramirez. In my view, yes.
Mr. Dingell. And I believe you would say that that is the
only way you are going to assure that they will have that right
to access; is that right?
Ms. Ramirez. In my view, yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Madam Chairman, I appreciate your work on
the bill so far, and I want to thank you for these hearings.
As my questions have indicated, I believe there are parts
of the bill that can be improved. I stand by to work with you
and am ready to assist you and the rest of our colleagues in
order to report a bipartisan consensus bill that offers
consumers the best protections possible. And I would observe,
just quickly once more, the FTC has substantial experience in
the protection of personal privacy from data collectors and
things of that kind; is that not so, Madam Commissioner?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. So, Madam Chairman, I thank you for the
courtesy and I yield back the balance of my time, which
constitutes 37 seconds. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman very much and
recognize Mr. Guthrie for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much. Thank you, Madam
Commissioner, for being here.
I appreciate this and this is a serious issue that we have
to address, and it looks like there is going to be significant
work to do this in a way that is bipartisan. And I really
didn't even think about this, and Mr. Pompeo said, but, you
know, some of the things I learned when I was involved in the
State legislature, involved in writing law and so forth, is
that we have got to be as clear as we can because you see
things--and just an example, you know, laws written 50, 60
years ago today are being used to, I think, doing
interpretations by agencies that were never intended.
And so we just want to be careful that we are not just
dealing with each other, and we know each other, and we know
each other are thinking, but we have got to think what is going
to happen as we go down the road.
And so in that, you know, I say, you have been there, and
we had SEC here before and they said, well, we are trying to
solve uncertainty. This may have to be decided in court if what
we are doing is right. So when we look at words like
``reasonable'' and ``significant risk,'' ``reasonable risk,''
just kind of understanding what we are thinking. And so I know
we talk about reasonable risk in data security and significant
risk.
And if you would kind of talk about the differences in
those two and the cost of complying with this, I guess, for a
business or in the level of security for consumers. We have got
to decide, give this consumer the security they have, with the
business having the knowledge or the certainty of what it is
going to cost them to do, so they can plan and move forward.
So just the difference in reasonable and significant risk,
in your mind, I guess.
Ms. Ramirez. In my mind, the concern that I had was that
using the word ``significant'' would elevate the standards and
the result would be that it would undermine protection to the
consumer. The FTC has applied a reasonableness standard
throughout its enforcement history in this arena, and it really
does depend on the particular circumstances.
We would like to take into account, again, the nature of
the information that might be at issue, the size of the
company, the costs that might be involved. So I believe that
taking a flexible approach allows us to fashion the right
balance between the costs and burdens that may be imposed on
business, as well as making sure that we have robust protection
for consumers.
Now, I also want to highlight that the cases that the
agency has brought in this arena have been--have related to
very basic and fundamental failures in data security. These
have not been close calls, so I hope that provides some
assurance to those who may have concerns.
Mr. Guthrie. Yes. I am not an attorney, I did have one law
school class, and the questions on tests aren't usually the
obvious things, and that is where--usually there is some area
that that is why it ends up in court; not that it is clear that
somebody had data for 20 years, had Social Security numbers,
had no need for them, and somebody breached them and took them.
As a matter of fact, at the expense of what a breach costs
a company, I wouldn't want to hold on to that information
more--if I didn't have a purpose or a need for it.
And I want to hit one thing and I will yield back. You
talked earlier about the time for notification was too long, I
guess in the draft you thought was too long. Did you say what
you thought was reasonable for that, or what you suggest?
Ms. Ramirez. Our view is that notification ought to be
provided as soon as practically feasible because, again, the
circumstances may change. In certain situations it may be
appropriate to have a short requirement of just a few days. In
other situations, there may be a need for a company to take
more time to write--to provide notifications.
So I think there ought to be an outer limit, and I have
suggested that 60 days would be an outer limit but, again, that
is an outer limit. Our view is the sooner, the better, because
that allows consumers to take appropriate steps to mitigate any
potential harm.
Mr. Guthrie. Oh, I agree with that. The difference is how
we define--that is how we define it, so yes.
Ms. Ramirez. And, again, I think it is important to
preserve some flexibility because it may differ depending on
particular facts and circumstances.
Mr. Guthrie. Yes. I think there was one testimony in a
previous hearing trying to figure out what happened, and they
were trying to go through that. But you are right, because I
mean, I would want to know as soon as practicable. Those were
those words, you argued ``practical'' or ``practicable,''
right?
Ms. Ramirez. Or ``feasible.''
Mr. Guthrie. But you are right. That is absolutely right.
So I appreciate that look forward to working with the
chairwoman and thank you for your courtesy.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman. For not being a
lawyer, you sure play one well on TV.
The chair is happy to recognize Ms. Schakowsky for 5
minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Let me just say that this committee has a history of
working in a bipartisan basis, and the House did pass out H.R.
20--is it 21--whatever that brush bill was that I was a
cosponsor of.
Ms. Ramirez. H.R. 2221.
Ms. Schakowsky. And, you know, we worked very closely
together and, as Mr. Stearns says, it has been going on since
2005. I am so hopeful that we will be able to craft a bill. I
feel confident that we will be able to craft a bill. In some
respects this draft is even better, the quickness of certain
notification. But we need to focus on, I think, where those
differences are.
So let me just ask a couple of questions, Ms. Ramirez.
The Republican discussion draft includes language that I am
concerned could have a narrowing effect that we don't totally
understand. The draft narrows application of the bill's data
security and notification requirements to persons engaged in
interstate commerce with personal information, quote, ``related
to that commercial activity.''
So let's take someone, a company like Amazon that is in the
business of selling books. And in that process it generally
collects your full name, address, credit card number and
security code. But what if they also ask you for your Social
Security number? I don't think they need that to sell a book.
And if they did ask you for it, it probably wouldn't be to sell
you that book. And what about other information that isn't at
this time within the meaning of personal information like an IP
address?
I know this is a fairly technical point so you may not have
an answer right now, but to the extent you can, do you know how
the FTC would interpret and implement this phrase, quote,
``related to that commercial activity''?
Ms. Ramirez. I think we would interpret it to be
coextensive with our jurisdiction over entities that engage in
interstate commerce. I think it would be relatively broadly
interpreted. Again, the precise scope of the definition is an
area that we are happy to work with the committee to ensure
that we assist in the committee coming up with a suitable
definition that addresses the concerns that have been
articulated today.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, I am just worried that it is
ambiguous language, and we may want to work with you and work
with the committee to tighten that up.
Ms. Ramirez. And we would absolutely be pleased to work
with you on that language.
Ms. Schakowsky. Great. Here we are, H.R. 2221 from the last
Congress and the Republican discussion draft of the SAFE Data
Act require notice to the FTC and consumers of an electronic
data breach only if the covered person has determined that the
breach, quote, ``presents a reasonable risk of identity theft,
fraud or other unlawful conduct.''
I know that others have asked this, but I wonder if one
more time, do you believe this trigger for notification, based
on reasonable risk, et cetera, is appropriate?
Ms. Ramirez. I do. I think that the standard of reasonable
risk gives it appropriate flexibility to accommodate both the
need to protect consumers, as well as the need to take into
account any burdens, excessive burdens on business.
Ms. Schakowsky. And it falls on the covered person to
determine whether or not the trigger has been--for notification
to the FTC and consumers--has been met. Do you believe it is
appropriate for the covered person to make the ultimate
determination about the risk posed to consumers from a data
breach and whether notice to the FTC and consumers is required;
and, if not, who should make that determination and how should
they go about doing that?
Ms. Ramirez. That is a serious concern that we have. We
believe that the FTC ought to be notified at the same time as
other law enforcement agencies so that we can also examine the
issue and determine if there ought to be notification that may
differ from the determination that is made by the company.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. And, finally, in the few seconds
I have, H.R. 2221 would require notice to law enforcement, the
FTC, and consumers in the event of a data breach involving
electronic records. There is no requirement for notice in the
event of a data breach involving paper records.
Do you believe the scope of the notification requirement
should be expanded to include data breaches involving paper
records?
Ms. Ramirez. I do. I believe that paper records can also
pose serious concerns and risks to consumers.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, and I yield back at zero.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentlelady. The chair--I was
going to give Christmas presents that equaled per seconds, like
Christmas gifts would be valued by the size and the amount of
time you give back.
The chair is happy to recognize Mr. Harper for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and thank you,
Commissioner, for being here and giving us your insight into
this.
If I could just talk a little bit more about reasonable
risk or significant risk, and you have indicated you support
the reasonable risk standard.
How do you define that reasonable risk? What do you see
that being?
Ms. Ramirez. I think if the information that is at issue is
potentially going to be misused, can be misused to harm
consumers, I think that there ought to be a presumption that
there ought to be notification.
Again, I do--I do want to highlight that the agency has
done significant work in this arena and our enforcement actions
and consent orders that we have entered into, I think, can
elaborate more fully on the situations that we have found where
action was necessary. So, but again, I think there needs to be
flexibility; I think reasonableness accomplishes that, and I
would be concerned about changing that standard.
Mr. Harper. So you said the Commission has done significant
work versus reasonable work?
Ms. Ramirez. We have great experience in the area of data
security.
Mr. Harper. Right. So how would we vary with significant?
If the standard was significant risk, how would you view that
different than reasonable risk?
Ms. Ramirez. I think it is a flexible concept, and I don't
have any magic words to articulate here today, but I think, in
my mind, the key is how do we best protect consumers. And if
that is the aim of the legislation, I believe that we ought to
err in favor of protecting consumers, given that we know that
the incidence of identity theft and data breach, by the way, is
one significant cause, of, again, identity theft continues to
be such a significant concern.
It is the most--we have received the most complaints
relating to identity theft than any other complaint, and that
has been in the last decade, so it remains a very significant
concern.
Mr. Harper. So ``reasonable'' would be in the eye of the
beholder in some instances, is how we define this.
Ms. Ramirez. No. I believe that you can establish objective
standards. The reasonableness of the concept that is, you know,
well and defined in many different areas and used in many
different areas of law, so I think it is one that can be
employed in a way that I think would address concerns. I think
it maintains appropriate flexibility and allows one to balance
potentially competing interests.
Mr. Harper. Yes. And I know as we go through the discussion
draft and we look at it, there is going to be that discussion
between reasonable and significant risk. You know, of course,
as you know in the practice of law, some-- you will have
preponderance of the evidence, or, in a criminal case, beyond a
reasonable doubt, but also there is clear and convincing.
So I think you are going to have that tug back and forth
between reasonable and significant, wanting to protect the
consumers but also looking at how the businesses will deal with
this. So, you know, I appreciate your input on that.
As we look at the notification of when you believe FTC
should be notified, you believe they should be notified at the
same time as law enforcement. Is that what you have stated?
Ms. Ramirez. I do, yes.
Mr. Harper. OK. And what period of time do you think is the
optimum time for you to get that notification?
Ms. Ramirez. I think as soon as the breach takes place. I
am now not remembering if the bill is specific on that point,
but essentially at the very outset, when other law enforcement
agencies are notified.
Mr. Harper. When we look at that specific time limit, you
know, these are certainly a great concern, as you have stated
and as we know, data breach is something that everybody is
concerned about and with this age that we have.
So tell me why you believe that the FTC should be notified
prior to the consumers?
Ms. Ramirez. As a law enforcement agency, I think it is
important that the FTC be provided prompt notification so that
it can take appropriate action if necessary.
In addition, I think that waiting for the outcome of a
particular company to engage in its own risk assessment risks a
situation where a company may perhaps conclude that
notification won't be necessary to consumers. The FTC may have
a different view of it. It may provide an additional level of
assurance as protection for consumers.
Mr. Harper. Well, let me end with this quickly. Do you
believe that this legislation, that it will address the current
and evolving environment with respect to cloud computing?
Ms. Ramirez. I am sorry, could you repeat that?
Mr. Harper. Do you think that this legislation
appropriately addresses the current and evolving environment
with respect to cloud computing?
Ms. Ramirez. I do. I think, again, cloud computing is, of
course, the wave of the future. But the data security methods
ought to apply to cloud computing, just as they do with other
methods of storage.
Mr. Harper. Thank you. With that, I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman. The chair recognizes
Dr. Cassidy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cassidy. Ms. Ramirez, the examples of health info which
are not covered by HIPAA, can you give me those?
Ms. Ramirez. Let me give you an example from one of the
matters that the FTC handled, the Eli Lilly matter, which
involved the release of information about individuals who had
used Prozac. HIPAA only covers particular entities such as
hospitals, doctors' offices.
Mr. Cassidy. So a noncovered entity, if you will.
Ms. Ramirez. It would be a noncovered entity; correct.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, you--so this may answer my next question.
It seems, as I am trying to understand this, that you in effect
have two sets of data, one with unique identifiers and the
other that is gained from publicly accessible information that
you have a similar concern, even though it might not have a
unique identifier; is that correct?
Ms. Ramirez. Well, it is not the issue of a unique
identifier. Again, when it comes to public records, our concern
is that once you compile information and you gather information
that in the past might have been very difficult to collect,
once it is collected at one place, that can then raise very
serious concerns.
Mr. Cassidy. So what are those concerns?
Ms. Ramirez. When you have data aggregators that are
gathering information about----
Mr. Cassidy. Well, I understand what a data aggregator is,
I understand that. They get all the data about mortgages being
sold in Washington, D.C.
Ms. Ramirez. One example could be that they may have
information that might--can be given to a payday lender, for
instance, because they have information that may reveal--have
indications about income level. That information can then be
used by a payday lender or someone who aims to engage in some
type of fraudulent activity.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, a payday lender is not inherently
fraudulent?
Ms. Ramirez. No, no, no, no, no. But my point is it can be
used by persons who may want--seek to misuse that information,
so it is very important that that information----
Mr. Cassidy. But that is true of all information in a free
society; correct? I am nervous about limiting access to
publicly available information, and I don't necessarily
disagree with you, but it always seems like we should have a
bias towards openness, knowing that those--so why should we not
have this bias towards openness if it is not being used by a
fraudulent entity and if it is publicly available otherwise?
Ms. Ramirez. The key is to ensure that appropriate measures
are taken to protect the information that has been aggregated.
You then--you now have an ability with these data aggregators
who have gathered just a treasure trove of information that,
again, previously may not have been easily accessible.
Mr. Cassidy. You keep saying that, and I understand that. I
understand that issue. What I don't know is what danger you see
with that. And I am asking openly.
Ms. Ramirez. So the danger can be that it can be misused
for a number of reasons.
Mr. Cassidy. But I guess all information could be misused.
All information can be misused. And so I am just trying to
understand.
Ms. Ramirez. So the fundamental point is that that
information needs to be protected; and if that information, if
there has been a breach, the consumer ought to be notified. And
in the case of data brokers, I believe that there ought to be
some additional requirements where a consumer may have access
to that----
Mr. Cassidy. Just so I understand better, because clearly I
am struggling, can you give me a specific example of--and just
so I can understand--again, I am not challenging, I am trying
to understand--a specific example of where a data aggregator
had data that was breached that did not include a Social, did
not include a credit card number or a security code, it was
just like, you know, Bill Cassidy, the Congressman from Baton
Rouge, and he has got three kids and et cetera, et cetera. Are
you with me?
Ms. Ramirez. Let me give you one example. Information
relating to income, for instance, is information that might be
gathered or somehow ascertained through the access of publicly
available information.
Mr. Cassidy. Now I am told, when I suddenly saw all these
catalogs that I was getting back from people who send catalogs,
that they looked at my census track and said, oh, he is in a
pretty good census track, and so therefore I started getting an
incredible number of catalogs. Now, are we going to restrict
the ability of someone to know what census track I live in?
Ms. Ramirez. No, but I think you can provide access rights
so that if, for instance--again let me go back to----
Mr. Cassidy. Now the access rights is a separate issue. The
access rights, I gather from Mr. Dingell's thoughts, and it
actually seems--I can see some use in that.
But, again, I am wondering, what is the inherent damage----
Ms. Ramirez. We would not be restricting the ability to
gather the information that was publicly available. We would
simply want there to be adequate security measures to protect
the information, and we would want there to be notification to
the consumer in appropriate circumstances. And in light of
potential misuse of information, additional requirements such
as access may be one way of addressing. But I am not advocating
that there be a limitation on the ability----
Mr. Cassidy. As the risk of losing my Christmas presents, I
will say, though, that it almost seems that if you have one
with credit card numbers and Socials and medical, you know,
military identification numbers, that clearly should be in its
own silo.
The other seems--the other seems, I am not sure--and I am
sure there is going to be an expense in terms of being in the
silo. The other seems to me to be inherently less, I don't
know, onerous as regards the protective measures taken, because
it doesn't have the same import if somebody knows I have got
three kids and live in the census track as opposed to knowing
my Social.
Ms. Ramirez. My apologies if I haven't been able to fully
articulate the potential risks that we see, and my staff is
very happy to work with you to provide some additional
information if I have not been able to answer your question
adequately.
Mr. Cassidy. If you will do that. And, again, I would just
understand. If you all send it to me, I would appreciate it.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack I thank the gentleman. I recognize Mr. Rush
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Madam Chairman. We have
known for several Congresses now that mass MEGA data breaches
could and will occur. And we have had the vision to introduce
legislation to make these breaches more difficult to perpetuate
and that would make consumers as close to whole as possible
when they piece back together their personal lives and
identities.
The DATA Accountability and Trust Act that I reintroduced
in May, along with Congressman Barton and Congresswoman
Schakowsky, is essentially the same bill that was passed out of
this committee in December of 2009, in the 111th Congress, as
H.R. 2221. That bill passed out of the House on suspension and
was then referred to the Senate Commerce Committee.
When I became chair of this subcommittee in the 110th
Congress, I introduced H.R. 958, which has since been shaped to
keep up with online and network technologies and emerging
formats for storing consumer data. These technologies and
formats improve consumers' lives and make new and exciting
business efforts and revenue models viable. But it has been
important in our approach to remain technologically neutral, so
that we don't pick winners and losers, and also cognizant--and
remain cognizant of the unique natures of the business models
and realities involving what the bill defines as ``service
providers,'' ``information brokers,'' and ``fraud databases.''
Madam Commissioner, I only have a few minutes and so I am
going to ask you a few questions, and I intend to ask each
panel these questions. So if I could get a yes or no answer,
that would certainly help me. And if I don't get to ask the
questions, I have some that I will refer to you in writing for
the record.
Should commercial entities that do business in interstate
commerce be required under Federal law to protect individuals'
personal information by securing it and protecting it from
improper access?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Rush. And when these entities contract with a third
party to maintain that personal data, should they be further
required to establish and implement information, security
policies, and procedures?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Rush. Should the FTC be authorized to prescribe what
those policies and procedures ought to be?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Rush. Should personal information be defined to include
an individual's first name or initial and last name, or
address, or phone number, in combination with any--with any one
or more of the following. An individual's Social Security
number?
Ms. Ramirez. I believe that that would be too narrow a
definition.
Mr. Rush. I have got a number of them, yes or no. Yes or
no.
Ms. Ramirez. No.
Mr. Rush. A driver's license number?
Ms. Ramirez. No.
Mr. Rush. A passport number, military number, or similar
identification number issued on a government document for
verifying identity?
Ms. Ramirez. No.
Mr. Rush. A financial account number?
Ms. Ramirez. No.
Mr. Rush. A credit card number?
Ms. Ramirez. No.
Mr. Rush. A debit card number?
Ms. Ramirez. No.
Mr. Rush. Or any security, access code, or password needed
to access the account?
Ms. Ramirez. No.
Mr. Rush. Should information brokers be required to submit
their data security policies to the FCC?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Rush. Should information brokers be required to
establish procedures that consumers may follow to review and,
if necessary, dispute the accuracy of their personal data?
Ms. Ramirez. In my view, yes.
Mr. Rush. Thank you very much. You have been very kind and
helpful.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mrs. Bono Mack. The chair recognizes Mrs. Blackburn for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for
being here with us today.
I want to stay with this personally identified information,
because I think that gets to kind of the crux of the matter
when you talk to our constituents and you look at how they have
reacted to what has transpired with the Sony breach and the
amount of time that was required to inform people there. You
can go back as far as the TJX breach and the amount of time and
the inconvenience that was caused to individuals there.
So I think that what we have to do is that our goal should
be to define this legislation in a way that is very clear and
very meaningful to our constituents and to policymakers. And I
know Mr. Stearns talked about FTC control and authority, and
some people believe that we should not give the FTC the control
to make the policy. Specifically, the FTC with the rulemaking
process and having the ability to set what is personally
identified information is a very powerful tool, and there are
many that think we should define that in law and not give it to
the FTC.
So I want to stay with this. I want you to define for me,
just go down the tick list of--as making rules, what you would
put sequence, what would be personally identified information,
how you would sequence that in the rulemaking authority.
Ms. Ramirez. I think the touchstone here is information
that can be uniquely tied to an individual. I am afraid that I
just can't rattle off a list here, but my staff is very happy
to work with you to articulate in more specific terms. But,
again, the key would be information that can then be used to
identify someone. And I believe it would be broader than the
definition that is currently used in the draft bill.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. What I would like for you all to do,
then, is to submit that to us in writing, because I think this
is an area where we are going to need to focus, put some
attention on what this is, who owns that online presence; is it
becoming more important to our constituents? And we hear from
them daily on the privacy issue, on the data searching, the
data selling, all of these issues that are becoming
intertwined, even with the piracy issue and the intertwining
that is there.
So to say a unique tie may be a simple, concise answer to
give, but it does not provide the depth that we are going to
need and have as we go through this. So I would ask you to do
that.
OK. The chair talked about declaring war on identity theft
and online fraud, and I think she is exactly right on this
because--and I agree with her on this, and our constituents
look at this as a virtual marketplace that is out there. And
they look at the relationship they have had with brick-and-
mortar retails and entities and then with click-and-mortar
businesses and also virtuals. So let's talk about people who
have become the victim of identity theft. What services do you
think should be made available to them? People realize a free
credit report doesn't cut it. Credit monitoring doesn't cut it.
So tell me what you think for those that have been harmed
by identity theft. What services should be available for them?
Ms. Ramirez. I do think that credit monitoring is an
important aspect of the protection, but I also think it is
incumbent--what the consumer will need to do is to be very
vigilant, monitoring all of their financial accounts,
monitoring their billing statements, and if they see anything,
so that----
Mrs. Blackburn. So the personal responsibility aspect.
Ms. Ramirez. That is an element of it. And we provide
guidance to consumers about what they ought to do and the steps
that they ought to take.
Mrs. Blackburn. So you see the FTC's role more as providing
guidance on that.
Ms. Ramirez. In terms of--consumer education is a
significant piece of what the FTC does, and we do provide
significant information to consumers, helping them take steps
if their identity has been stolen or there is a risk of that,
what steps they can take to protect themselves.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Let me ask you one other thing. The
bill that we are considering, should it apply to government
systems?
Ms. Ramirez. The bill should apply to commercial activity.
That is the jurisdiction that the FTC has to commercial
entities, so that is the scope of our jurisdiction.
Mrs. Blackburn. And you don't think we should apply it to
government entities?
Ms. Ramirez. It is an area that is outside the scope of
what the FTC does.
Mrs. Blackburn. I respect that answer. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentlelady very much.
With that, we have concluded the first panel. We want to
thank our witness very much for her in-depth and very
thoughtful answers today.
I will say to the audience, we are going to take a 5-minute
break while we reseat the second panel, but to remind people
that there is an overflow room in 2123 for anybody who would
prefer to sit rather than stand.
So, again, Commissioner Ramirez, thank you very much for
your time today.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. See you all in 5 minutes.
[Recess.]
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. If the subcommittee could come
to order once again. If the gentleman in the corners could
please take your seats.
On our second panel we have four witnesses who are deeply
engaged on the issue of cybersecurity.
Testifying are Jason Goldman, Counsel, Telecommunications &
E-Commerce, U.S. Chamber of Commerce; Robert Holleyman,
President and CEO of the Business Software Alliance; Stuart
Pratt, President and CEO of the Consumer Data Industry
Association; and Marc Rotenberg, Executive Director for the
Electronic Privacy Information Center.
Good afternoon, gentlemen. Thank you all for coming. You
will each be recognized for 5 minutes. To help you keep track
of the time there is a time clock in front of you, and green,
red, yellow, you know what they mean. Yellow means 1 minute to
get to the conclusion of your testimony.

STATEMENTS OF JASON D. GOLDMAN, COUNSEL, TELECOMMUNICATIONS &
E-COMMERCE, U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE; ROBERT W. HOLLEYMAN, II,
PRESIDENT AND CEO, BUSINESS SOFTWARE ALLIANCE; STUART K. PRATT,
PRESIDENT AND CEO, CONSUMER DATA INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION; AND MARC
ROTENBERG, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ELECTRONIC PRIVACY INFORMATION
CENTER

Mrs. Bono Mack. So at this point in time we are going to
recognize Mr. Goldman for 5 minutes, and please remember to
turn your microphone on and bring it close to your mouth.

STATEMENT OF JASON D. GOLDMAN

Mr. Goldman. Good afternoon, Chairwoman Bono Mack, Ranking
Member Butterfield, and other distinguished members of the
subcommittee. I am Jason Goldman, Telecommunications & E-
Commerce Counsel of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the world's
largest federation, business federation, representing the
interests of more than 3 million businesses and organizations
of every size, sector, and region.
On behalf of the Chamber and its members, I thank you for
the opportunity to testify here today regarding the discussion
draft of the SAFE Data Act.
We live in an information economy. Today, Chamber members
of all shapes and sizes communicate with employees, existing
consumers, potential consumers, and business partners around
the world. They use data to spur sales and job growth, enhance
productivity, enable cost savings and improve efficiency.
Global and U.S. data usage are skyrocketing. In today's
tough economy, businesses depend more than ever on having
beneficial and trusted relationships with their customers.
Therefore, there is no question that protecting sensitive
customer information should be a priority for all businesses
that collect and store this data, and the customers deserve to
be promptly notified if a security breach has put them at risk
of identity theft, fraud, or other harm.
The Chamber supports the enactment of meaningful Federal
data security legislation that would implement national data
security standards to protect against the unauthorized access
to sensitive personal information about businesses' customers,
and breach notification requirements to notify customers when a
significant risk to them may result from a security breach. At
the same time, the Chamber urges policymakers to ensure that
any legislation in this area does not hinder innovation and
beneficial uses of the data.
The Chamber appreciates the willingness of the subcommittee
to work with us in legislation aimed at accomplishing this
goal. The Chamber only recently got this text of the SAFE Data
Act, so our comments are based on our initial read and may
change as we continue to vet the bill through our membership.
The United States has a national economy. And almost every
State has enacted various data security and breach notification
provisions, many of which differ from one another in material
ways. This patchwork of State laws not only makes compliance
difficult for businesses, but it can also create confusion for
customers who receive notices from many sources.
The Chamber supports the preemption of State information
security and related liability laws to create a national
uniform standard that will create regulatory certainty and
minimize compliance costs for businesses that operate in
multiple States.
The Chamber has long advocated for a notice requirement
that avoids the dangers of over-notification. As was discussed
in the previous panel, the Chamber worries that if needlessly
alarmed, customers may take actions that are not warranted and
are a waste of their time.
Alternatively, more worrisome, customers that are flooded
by these notices may be falsely lulled into inactivity and not
take proper action when the risk is justified.
Therefore, the Chamber is pleased that the draft bill
recognizes that the notification should be based on risk of
harm, not just on the mere fact that data breach occurred.
The Chamber agrees that notification of breach is not
necessary where the data has been rendered unusable,
unreadable, orindecipherable by different methods such as
encryption, redaction, or access controls.
The Chamber also recommends the inclusion of a threshold
number of individuals requiring notification that would trigger
notification to the FTC.
The Chamber agrees that consumers should be notified in a
timely manner after the occurrence of a reportable breach.
However, given the complexities of dealing with a data breach,
the Chamber recommends that the draft be modified to allow
companies a reasonable amount of time to notify consumers,
rather than a specific time frame.
Furthermore, to catch cybercrooks and other criminals, as
well as to ensure the safety of our Nation, the Chamber
supports the revisions in the draft bill permitting delay of
notification for law enforcement or national security purposes.
Along with that, the Chamber recommends inclusion of language
in the bill that identifies which specific agencies would
trigger that exception or would have been able to enact that
exemption.
Regarding liability, the Chamber is concerned about the
application of a daily fine as it relates to the bill's
security requirements. If any entity is found liable for
violating the data minimization requirement, is every day the
entity maintains records that should have been destroyed
throughout all of their data bases a multiplier penalty?
The Chamber appreciates the revisions on the data broker
provisions that were discussed in the panel earlier.
On enforcement, the Chamber is concerned about enabling
State attorneys general to impose 50 different enforcement
regimes that will undermine the uniformity of this act and make
compliance extremely difficult. At the very least, the draft
bill should curtail the ability of State attorneys general to
utilize private outside contingency attorneys to enforce this
act or to litigate claims on behalf of their constituents.
Also the Chamber appreciates the tech-neutral provision in
the act that says the FTC should implement in a tech-neutral
manner. And, last, the Chamber does appreciate the inclusion of
a prohibition of the no private right of action.
With that, thank you, and I am happy to answer any
questions.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Goldman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goldman follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Mr. Holleyman, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT W. HOLLEYMAN, II

Mr. Holleyman. Chairwoman Bono Mack, Mr. Butterfield,
members of the committee, Business Software Alliance strongly
supports the enactment of a national data security and data
breach notification law. We believe that that is important to
build trust and confidence in the digital economy.
This is now the fourth Congress to consider data breach
legislation, and we are grateful for the opportunity that we
have had to work with the members of this committee to advance
a bill.
The time to act is now. The need is clear, as are the
solutions. BSA endorses the key elements of the SAFE Data Act
that are before us today. We support requiring organizations
that hold sensitive personal information to implement
reasonable security procedures. And the draft bill takes into
account an organization's size, the scope of its activities,
and the costs involved.
We support creating incentives to adopt strong security
measures. The draft bill will promote the use of technologies
such as encryption, which render data unusable, unreadable, or
indecipherable to thieves if they manage to steal it. We
support an approach that avoids unnecessarily alarming or
confusing consumers, and the draft bill accomplishes that by
only requiring notification when there is a risk of identity
theft, fraud, or unlawful activity.
Finally, we support the bill's establishment of a uniform,
national framework with Federal enforcement preempting today's
patchwork of State laws.
We hear about new data breaches almost daily. One group,
the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, has recorded more than 2,500
of them since 2005, involving more than 530 million individual
records. In many cases these records include data that are
useful to identify individuals and then exploited by thieves,
such as Social Security, credit card, or driver's license
numbers.
Surveys indicate that these breaches are causing consumers
to question the security of online transactions, and that is
especially troubling, because we are in the middle of an
exciting new wave of innovation with the emergence of cloud
computing. Cloud computing offers tremendous new opportunities
for economic growth and efficiency. It allows businesses and
organizations to reinvent their back office operations and will
give users access to their data and services from any device,
whether they are at home, at the office, or on the road.
We cannot allow breaches to erode confidence in the cloud
environment or the Internet economy, and for years BSA members
have been working hard to protect data from cybercriminals. BSA
members are leaders in providing new security solutions and
themselves invest in reducing vulnerabilities and protecting
the integrity of their technology.
BSA members are developing cutting-edge security solutions
that are employed by businesses and consumers to defend against
the evolving and the very real threats. And BSA has led the
fight against the use of illegal software, not only because it
drains revenues from American companies, but also because
pirated software commonly includes malicious computer code that
hackers and other criminals use to steal data. Importantly, BSA
members are at the forefront of the cloud revolution, which
creates new opportunities to better store data behind strong
security walls.
As this committee understands, Congress also has a
responsibility. In the absence of a national law, States have
enacted their own data breach notification requirements.
Unfortunately, this has resulted in inconsistency that is
unwieldy for business and confusing for consumers. We need a
uniform national framework that better protects consumers and
also, as this bill does, promotes effective security measures.
I testified before this committee 2 years ago about the
need for a national data breach law. Since then, another 250
million sensitive records have been breached.
Madam Chairman, I commend you and your colleagues for
drafting this bill. I urge Congress to pass a Federal data
breach law this year. And the BSA and I look forward to working
with you and members of this committee to make that a reality.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much, Mr. Holleyman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holleyman follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Mr. Pratt, you are recognized for your 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF STUART K. PRATT

Mr. Pratt. Madam Chairman, Ranking Member Butterfield, and
members of the subcommittee. My name is----
Mrs. Bono Mack. Excuse me, is that microphone on?
Mr. Pratt. It is. I will pull it closer.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you.
Mr. Pratt. Madam Chairman--is it working?
Mrs. Bono Mack. If the light is on. I can't necessarily
tell, but the people in the back really care that they will
hear well.
Mr. Pratt. I am President and CEO of the Consumer Data
Industry Association. We appreciate the opportunity to testify
today.
For more than a decade, CDIA has been on record as
supporting the enactment of a inform Federal standard for both
security of sensitive personal information and notification of
consumers where there is a significant risk of identity theft.
With this in mind, we applaud the focus of this hearing.
Your committee's leadership is key to finding the right path
forward. CDIA's members support the proactive approach you have
taken by circulating a discussion draft in order to build the
much-needed consensus. It is the right step to take.
You have asked us to comment on the discussion draft known
as the SAFE Act, or SAFE Data Act. So, first, CDIA is very
encouraged by the essential structure of the draft bill. Risks
to sensitive consumer data are best addressed with two key
pillars:
First, sensitive personal data must be secured. The draft
proposal appropriately empowers the Federal Trade Commission to
write scalable regulations relative to data security, much as
the FTC and bank agencies have done for financial institutions
governed by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. CDIA members support
this approach.
Second, consumers must be notified when sensitive personal
information about them has been lost or stolen. Again, our
member support notification where, for example, there is a
significant risk of harm for the consumer, such as the
likelihood of becoming a victim of the crime of identity theft.
Within these two key pillars are many provisions which are
well thought out and deserve to be highlighted. For example,
the discussion draft establishes strong incentives for U.S.
businesses to adopt strategies to reduce risks by rendering
data unusable, unreadable, orindecipherable. These incentives
are appropriately technology-neutral and thus will spur
innovation in the design of systems that will ultimately
protect data about consumers.
The draft properly includes a risk-based trigger for
determining when a notice must be sent, which ensures that we
as consumers receive relevant and timely notices, rather than a
deluge of notices through which we need to sift to find the one
that is meaningful.
While the draft urges speedy notification of consumers, it
acknowledges the need for law enforcement to engage with
private sector and, in some cases, to delay such notices, but
not to allow delays that are unduly long.
We are pleased that the draft's proposals solve the problem
of overlapping laws with regard to data security. Fully
exempting persons who are subject to the data security
requirements of Title 5 of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ensures
that CDIA members, both large and small, are in the very best
position to successfully comply with the law and, most
importantly, to be successful in securing sensitive personal
information about consumers.
We encourage the committee to adopt a similar subject to
standard with regard to persons who are already held
accountable for data breach notification duties under Federal
laws, regulations, or agency guidance.
Ensuring a truly uniform national standard for both data
breach notification and data security is essential to the
success of the draft the proposal. To this end, we applaud the
inclusion of section 6. As the committee continues to refine
the discussion draft, we encourage it to consider a subject
matter approach to preemption to ensure that the standard is
truly uniform.
Regarding the content of notices, let me make just a couple
of points:
First, we thank you for the inclusion of language in
section 3(e), which makes it clear that the person who
experienced the breach and who is notifying consumers is the
one who pays for the credit reports to which the consumer is
entitled.
Second, for the sake of consumers, we request that the bill
be amended to require those who are sending out breach notices
to more than 5,000 individuals, to notify consumer reporting
agencies in advance so that our members can appropriately
prepare to handle the spike in volume.
Further, all persons issuing notices must verify the
accuracy of the contact information included. Our members have
at times discovered that breach notices issued by others had
incorrect toll-free numbers listed, which is a disservice to
consumers.
In terms of definitions, we are glad that section 5(7)(A)
establishes the definition for the term ``personal
information.'' Having a definition is clearly necessary to
ensure that all persons affected by the scope of the bill
understand the type of data which must be protected. Section
5(7)(B) properly excludes public records from that definition.
Our members are concerned with the inclusion of section
5(7)(C) which allows the FTC to alter the definition. We
believe the definition as proposed is adequate and should be
set by the Congress.
In closing, let me congratulate you on a very strong
discussion draft that is unencumbered by ancillary issues. The
committee is on the right track, and we look forward to
supporting its efforts to protect consumers' sensitive personal
information. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Pratt.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pratt follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Mr. Rotenberg, 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARC ROTENBERG

Mr. Rotenberg. Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr. Rush, members of
the committee. My name is Mark Rotenberg. I am the Executive
Director of the Electronic Privacy Information Center, and I
teach privacy law at the Georgetown Law Center, and I thank you
very much for holding this hearing today.
It is actually difficult to overstate the problem of
security breaches in the United States. In fact, as your
earlier hearings have demonstrated, these risks are far-
reaching and they impact millions of consumers,, in May, more
than 200,000 customers of Citigroup, and 100 million users of
the PlayStation Network also had information improperly
accessed.
And if I can make an additional point for you this morning,
these problems are going to get worse. We are moving more of
our personal data from our laptops, our devices, and our
desktop computers into the cloud where they can be more easily
accessed by others. You are going to hear more and more about
security breaches.
You are also going to learn that the attacks are becoming
more sophisticated. Not only do we have to now contend with
phishing, which seeks to obtain sensitive personal data, we now
have to contend with what is called spear phishing, which means
identifying particular users and using some information about
them, such as their home address, to get additional information
that makes possible identity theft, financial fraud, and so
forth.
So at the outset, my sense would be that given the fact
that the House last year had passed a strong measure, the
problems are getting worse and likely to continue to do so. I
would have started there and tried to figure out how to improve
that bill. And in that spirit, I actually wanted to commend you
for incorporating the data minimization provision in the draft
bill.
I think this is a very important safeguard that not only
limits the risk at the outset by telling companies, you know,
really think if you need to have Social Security numbers on
health club members, for example, because if you lose control
of that information, you have created a risk. So you reduce the
risk at the outset. But in the circumstances where the
information isn't properly accessed, there is less exposure to
customers, so that is also an important safeguard. And I am
very glad to see that incorporated in the draft measure that
you circulated, as well as the effort to reduce the time period
for notification.
Because one of the other things that we have learned based
on the Citibank experience and the Sony experience is not
surprising. These companies are reluctant to notify their
customers when they have a problem, and that is why legislation
is so important for companies to tell customers that there is a
problem and that you are going to need to act on this
information. So I think the fact that you have limited that
time period is very important.
Now, in my written testimony, I made some additional
suggestions, and I will try to highlight the key points in
particular about questions that have been raised by the members
during the earlier part of this hearing with Commissioner
Ramirez.
I noticed for example, Dr. Cassidy had asked this question:
Well, why should we have a public information, you know,
requirement if that data is already out there? Can't we kind of
put that in a separate category and not have to notify people?
And I think the answer is obvious.
There is a big difference between someone breaking into a
database to get someone's home address and someone finding the
home address in a publicly accessible file. And the reason, of
course, is that there is intent behind the break-in to go after
the person whose home address has been obtained. And the fact
that it might be accessible somewhere else should hardly make
people feel good about the fact that it can be categorized as
public information.
So I would take away that exception that says that somehow
companies get a free pass if it is information that can be
obtained somewhere else, and therefore they don't have to worry
about people breaking in who get access to it. I think the home
address information makes obvious the problem.
There has been some discussion about how do we define
personally identifiable information. It is a very difficult
problem. It comes up in almost every privacy bill. I think a
very good starting point is to say, simply, personally
identifiable information is information that identifies or
could identify a person, and then include by way of
illustration, including but not limited to many of the
provisions you have in your bill. So it is a Social Security
number, it is a bank account number, it is a person's name, it
is a home address. But it could also be an IP address; in other
words, the fixed Internet address associated with their laptop
or their mobile device. That very well could be personal
identifiable information.
Their Facebook user ID could also be personally
identifiable information. In fact, that is exactly what
contributed to one of the concerns about app access to
Facebook-based information.
On this critical question of preemption, I completely
understand why my colleagues at this table would favor national
standard. It is quite sensible from their perspective. But I
would urge you to look very closely at some of these strong
State measures that would be effectively overwritten if a weak
Federal standard is established.
Those bills are important, and even in States like
California, where they thought they had it right the first time
on financial data, they had to come back later and deal with
medical breach notification as well.
Thank you very much.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, and I apologize that I did not
pronounce your name correctly. Mr. Rotenberg. Correct?
Mr. Rotenberg. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rotenberg follows:]

Mrs. Bono Mack. As a student of how John Dingell does his
questioning, I am going to try this myself and recognize myself
for the first 5 minutes with a ``yes'' or ``no'' required out
of each of you, and we can go down the line starting with Mr.
Goldman and around and around.
So yes or no, Mr. Goldman, is the existence of so many
State standards an impediment to faster consumer notification?
Mr. Goldman. Yes.
Mr. Holleyman. Yes.
Mr. Pratt. Yes.
Mr. Rotenberg. Should not be.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Is preemption necessary to speed up the
consumer notification?
Mr. Goldman. Yes.
Mr. Holleyman. Yes.
Mr. Pratt. Yes.
Mr. Rotenberg. No.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Would a single Federal standard lessen the
risk of over-notification and decrease the number of
unnecessary notices sent every year?
Mr. Goldman. Yes.
Mr. Holleyman. Yes.
Mr. Pratt. Yes.
Mr. Rotenberg. No.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Do you think consumers can become
desensitized to risk if they receive too many notifications?
Mr. Goldman. Yes.
Mr. Holleyman. Yes.
Mr. Pratt. Yes.
Mr. Rotenberg. Yes.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Do you believe there is a problem with
over-notification that can adversely affect consumers even if
it may be erring on the side of caution with consumers'
benefits?
Mr. Goldman. Yes.
Mr. Holleyman. Yes.
Mr. Pratt. Yes.
Mr. Rotenberg. No.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Do businesses ever err on the side of
notifying consumers even if they may not be required to do so,
because wading through 46-plus standards is too difficult or
time-consuming?
Mr. Goldman. Yes.
Mr. Holleyman. Yes.
Mr. Pratt. Yes.
Mr. Rotenberg. I don't know.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Should companies who no longer need it keep
sensitive information such as credit card numbers or dates of
birth in perpetuity?
Mr. Goldman. Would you repeat the question? Sorry.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Should companies who no longer need it keep
sensitive information such as credit card numbers or dates of
birth in perpetuity?
Mr. Goldman. ``It depends'' is not an answer, right? No.
Mr. Holleyman. I would say no.
Mr. Pratt. No.
Mr. Rotenberg. No.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Should every data breach trigger a notice
to consumers?
Mr. Goldman. No.
Mr. Holleyman. No.
Mr. Pratt. No.
Mr. Rotenberg. Yes.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Should information made available by
Federal, State, or local governments in accordance with the
law, and thus otherwise be publicly available, be considered
personal information?
Mr. Goldman. No.
Mr. Holleyman. I would not take a position on that.
Mr. Pratt. No.
Mr. Rotenberg. Yes.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Should the FTC have the ability to modify
the definition of PDI?
Mr. Goldman. No.
Mr. Holleyman. I would say our answer would be yes.
Mr. Pratt. No.
Mr. Rotenberg. Yes.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Should entities that are governed by
explicit information security and breach notification
requirements of other Federal laws enforced by other agencies
also be subject to FTC enforcement under this draft?
Mr. Goldman. No.
Mr. Holleyman. No.
Mr. Pratt. No.
Mr. Rotenberg. Yes.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Should all entities, regardless of their
size or the scope of personal data they hold, be subject to the
same data security requirement rules for section 2 of this
legislation?
Mr. Goldman. No.
Mr. Holleyman. We have not taken a position on that.
Mr. Pratt. No.
Mr. Rotenberg. No.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. And do you believe regulation of
the collection and use of data is a data security issue?
Mr. Goldman. Yes.
Mr. Holleyman. Yes.
Mr. Pratt. No.
Mr. Rotenberg. Yes.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Do you think encrypted data that is
breached should require notification?
Mr. Goldman. No.
Mr. Holleyman. No.
Mr. Pratt. No.
Mr. Rotenberg. Yes.
Mrs. Bono Mack. And lastly, should State attorney generals
have the ability to enforce this law.
Mr. Goldman. No.
Mr. Holleyman. Yes.
Mr. Pratt. No position.
Mr. Rotenberg. Yes.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Is your organization a nonprofit
organization?
Mr. Goldman. Yes.
Mr. Holleyman. Yes.
Mr. Pratt. Yes.
Mr. Rotenberg. Yes.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Does your organization maintain personal
information of the sort that would be covered by this bill?
Mr. Goldman. I don't know.
Mr. Holleyman. Yes, for our employees.
Mr. Pratt. Yes.
Mr. Rotenberg. Yes.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Do you agree with the proposal to allow the
FTC to regulate in this area?
Mr. Goldman. Yes.
Mr. Holleyman. Yes.
Mr. Pratt. Yes.
Mr. Rotenberg. Yes.
Mrs. Bono Mack. And now just the wild card, to throw it
out: Do you believe political campaigns should be covered as
well?
Mr. Goldman. No comment.
Mr. Holleyman. Would consider it.
Mr. Pratt. No position.
Mr. Rotenberg. Yes.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. All right. That went rather
well.
Mr. Goldman, you suggest change in the time frame from 48
hours to a reasonable time frame would guard against over-
notification and consumer overreaction. If notification is tied
to risk of harm, how do we risk over-notification?
Mr. Goldman. I think it comes down to, again, we are
extremely concerned about over-notification, and specifically
it depends what kind the breach is. I mean, this is one of the
things I mentioned in my testimony, is that if you, for
example, have an employee steal information for another
employee, that is sort of a one-on-one breach; so does that
trigger the whole breach mechanism that is included as part of
this? So I think it sort of depends on a case-by-case basis, is
what I would say.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you.
And Mr. Rotenberg, you recommend that Congress define PII
and not permit the FTC to further amend that definition--I
mean, excuse me; Mr. Pratt, this question is for you. But is it
wise to lock anything into stone when it comes to technology?
Could there be advances in technology that would enable
seemingly innocuous pieces of information to become the tool of
fraudsters?
Mr. Pratt. As an industry that deals with a lot of that
information that is sensitive and as an industry that secures
that information today, I mean, we are comfortable with the
structure that you have in place. We do think it encompasses
the types of data that expose consumers to a degree of risk.
And I think even some of the examples that Mr. Rotenberg has
given, we would disagree with those, that those are necessarily
new and different risks that might have to be accounted for
subsequently. So we still stand by the position that we believe
Congress should work out its definition and give businesses a
stable marketplace in which to then compete and build the
products and services.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. My time is expired. I look
forward to a second round of questioning, and now recognize Mr.
Butterfield for 5 minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. I thank the chairman. Information brokers
possess huge data profiles on a staggering number of Americans,
nearly all of them--nearly all of whom do no business with
these brokers. These brokers invest time and money to uncover
personal details and, without knowledge or consent, they sell
this information to the highest bidder. It appears that
American consumers have no free market method of showing
disapproval if they feel their personal information is being
misused or to correct any inaccuracies in the profiles. It is
in situations like these where it becomes prudent to enact laws
that empower consumers, giving them the tools they need to
control their personal data.
Mr. Rotenberg, do you believe, sir, that consumers should
be able to access the information that brokers hold about them
upon their request?
Mr. Rotenberg. Yes, I do, Mr. Butterfield. And I do so for
precisely the reason that you explained, which is that there is
no one-to-one relationship between the consumer and the
information broker. They are a third party, which means the
consumer actually doesn't otherwise know what information they
would have.
Mr. Butterfield. When a broker possesses information. Who
actually owns that data?
Mr. Pratt. Well, of course the broker would claim that they
do. But what they do with the data has an enormous impact on
the individual. It can determine employment, it can determine
whether they get an apartment, a Federal contract. A whole
range of activity in the United States is today deeply impacted
by the information that information brokers have about us and
they make available to others.
Mr. Butterfield. Do you believe that consumers should be
able to dispute inaccurate information that brokers hold on
them?
Mr. Rotenberg. Yes I do. The information brokers have
become the modern-day equivalent of the credit reporting
agency. And Congress figured out 40 years ago the credit
reporting agencies were holding financial reports on consumers
that impacted their ability to get loans and start businesses.
Information brokers are playing a similar role today.
Individuals should have a right to dispute what is in that
record.
Mr. Butterfield. H.R. 2221, the data security bill approved
by the House last Congress, that Mr. Rush and others had their
fingerprints on but which the Senate failed to act, contained
various requirements on how information brokers must interact
with consumers seeking to access their personal information or
resolve a dispute about its accuracy or misuse.
In lieu of complying with these requirements, brokers were
given an alternative procedure that they could follow; namely,
providing individuals with the option to completely opt out of
having their personal info used for marketing purposes. Neither
the special requirements on information brokers nor the
alternative opt-out procedure are included in the Republican
discussion draft as we can discern.
In the absence of a Federal law mandating simple opt-out
procedures, brokers have generally not provided them. However,
in a perverse turn the data broker, U.S. Search, Incorporated,
recently tried to fill the gap by telling consumers that for
$10 it would lock their record so that others could not see
them or buy them. The FTC soon found this promise was entirely
false. In March the Commission reached a settlement where the
company agreed to refund all fees charged and avoid
misrepresentations in the future.
Again, Mr. Rotenberg, do you believe that it is currently
too difficult for consumers to opt out of information broker
databases?
Mr. Rotenberg. Yes, I do, Mr. Butterfield. I think this is
an area where there needs to be legislative safeguards.
Mr. Butterfield. Can you discuss how difficult it is to
remove one's information from a broker's database in regards to
broker retailers?
Mr. Rotenberg. Well, the broker business model relies, of
course, on the collection of detailed information about
consumers without their knowledge. It is not the consumers
providing information. And that information gains commercial
value as it is shared with more third parties. The consumer has
no ability to interact to limit those transactions. So the
simple answer to your question is, it is very difficult--it is
very difficult I think for consumers to play any meaningful
role in what information brokers do with information about
them.
Mr. Butterfield. I see your point. And let me just throw it
over to the chairman and yield to her.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I appreciate the gentleman yielding to me
very much at a strange time.
I just want to reiterate to the panel and the subcommittee
that we are also looking at privacy. And to the degree that we
can separate the privacy debate from the data breach debate, it
all will be helpful for us as lawmakers to understand that the
two, although very similar in this case, they might be
different. So I just wanted to throw that out for you all, to
point out when you see it as a privacy issue beyond data
breach, that would be helpful.
Mr. Butterfield. That is a very important distinction, and
I thank the chairman for making that comment. My time is
expired. I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much, Mr. Butterfield. And
the chair is happy to recognize Mr. Stearns for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stearns. Thank you Madam Chair.
Mr. Goldman, the chairlady talked about this 48 hours
breach. And Mr. Goldman, you had indicated that you have more
preference for a reasonable, I think you indicated----
Mr. Goldman. Correct.
Mr. Stearns. Are there cases where, for example, we could
move the 48 hours to, let's say 96 or 72, that you would feel
more comfortable with, rather than 48 hours; or is it a
fundamental idea in your mind that every company is different;
one is a small company, one is a large company, the situation
in which it occurs is different, so in fact to put a mandate of
48 hours as a time frame might not be applicable? So maybe you
might want to explore that.
Mr. Goldman. Sure. I mean, from talking to some of our
members that have experienced, unfortunately, some of these
breaches, they are talking that it can take anywhere from a few
days, to even 100 days or more, to get to the bottom of it. So
that is why we are very leery of putting a time frame on it.
I guess H.R. 2221 included, I think, a 60-day time frame. I
don't think we generally supported that bill, but I don't think
we fully vetted that 60-day requirement, so I would have to get
back to you on that. But I think generally we are concerned
about making sure that businesses have the ability to properly
react without having a time frame guide their actions.
Mr. Stearns. Can you give me a specific example from one of
your members where a 48-hour time frame would be harmful or
very difficult to accomplish?
Mr. Goldman. Well, I think from reading the press reports,
I will speak to this. In one of the cases that recently
occurred the company said, originally said, that the credit
card data was compromised. And it turns out that credit card
data was not compromised.
Mr. Stearns. So it took them some time to figure it out?
Mr. Goldman. It took them some time, but in the meantime
they notified and told customers that their credit card data
was compromised. So in the meantime you have customers
canceling their credit cards, going through the inconvenience
of canceling their credit card and having to get new credit
cards. And it is even more of an inconvenience if you have
monthly fees automatically charged to your credit card, because
then you have to contact those vendors, and it just gets very
complicated.
So I think from the consumer point of view, I would like to
make sure before I go through that hassle that I actually have
to.
Mr. Stearns. And so when you use the language
``reasonable'' time period, that gives them that flexibility?
Mr. Goldman. I would say so.
Mr. Stearns. And Mr. Rotenberg, you don't agree with this.
As I understand it, you think that 48 hours. But based upon
what Mr. Goldman said, is there a possibility where there are
situations where a company, particularly you mentioned this
credit card company, that if they go out and scare all their
members within this 24- or 48-hour period, these people all
start canceling their credit cards, when actually when they do
the investigation there was not a breach? Is that a good
example or do you think that his example is----
Mr. Rotenberg. If I may clarify, Congressman, not only do I
stay by the 48-hour rule, I actually disagree with the
characterization of your first witness. I know a fair amount
about what happened in this Citigroup breach matter. In fact,
there was credit card information disclosed; it was account
holder name information and it was the account number
information. Now, it was not the security code and it was not
the expiration number. And the conclusion was drawn that
therefore the risk was somewhat--somewhat less than they
initially thought. But the risk was very real and it was
important for people to be notified.
Mr. Stearns. But would you also agree with what Mr. Goldman
says, that every company is different and sometimes this breach
when they are going to look at perhaps thousands and millions
and tens of thousands, that it is possible that they can't do
it in 48 hours, and there might be some idea, maybe not 48 and
96, there might be a reasonable time period; wouldn't you agree
on that?
Mr. Rotenberg. I appreciate the difficulty, and there is no
doubt there is a real burden on companies when they have to
notify customers, and they are understandably reluctant to. But
there is a problem, and I don't think we can diminish the
problem by----
Mr. Stearns. OK. I want to go on. I have another question.
Mr. Goldman. Just to clarify, I was not referring to
Citibank, just to clarify.
Mr. Stearns. OK. Also in the bill it talks about personal
identifiable information, and we had some questions on that. Is
there any--are any of you concerned about the definition of
personal identifiable information? Can a company adequately
understand that definition so that they can actually conclude
when it comes to data minimization what they should take out?
I guess my question is, Mr. Goldman, are you concerned
about the FTC and how they interpret these terms and what
impact the legislation would have dealing with data
minimization?
Mr. Goldman. Yes, we are concerned about the ability of the
FTC to expand its definition of what PII means. I think we are
comfortable with the definition that is in the draft bill as
is. We worry about the inclusion of Internet protocol
addresses, we worry about inclusion of user names. So I think,
yes, we are definitely worried about the expansion, the
possibility of expansion authority.
Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman. The chair now
recognizes Mr. Rush for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Holleyman, you said in your testimony, and I hope that
I am accurate in my paraphrasing, that security breach
notifications should be required in instances where there is
reasonable risk of identity theft, fraud, or unlawful conduct.
You suggest that these limits are needed to help reduce
excessive notifications which might lead to mass anxiety and
panic among consumers. But as Mr. Rotenberg pointed out,
phishing and spear fishing was the two examples of fraud and
unlawful conduct likely to result in most, if not all,
instances of large-scale breaches.
So should the scale of the breach be a dispositive factor
in determining whether consumers also receive immediate
notification?
Mr. Holleyman. Thank you, Mr. Rush. A good question. I
think we believe that there should be notification triggered
when there is a significant risk of a harm. We think that the
important provisions in this bill, however, are the ones that
encourage industry to adopt security measures, using encryption
or other technologies that would render the information
indecipherable or unreadable; and that that is actually, at the
end of the day, the most important safeguard because that, when
it is affected--if that information is obtained but the
criminal can't do anything with that information, then we
believe that you should not have to notify consumers, because
it is that excessive notification that we believe raises
consumers' concerns unnecessarily. And what the market should
be doing is driving people to store data in unreadable format
so that when breaches occur--and they will--the criminal can't
do anything with that data.
Mr. Rush. Do the other three witnesses agree with that?
Mr. Pratt. We strongly agree, though, that one of the--and
this was true of your bill as well, Congressman, and that is
the incentive to render the data unusable is probably one of
the most critical provisions of the current draft of the bill
that you had passed last year. It is the one that we focus on
as an industry every day, it is the one that we take most
seriously. Because the strong incentive is not to notify people
that you have lost data, whether it is a criminal act or some
other failing, but to have protected it in the first place. I
mean, that is always first. Protect it in the first place. Find
the best technology to do it when the data is at rest, when the
data is in transmission. That is really critical.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Pratt, you argue in your testimony for
advance notice of a security breach presumably at the same time
as when notice is given to the FTC. Would such a model favor
your members over other similar parties who don't make the
definitional cut as, quote, ``data broker,'' end of quote?
Mr. Pratt. The reason we are requesting notice--and I am
not sure we are saying that it has to occur concurrent with
notification of law enforcement or the FTC--we are just
simply--we have call centers, and when a letter goes out and
says, call the credit bureau and order a credit report, we have
to make sure that we have the right staff, we have to make sure
that we have the right pipes open for the online access or the
telephonic access, even the mail processing access. And we have
to normalize systems. We understand what our normal pattern is.
But a very, very large data breach creates aberrant
patterns which create spikes of activity. We just want to be
able to serve the consumer and ensure that they get the credit
report that they want, or ensure that the telephone is picked
up on time, which is what they expect. So that really is the
reason why we are asking for that.
Mr. Rush. Can any of the other witnesses conceive how such
a model might impede the FTC's ability to investigate and
enforce under the law? Any other witnesses? All right.
OK, let me ask Mr. Rotenberg. Mr. Rotenberg, can you please
elaborate further on why you believe this definition of
personal information is too narrow and why you believe it
should be defined as information that, quote, ``identifies or
could identify a particular person,'' end quote.
Mr. Rotenberg. Well, I think the definition that I proposed
followed with examples, which are included in the bill, is
common sense. We think of personal information as information
that identifies someone, or could identify them, and then the
examples are good. But I also know, based on some of the recent
experiences with data breaches, that an IP address poses a risk
because it can be personally identifiable.
The Facebook user ID posed a risk because it was user
identifiable. So the list helps people understand. But if the
list is limited, I think we have a problem.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Rush. And the chair
recognizes Mr. Olson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair, and I would like to welcome
the witnesses. And I really appreciate your perspectives on an
issue which has only become more pervasive in the future, just
as Mr. Rotenberg eloquently stated in his opening statement.
My first two questions are for you, Mr. Goldman. What is
the Chamber's view of the carveout for entities already covered
in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley? Is this an adequate, explicit
carveout?
Mr. Goldman. We didn't take a position in our testimony.
But generally we have supported carveouts for entities that are
already covered by other laws, so there is not duplicative laws
and they can figure out which agency they are better regulated
under. So, yes, that is my answer.
Mr. Olson. OK. Thank you for that answer. And as currently
drafted, the legislation standard for risk is a reasonable risk
of harm. When I asked our witness on a previous panel, the FTC
commissioner, Ms. Ramirez, she stated that the FTC thought that
reasonable risk was the right standard, because erring on the
side of notification overrides some sort of desensitation of
the public.
And could you elaborate on why the Chamber believes that
consumers will be better off if the standard were changed to
significant risk of harm?
Mr. Goldman. Sure. The Chamber does support a significant
risk standard because we are worried, I guess as I stated in my
opening comments, about two possibilities where customers are
over-notified and they just ignore it, and then when a real
risk occurs they don't take any action; or they get a notice
and get--and sort of reactneedlessly, and so they cancel their
credit card. So both--I mean both extremes. So we prefer to
have the significant risk standard.
Mr. Olson. Thank you for that answer. And then I have got a
round of questions for all four of the witnesses. And we will
start off with you, Mr. Rotenberg, just to give Mr. Goldman a
break here. But if you or one of your member companies suffered
from a security breach, how would the proposed SAFE Data Act
change their response and how would it better help consumers
avoid identity theft?
Mr. Rotenberg. Congressman, we actually don't have member
companies. But I will say that many of the elements that are
currently in the bill we have actually tried to follow over the
years. For example, this goal of data minimization we think is
a very good way to protect people online, and we have for a
number of years taken steps to limit the amount of personal
information that we collect. We collect information we need to
provide the services that we provide, but we don't collect
excessive information.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. Mr. Pratt.
Mr. Pratt. Our members are regulated first on the data
breach notification side by the 47 or 48 State statutes that
are out there today. So establishing a Federal standard I think
would give us an easier route to compliance. But we would be
notifying consumers, just as we do today, under those State
statutes. And all of our, almost all of our members are
financial institutions under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. And so
we are already complying with a data security regime which is
called the Safeguards Rule.
And so for most of our members it would not be a remarkable
change. In fact, even where our members have sensitive data
that isn't otherwise regulated under GLB, for example, we build
enterprise-wide data security. There is no reason to segregate
out some data and treat it differently from other information,
so it is built enterprise-wide.
Mr. Olson. Thank you for that answer. Mr. Holleyman.
Mr. Holleyman. I can't speak for any individual member
company. But I can say that all of our companies are involved
in trying to build greater security into their products in
companies who provide tools to consumers and businesses to
secure their environments. And certainly in supporting the
concepts of this bill, we recognize that they are ones that we
would be subject to. And our members with that are completely
welcoming this legislation, again with some fine-tuning we
would like to see. But we think it is important to act, and
important to act this year.
Mr. Olson. Thank you, sir. And finally, Mr. Goldman.
Mr. Goldman. Sir, with the uniform national standard it
would make it easier for our companies to comply, versus the
current situation of having to comply with 46, 47 State rules.
Also a lot of our companies are covered by other laws such as
GLB or HIPAA.
Mr. Olson. Well, thank you for that question. As a Navy
guy, I can say to all four of you that we may not be hitting
the bull's-eye but we are hitting the target.
Finally, one question for the four of you. This proposed
legislation would require an entity to conduct an assessment
upon discovering a breach.
Do you or one of your member companies, with all due
apologies, Mr. Rotenberg, already conduct assessments? I think
I know the answer. And how would this requirement and its
timing impact your ability--your company's ability to members
to resolve a security breach?
Mr. Rotenberg. I will take a pass.
Mr. Pratt. I can't speak specifically, because today those
assessments would be dictated by the State laws that are out
there which dictate different standards. That is one of the
reasons why a national standard would be helpful in terms of
assessing a data breach risk.
If I could just take 1 minute to speak to this GLB
exception. It is important to have this exception, because data
security in this bill is a good idea, and our members are happy
to live under a new data security regime for part of our
businesses which might not otherwise be regulated. But if our
members, small or large, are regulated by the Gramm-Leach-
Bliley Act, we are only asking that we just operate in tandem,
that we have the same data security provision under GLB.
That is why that exception is so important, though, because
it means I don't have overlapping requirements between two
different standards. And for small businesses, in particular in
our membership, that is an important thing, because they don't
necessarily have a general counsel on staff that is going to
advise them all the time.
Mr. Olson. Thank you for that. Mr. Holleyman.
Mr. Holleyman. Because our members oftentimes provide
technologies that are used to prevent breaches, we also have a
lot of experience in helping identify breaches when they occur.
And we know through that, that the nature of the breach may
differ, the amount of time to make the assessment may differ,
and we support the provisions of the bill that are flexible,
depending on the nature of the breach and the size of the
enterprise.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. And finally, Mr. Goldman.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Excuse me, we need to move on. We are a
minute over.
Mr. Olson. That was yield back time that I didn't have, but
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I appreciate that very much, and am happy
to recognize Mr. Kinzinger for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Madam Chairman. And I will say as
an Air Force guy, we hit the bull's-eye on the target every
time, so I think that is important to note.
Mr. Olson. You don't want to go there, my friend.
Mr. Kinzinger. I appreciate all four of you in your
assistance in helping us draft, I think, this very important
piece of legislation. Some of this stuff has been touched on a
little bit, but I want to make sure we are getting all the
questions answered that we need.
For the three, Mr. Holleyman, Pratt, and Rotenberg, and
then I guess Mr. Goldman, if you want to jump in on this too.
Let me ask, in the current draft, if a company is unable to
detect a breach over the course of several months due to
insufficient security techniques, it does not appear that they
necessarily face harsher penalties for that.
Do you believe that this legislation should include
reasonable standards or methods for detecting breaches, and
penalties for those companies that fail to reach those
standards?
Mr. Rotenberg. Yes, I think it is an excellent point. It
would be a good change.
Mr. Pratt. We haven't actually asked our members that
question, but maybe we could follow up with you and give you an
answer to that. I would say in general, though, that the data
security requirements that the FTC writes today are broad, they
are enforced aggressively, and they would imply that you have
to have sufficient security standards, not just simply to
protect against, but to detect possible intrusions.
And I know even the association I run has stood up several
major platforms where we have had intrusion detection systems
that operate concurrently with other forms of protection of the
data itself, so it is fairly common.
Mr. Kinzinger. And for those kinds of systems are they
pretty foolproof?
Mr. Pratt. Well, I don't think anything is foolproof. It is
a moving target. And I think that is very important for all of
you--all of you all know this because of the cybersecurity
issues that you probably learned about in other hearings; and
that is, it is a moving target. So they are always hitting
targets, but they are different targets.
Mr. Kinzinger. Right. I understand.
Mr. Pratt. But it is critical. And so when you look at
these security requirements that are imposed on U.S.
businesses, they are written flexibly enough to account for
ongoing assessment of risk. That is one of the key components.
We are comfortable with that. Because we would agree, by the
way, as well that it is a business necessity that we protect
the data that we have, that we use the best technologies, that
we look at new risk.
Our members, for example, participate in the ISAC, which is
the Information Sharing and Analysis Center that is operated by
Treasury in order to see what kind of cybersecurity risks are
out there, so we exchange information.
Mr. Kinzinger. Mr. Holleyman.
Mr. Holleyman. We certainly support the framework that this
bill outlines. I want to get back to you on some of the
specifics, particularly around newer concepts like
minimization. They are important but we have to canvas our
members. We do believe that this bill is important because it
not only deals with the issue of notification of breaches after
the fact, but it puts in place obligations related to securing
data. Again, those obligations, and when businesses do that up
front, that is going to minimize the need for notifications,
the excessive notification. So that is an important addition to
the concept of this bill.
Mr. Kinzinger. Did you want to jump in on this?
Mr. Goldman. I have to go back to our members and ask, but
generally companies are very concerned about reputational harm.
So they are going to take, you know, for liability purposes and
reputation purposes, they are going to take the best practices
they can imagine.
Mr. Kinzinger. And just quickly.
Mr. Pratt. Just one point. And that is data security
involves access control. Access control would almost inherently
require or at least implicitly require some sort of intrusion
detection system, because otherwise you are not controlling
access. So I think even if it is not expressly stated, it is
built into the access control concept.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK. And as we talked about, getting into the
boy-who-cried-wolf issue--and if we can keep this real brief
for all of you--this draft could give a company an exceedingly
long period of time to notify customers in a breach of high
severity.
Do you believe we should look into creating kind of tiers
of risk, so if there is a high level of risk for the consumer,
that notification be treated differently than that of a more
moderate risk? Should we have obviously different tiers on
that?
Mr. Rotenberg. Congressman, I think that is an attractive
idea, but it would actually end up adding a layer of complexity
to an already serious problem. And I think it is notable when
we have these extreme breach problems with Citibank, Sony, and
others, very sophisticated companies, a large number of
customers, here we are more than a month later and we still
don't fully know the extent of the harm.
So while I appreciate the approach, I would try to go for a
single simple standard. I think it is easier to manage.
Mr. Kinzinger. And if you just, very quickly, because I
have one more quick question and 20 seconds.
Mr. Pratt. I would have to get back to you on that. We
don't have a position on that right now.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK.
Mr. Holleyman. We believe your issue can be best addressed
by using the term ``significant risk'' in the bill.
Mr. Kinzinger. And then, Mr. Goldman, do you believe that
the legislation should more clearly define the size and scope
of companies that must develop a security plan?
Mr. Goldman. Yes. I mean, specifically--well, I will go
back to what I said before, was that when it talks about the--
you know, if you have a breach, you know, it depends on the
size of the breach; and in terms of the company, yes. I mean,
small businesses obviously are going to have much different
capabilities to respond than a larger-size business, yes.
Mr. Kinzinger. And I yield back my negative time. Thank
you, Madam Chairman.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much, Mr. Kinzinger. And
gentlemen, I would like to express the gratitude of all of the
members of our subcommittee for your time today and thank you
for your willingness to engage with us on this very important
discussion. I think there are a lot of great ideas and
willingness to come together with a great bill.
I want to reiterate again my desire for a bipartisan
product, and believe that Mr. Butterfield and I can accomplish
that goal. I am very hopeful for that.
I would also like to say that I was hoping for a second
round of questions but time has gotten the better of us here.
So I note that I will have some further questions in writing to
send to all of you. And I would like to remind the members that
they all have 10 business days to submit questions for the
record, and would ask the witnesses to please respond promptly
to any questions they receive.
Mrs. Bono Mack. So again, as the recent spate of high-
profile, eye-popping data breaches point to the need for new
safeguards to better protect sensitive online consumer
information. It is a huge challenge and I know that we can get
this done by working together.
So thank you all very much for your time today. And with
that, the hearing--the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:05 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Edolphus Towns

Thank you Chairman Bono-Mack and Ranking Member Butterfield
for holding this legislative hearing today on ``The SAFE Data
Act''. The issue of data theft has plagued consumers in our
country for several years and currently there is no
comprehensive federal law that would require companies that
hold consumer's personal information to implement reasonable
measures to protect that data. It is my hope that this hearing
will reinforce the need to protect consumers
against fraudulent activity that target an individual's
personal information. With the advent of cloud computing and
the increased volume of online purchasing, data security must
be at the forefront of consumer protection.
In the previous Congress members from both sides of the
isle took the lead on this issue and acted in a bipartisan
effort to reduce the number of data breaches while at the same
time empowering consumers with new rights whenever personal
information is compromised. Unfortunately time was not on our
side and the Senate was unable take on this issue of data theft
before the end of the 111th Congress. Data theft still remains
a very large burden for the American consumer that must be
addressed by legislative action from this committee.
Unfortunately the discussion draft before us today falls short
of the commitment needed to ensure that the personal
information of hard working Americans are kept safe.
Recent media reports pertaining to data breaches at the
Sony Corporation, Epsilon Data Management and Gawker Media help
to reinforce the need for congress to act once again in a
bipartisan manner. I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
today about how they have been dealing with this important
issue. I also look forward to working with my colleagues on
this committee to ensure that data security measures and
protocols are enhanced in this congress to protect the American
people.
Thank you Madam Chair, I yield back my time.
----------


