- OVERSIGHT OF DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY RECOVERY ACT SPENDING

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY RECOVERY ACT SPENDING

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 17, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-24

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-133 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ANNA G. ESHOO, California
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
Vice Chair                         GENE GREEN, Texas
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JIM MATHESON, Utah
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              Islands
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

CLIFF STEARNS, Florida
Chairman
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma                Ranking Member
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         GENE GREEN, Texas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia             Islands
JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)        officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Cliff Stearns, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Florida, opening statement..................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado, opening statement.................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    75
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    78
Prepared statement...........................................    81
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................   204
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, prepared statement......................................   206

Witnesses

Franklin Rusco, Director, Natural Resources and Environment,
Government Accountability Office...............................    85
Prepared statement...........................................    88
Gregory Friedman, Inspector General, Department of Energy........   106
Prepared statement...........................................   108
Steve Isakowitz, Chief Financial Officer, Department of Energy...   124
Prepared statement...........................................   126
Answers to submitted questions...............................   208
Steve Chalk, Chief Financial Officer, Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy, Department of Energy \1\.....................
Insert for the record........................................   231
Inez Triay, Assistant Secretary for Environmental Management,
Department of Energy \1\.......................................

Submitted Material

Letter of March 17, 2011, from Philip Giudice, Chair, National
Association of State Energy Officials, to Mr. Stearns and Ms.
DeGette, submitted by Ms. DeGette..............................    10
U.S. State Energy Program Briefing Book for 2011, National
Association of State Energy Officials, submitted by Ms. DeGette    17
Audit report of American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
funding for Weatherization Assistance for Low-Income Persons
program, Comptroller of the Treasury, State of Tennessee,
December 10, 2010, submitted by Mr. Stearns....................   150
``Audit Report: The State of Illinois Weatherization Assistance
Program,'' Office of Audit Services, Office of Inspector
General, Department of Energy, October 2010, submitted by Mr.
Stearns........................................................   170

----------
\1\ Mr. Chalk and Ms. Triay did not present opening statements.

OVERSIGHT OF DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY RECOVERY ACT SPENDING

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 17, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 1:30 p.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Cliff Stearns
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Stearns, Sullivan, Murphy,
Burgess, Bilbray, Gardner, Upton (Ex Officio), DeGette, Green,
Christensen, and Waxman.
Staff Present: Todd Harrison, Chief Counsel; Alan Slobodin,
Deputy Chief Counsel; Karen Christian, Counsel; John Stone,
Associate Counsel; Peter Spencer, Professional Staff Member;
Jim Barnette, General Counsel; Alex Yergin, Hearing Clerk;
Kristin Amerling, Minority Chief Counsel and Oversight Staff
Director; Tiffany Benjamin, Minority Investigative Counsel;
Anne Tindall, Minority Counsel; Ali Neubauer, Minority
Investigator; and Lindsay Vidal, Minority Press Secretary.
Mr. Stearns. Good afternoon. The subcommittee will come to
order on Oversight and Investigations. I will start with my
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CLIFF STEARNS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Ladies and gentlemen, we are convening this hearing of the
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations to gather
information concerning the Department of Energy's stimulus
spending. This is the first oversight hearing focusing on DOE's
role in the stimulus program since the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 was signed into law by President Obama
just over 2 years ago.
We will hear today from the Department of Energy, and from
the DOE Inspector General and the U.S. Government
Accountability Office, the two chief overseers of the
Department's spending, which have produced 50 reports on DOE
stimulus between them. This happens to be the first time both
the IG and the GAO have testified together on DOE's stimulus
spending as well.
In 2009, DOE was appropriated about $36 billion under the
Recovery Act to increase taxpayer spending on energy
efficiency, environmental cleanup, loan guarantees and various
energy-related research, development and deployment projects
and activities. The appropriation was in addition to the DOE's
annual funding of about $28 billion and represented an
unprecedented expansion of taxpayer spending by the Department
of Energy.
This unprecedented spending was accompanied by promises
that the program would stimulate economic growth, create jobs,
clean the environment, and transform our energy infrastructure.
I, along with all of my Republican colleagues, were strongly
against the Act's massive government spending. This was not the
way to stimulate the economy and create jobs.
So the question is, how are things going?
Let's review some of the information to date:
The agency hit its own targets generally for allocating
funds, but today, over 2 years later, only about $12 billion of
the $36 billion allocated has actually been spent. The whole
point of the Democrats' stimulus bill was to spend billions of
dollars in the hope that such spending would stimulate the
economy and, of course, create jobs. It doesn't appear that
this massive increase in spending has done either--most of the
money still hasn't been spent and unemployment still stands at
almost 9 percent.
While the Department had existing weatherization and energy
efficiency programs, there was nothing ``shovel ready'' about
expanding this on the scale that was dreamed up by the
administration. As the GAO has documented, efforts to safeguard
taxpayers' funds, clear up wage requirements and State and
local infrastructure issues slowed the promised $12 billion in
spending considerably. Only recently, nearly 3 years after the
financial crisis, has DOE even reached the halfway point of
580,000 homes it promises to eventually weatherize under this
program.
In addition, questions of cost effectiveness and
performance remain. For example, with regard to the
weatherization program, the GAO informed staff of one case in
which contractors were hired to install new windows on every
house on a Houston neighborhood street, without any clear
measure of whether this was the most cost-effective way to help
the homes save energy.
In an Illinois program, a DOE inspector general audit found
12 of 15 weatherized homes visited failed inspections because
of substandard workmanship. Tennessee conducted its own State
audit and found in 45 percent of 84 weatherized homes that
``contractors had not performed weatherization measures, had
not properly completed weatherization measures of any kind, or
had performed work that was not allowable under the program.''
So clearly there is a need for close oversight scrutiny of
these projects.
The DOE stimulus funds awarded up to 10,000 jobs with the
$6 billion allocated for environmental cleanup. But contractors
are already finishing some of the work and announcing the end
of some 2,000 of these jobs. It is good that the funds help
keep some people working during the tough economic times. Yet
when the spending ends, can the agency show that this work
reduced environmental risk or future cleanup costs, or that
these stimulus funds are doing any more than just creating
short-term temporary jobs?
Is DOE even tracking how the cleanup spending achieves
long-term environmental cleanup goals? GAO has reported that
this past summer, the DOE's alleged future savings from the
Recovery Act's accelerated cleanup spending overestimated
taxpayer savings by almost 80 percent.
So this committee's oversight responsibility requires that
we hold the DOE accountable for measuring its Recovery Act
spending in a way that we can evaluate whether or not it was
cost effective in terms of policy goals and just good fiduciary
sense.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stearns follows:]

Mr. Stearns. With that, I welcome the witnesses and yield
to the distinguished lady from Colorado for the purposes of an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DEGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I think it is
important that this committee do oversight. And I am glad that
we are looking at the agencies under our jurisdiction.
I don't think we are always going to agree on energy policy
issues, but I do think we can do oversight in a productive
bipartisan way. So I hope this hearing today on the DOE will
look at ways to improve DOE programs that are promoting jobs
and innovation and not simply just be an opportunity for people
to rail against the Recovery Act.
In the face of one of the worst economic crisis this
country has ever seen, the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act was an unprecedented effort to create and save jobs,
increase overall economic activity, spur long-term growth and
promote innovation. It also contained a number of DOE-specific
provisions to support the transition to a clean energy economy.
The Recovery Act has already had a tremendous positive
impact. It provided $288 million in tax cuts and benefits for
millions of families and businesses. It increased funding for a
number of programs, including extending unemployment benefits
by $224 billion.
In the weatherization assistance program, for example,
which enables low-income families to reduce permanently their
energy bills by making their homes more energy efficient, we
have weatherized 330,000 homes. What this does, as well as
giving jobs to the people involved, it saves those families an
average of almost $5,000 on their energy bills over the next
decade.
Ultimately, Recovery Act funds will help pay to weatherize
600,000 homes, saving those families billions of dollars in
utility bills. So again, it is just not the short term jobs
that were created, but it is the actual weatherization that
will save the families billions of dollars.
In Colorado, for example, the Recovery Act sponsored State
energy program provided funds to schools and local businesses.
These funds help the Calhan School, which is a rural public
school northeast of Colorado Springs that was struggling with a
worn out boiler and failing temperature controls. Recovery Act
funds allowed the school to install a new, highly efficient
heating and cooling system using a ground source system so
students can focus on learning, not just keeping warm or cool.
Success stories like this can be seen across the country.
In Virginia, James Madison University Center For Wind Energy
received $800,000 from the State energy program to build a wind
testing and training center geared towards students and
companies who want to break into the wind industry. Tennessee
used Recovery Act funds to build up its solar installation
grant program allowing for rapid expansion in the solar
installation industry, keeping people employed when they needed
it the most. And Mr. Chairman, in your own State, Recovery Act
funds helped install solar and wind power on existing
billboards which ended up saving the State $232,000 in energy
costs.
Mr. Chairman, I have got a letter from Philip Giudice, who
is the Commissioner of the Massachusetts Department of Energy
Resources and chair of the National Association of State Energy
Officials, which talks about many of these accomplishments. And
I would like to ask unanimous consent to enter it into the
record at this time.
Mr. Stearns. By unanimous consent.
[The information follows:]

Ms. DeGette. Thank you. The letter says that ``energy-
related ARRA funds being deployed by the States have been a
resounding success in terms of economic development, technology
innovation, efficiency and energy savings.''
It also notes that the National Weatherization Assistance
Program under ARRA has completed energy efficiency
improvements, lowering energy bills for hundreds of thousands
of elderly and other low-income citizens across the country.
I'm disappointed that we didn't get to have our minority
witness like Mr. Guidice here today because States have been
heavily involved in administering Recovery Act funds through
some of these initiatives. And they would have been able to
provide us with a really important perspective on how the
States are using this money.
Beyond the goal of promoting economic recovery, the
Recovery Act was also designed to promote oversight, and it
provides for an unprecedented level of oversight to identify
and prevent waste. And so I'm hoping we can hear today how
those efforts have gone, and if we need to improve them exactly
how we can improve those efforts. With that, Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. DeGette follows:]

Mr. Stearns. The gentlelady yields back.
I just want to indicate we share your interest in the
hearing, the perspective of the different States who did
receive DOE stimulus funds and were responsible for
administering them, and perhaps in a later hearing, we will
perhaps bring in your State, my State and others. So I
appreciate your bringing that to my attention.
And we recognize the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Sullivan,
for 1 minute.
Mr. Sullivan. Thank you, Chairman Stearns and thank you for
holding this important hearing today on oversight of the
Department of Energy stimulus spending.
Democrats contended that the $787 billion stimulus was
needed to jump-start the economy and add jobs. But as
Republicans predicted, the stimulus has not worked. It has only
added to our deficit, now at $14 trillion. And it has done
little to help unemployment, which was 8.1 percent when the
stimulus was signed in 2009 and rose to 10 percent at the end
of that year, and now is at 8.9 percent.
DOE received approximately $35 billion for programs and
activities through the stimulus making the agency, as some have
said, the largest venture capital organization in the world.
This sum was dwarfed by the Department's annual budget of about
$27 billion.
This overnight infusion of a huge amount of taxpayer funds
has caused a number of problems and concerns with wasteful
spending. The risk of waste, fraud and abuse increases
dramatically whenever there is pressure to spend large amounts
of money quickly. Lack of controls and monitoring at the State
level also increase the likelihood that stimulus dollars were
wasted on the wrong projects.
I look forward to the hearing from our independent panel of
witnesses, from the GAO and from the Department of Energy
Inspector General's office. And I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentleman. And the gentleman from
California, Mr. Bilbray, is recognized for 1 minute.
Mr. Bilbray. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your
holding this hearing. You know, Mr. Chairman, we were allotted
1 day to mark up the bill that created this major funding and
the old majority contended that the $787 billion was needed
immediately for a jump-start. The fact is, at the time that we
were confronting that, I think we were about 8 percent
unemployment across the country. And the fact is that last I
checked, I think there was only about 12 percent of this has
been spent.
I think the DOE has received $35 billion in this program
and for the stimulus, and the sum that they are looking at
really is one that I think we have got to be conscious of what
are we getting for this investment.
Mr. Chairman, we were at 8 percent, and we are, in
California, we are now at 12 percent unemployment. I think that
we have got to recognize that there is not necessarily a
successful program when it comes to saving the economy or jobs.
And I just have to say that a lot of people look to a lot of
these strategies and conservation as being a way of maintaining
good job development. I would just like to point out that
California has led the fight on energy conservation and we are
at 12 percent unemployment. It hasn't done us very well.
Mr. Chairman, I would just like to point out, again, that
this town doesn't make mistakes just by trying new things or by
making mistakes. The biggest problem in this town is that when
it tries to do things and makes mistakes, it won't admit it and
go back and correct it. And that has been our greatest flaw.
And I would just like to ask again that those who do not learn
from history are damned to repeat it.
Contrary to what people think, the great expense of the WPA
project did not create a strong economy for the United States.
In fact, it wasn't until we started producing products and
exporting it out of this country that the American economy
responded and that government funding for government jobs were
not the stimulus that pulled this country into the greatest
economic powerhouse it has become historically. It was
investment by private sector for manufacturing, something that
we ought to go back and visit and not try the failed policies
that appear to have failed again. Yield back.
Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentleman. At this point, I think
on this side we have finished. And I recognize the gentleman
from California, Mr. Waxman, ranking Member.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Two years
ago, President Obama took office in the middle of one of the
most significant economic crises this country has faced. And
after years of lax oversight, the financial industry had
collapsed and the recession it caused resulted in a loss of
over 8 million jobs. Within 60 days of his inauguration, the
President signed into law the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act. This law was designed to create new jobs and
save existing ones, spur economic growth and foster
accountability in government spending.
Since then, the Act has saved millions of jobs and
supported projects around the country that conserve energy,
promote innovation and save taxpayers' dollars. Today, the
subcommittee is examining implementation of the Recovery Act
within the Department of Energy. This is an important subject
for oversight and I commend the chairman for holding this
hearing. We need to ensure that the rigorous oversight
mechanisms set in place by the law are operating consistent
with the law's design and that the Recovery Act is implemented
effectively.
I'm concerned, however, about a pattern emerging from this
committee. What we have seen in the past couple of months is a
series of hearings in which my colleagues on the other side
seem more focused on bluster than oversight. The committee has
become proficient about leveling complaints about government
programs that have no foundation in fact, and we never seem to
find time to figure out how to make government work more
effectively or how to save the taxpayers' money. And the
committee has failed to move forward one single initiative to
create jobs for the American people.
At this point in the last Congress, we had passed, and the
President had signed into law, both the Recovery Act and
legislation to expand the State Child Health Insurance program.
We were just months away from passing even more legislation,
such as the Cash for Clunkers bill that boosted the American
auto industry. Each of these initiatives provided critical
economic support for families hard hit by the recession.
What we have done so far in this Congress, this committee's
top priority was a bill to restrict women's access to health
insurance for abortion. Earlier this week we approved a bill to
cut off EPA's authority to regulate greenhouse gas emissions
that are contributing to climate change and threatening public
health. Today we are voting on a bill on the House floor to
defund National Public Radio. It won't save a cent of money. It
is only punitive to punish NPR for not being FOX News.
And the House passed a budget that would put hundreds of
thousands of Americans out to work--out of work. If it only put
them out to work, that would be good.
Not one of these bills create jobs. In fact, with respect
to DOE programs we are discussing at today's hearing, the
Republican funding resolution H.R. 1 threatens over 40,000
construction and permanent jobs as well as billions of dollars
in investments in major solar, wind, geothermal and biofuels
projects.
My colleague from California a minute ago said the problem
in this town is people never admit they were wrong. Well, I am
waiting for a Republican to admit they were wrong about the
American Recovery Act, because that bill saved jobs. No
Republican voted for it. It saved jobs and has done a lot for
our infrastructure. Can't they at least admit they were wrong?
Republicans promised to govern by the cut-go rule but the
impact of their legislation instead has followed the cut jobs
principle. The major bills brought to the floor reduce
employment and opportunity for growth.
This committee has jurisdiction over many areas where we
could be legislating to spur the economy. I would like to see
the committee resume its position as a leader in promoting
economic growth and jobs. Today's hearing could be a first step
in that process, and I hope it will be, Mr. Chairman. The DOE
Inspector General and the GAO have been conducting rigorous
oversight to review implementation of the DOE Recovery Act.
They are important witnesses, but we asked to invite a
witness, a State official, who was implementing the
legislation. We were told we couldn't have them. Ms. DeGette
put into the record a statement from a State official who has
many positive things to say about the program. That is in the
committee record. But we were not allowed to have that witness
testify today. That failure to include witnesses like this one
makes me concerned that we are continuing down the same road we
have been going down since this Congress began. We are not
passing legislation that creates jobs and strengthens our
economy.
Instead, we are simply engaging in partisan sniping over
programs that my Republican colleagues do not like. Why they
don't like them I don't know. But they don't like them, I guess
because it was a Democratic Congress and a Democratic
administration. But that is not a good enough reason for me. I
hope we can do better, and the American people need us to do
better. We need to be to do better on a bipartisan basis and
not just use our time here for partisan sniping.
I'm glad I don't do things like that. I yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Waxman follows:]

Mr. Stearns. I thank my colleagues. Mr. Waxman represents
certainly a different point of view, and I appreciate his
opening statement. But I would point out that we did take her
suggestion about having a witness from Massachusetts, and we
talked about it and perhaps having a witness from Florida in
another hearing. And I would say to my colleague from
California that perhaps we will have another hearing on this
oversight. And I agree and am pleased that you support this
oversight on the stimulus package. And I, in all deference to
you, I don't recollect any oversight hearing when the Democrats
were in control on the stimulus package. So I'm very glad we
can do it today.
And Mr. Green is recognized, from Texas, for 1 minute.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the 1
minute, and I appreciate our panel for being here.
My concern is that if we hadn't spent that money what would
our unemployment be now? And I will give you a great example.
In the Houston area, the Department of Energy provided $200
million for a smart metering program. Somebody had to make
those meters and put those meters out there. Now I have to
admit, I'm worried about hearing from my constituents because
historically we have smart metering, we found out that their
bills go up and nobody wants to hear that. But maybe the
technology, but that will help people control their electricity
and not only for their cost but also so we don't have to build
more power plants. But $200 million, I think, was one of the
biggest grants the Department of Energy gave to a local
community.
And like I said, there are people working now to install
those meters. And I wish it had lowered the unemployment rate,
but maybe our recession we had was much deeper and longer than
most of us expected. With that Mr. Chairman I appreciate the
opportunity to give a 1 minute.
Mr. Stearns. I thank my colleague. Does anybody else
request speech? The gentlelady from the Virgin Islands.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to speak
to the success of the program in my district as I'm sure it has
been successful in many others. Our Energy Star appliance
rebate infused $834,000 into the local economy through direct
subsidies to 2,114 residents and small businesses, a sun power
loan program afforded 389 families to receive a solar water
heater at no cost through a special program, the hybrid and
electric vehicles rebate program was so successful that the
rebates exceeded what they had planned, 81 rebates worth
$259,200.
And in addition to the direct and indirect jobs, we trained
about 40 people who been unemployed for a long time in solar
water heater installation and repair. They are all going to
work. And we are just really--this has been a great help to our
economy both in reducing our electricity bills and in creating
jobs and saving jobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stearns. I thank my colleague. Now we come to our
witnesses. All of you are aware that the committee is holding
an investigative hearing. And when doing so, has been the
practice of taking testimony under oath.
Do you have any objection to testifying under oath?
The chair then advises you that under the rules of the
House and the rules of the committee, you are entitled to be
advised by counsel. Do you desire to be advised by counsel
during your testimony today? If not, if you would please rise
and raise your right hand, I will swear you in.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Stearns. You are now under oath and subject to the
penalties set forth in title 18 section 1001 of the United
States Code. Before you give your 5-minute summary, let me
introduce each of our five witnesses today. Mr. Frank Rusco
will testify on behalf of the Government Accountability Office.
He is a director on GAO's natural resources and environmental
team. Welcome. Mr. Gregory H. Friedman, Inspector General at
the Department of Energy, will also testify. He was confirmed
by the Senate as Inspector General of DOE in 1998. He has been
with the DOE's Inspector General's office since 1982.
Finally, testifying on behalf of DOE is Steve Isakowitz,
DOE chief financial officer, and accompanying him will be
several people that he might want to introduce.
And so I welcome each of you, and before your opening
statement, if you wanted to introduce some of your staff that
you have with you, that would be helpful.
We will start with you, Mr. Rusco, for your opening
statement.

STATEMENTS OF FRANKLIN RUSCO, DIRECTOR, NATURAL RESOURCES AND
ENVIRONMENT, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE; GREGORY
FRIEDMAN, INSPECTOR GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY; AND STEVE
ISAKOWITZ, CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY,
ACCOMPANIED BY INES TRIAY, ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT, AND STEVE CHALK, CHIEF FINANCIAL
OFFICER FOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RENEWABLE ENERGY

STATEMENT OF FRANKLIN RUSCO

Mr. Rusco. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee. I'm pleased to be here today to discuss GAO's
oversight of DOE spending under the Recovery Act. The Recovery
Act included almost $42 billion for the Department of Energy
programs activities and borrowing authority.
This Recovery Act money was spread over many DOE offices
and programs, but the bulk of the money was concentrated in
DOE's Offices of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy,
Environmental Management, Electricity Delivery and Energy
Reliability, Loan Guarantees, Fossil Energy and Science.
My remarks today are focused on five programs that received
approximately 56 percent of DOE's Recovery Act funding. The
Office of Environmental Management has for years overseen the
cleanup of DOE's contaminated nuclear weapons research,
development and production facilities. This Office received
almost $6 billion in Recovery Act funds, a substantial increase
in funding levels to the office which has an annual budget of
about $6 billion.
The Weatherization Assistance Program has been providing
home weatherization help to low-income households for over 30
years. The program received $5 billion in Recovery Act funding,
a large increase from an annual budget of about $225 million.
The Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grants program
provides grants to States, territories, tribes, and localities
to improve energy efficiency. This program was authorized in
2007, but the $3.2 billion it received in Recovery Act funding
was the first funding ever for these block grants.
The State Energy Program has, since 1996, provided grants
to States, the District of Columbia, and territories to promote
national energy goals such as increasing energy efficiency.
This program, which typically has an annual budget of under $50
million, received $3.1 billion in Recovery Act funds.
Finally, the Loan Guarantee Program was established in 2005
to provide Federally guaranteed loans to energy projects that
are innovative and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Until the
Recovery Act, the Loan Guarantee Program had only been
authorized to provide loans to companies who paid their own
credit subsidy costs, an amount roughly equivalent to the
expected loss to the government of the loan. In contrast, the
Recovery Act provided $2.5 billion specifically to enable the
program to pay the credit subsidy costs for the projects.
Because the government, instead of a borrower, pays the
credit subsidy costs for loans made under the Recovery Act,
this increases the amount of taxpayer money that is at risk
considerably.
The extent to which Recovery Act funds provided to the five
programs have been spent varies significantly. As of March 10,
2011, DOE reported that 67 percent of Recovery Act funds for
environmental management projects had been spent, 50 percent of
funding for the Weatherization Assistance Program had been
spent, 34 percent for the State Energy Program, 28 percent for
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grants and 5 percent
for the Loan Guarantee Program.
The number of full-time equivalent jobs reported by
recipients also varies by program. For example, the recipients
of Weatherization Assistance Program funding reported 15,400
full-time equivalence jobs for the fourth quarter of 2010.
Environmental management recipients reported 9,400 FTEs in the
fourth quarter, and the Loan Guarantee Program reported 784
FTEs.
In the course of our work, we found a variety of concerns.
Overall, it has been difficult for DOE to build in effective
measures for program goals, such as improving energy
efficiency, energy saved, costs saved, cost effectiveness or
reduced environmental risk. In addition, DOE and funding
recipients have struggled to accurately measure jobs funded by
the Recovery Act. The Loan Guarantee Program has had difficulty
reconciling the inherent tension between funding innovative
projects that reduce greenhouse gases, funding projects that
have a high likelihood of paying back the loan, and, in the
case of Recovery Act funds, creating jobs in a timely fashion.
GAO has made recommendations to DOE to improve the
reporting and measurement of jobs funded by Recovery Act money,
to improve oversight and monitoring of Recovery Act funds, and
to improve the measurement and reporting of program outcomes.
In most cases, DOE has generally agreed with our
recommendations and has taken steps to implement them.
Thank you. This concludes my oral statement. I will be
happy to answer any questions the committee may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rusco follows:]

Mr. Stearns. Thank you.
Mr. Friedman, your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF GREGORY FRIEDMAN

Mr. Friedman. Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee,
I appreciate the opportunity to testify today on the work of
the Office of Inspector General concerning the Department of
Energy's implementation of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009.
I'm very pleased to be joined today by my colleague, my
long-time colleague, Rick Hass, who is the Deputy Inspector
General for Audits and Inspections.
In March 2009, I testified before the Subcommittee on
Investigations and Oversight, Committee on Science and
Technology on issues relating to the Recovery Act. In that
hearing, I laid out the Office of Inspector General's strategy
for ensuring that the Recovery Act funds were used effectively
and efficiently. Many of the findings I will discuss today
parallel issues raised in my 2009 testimony.
As you have heard, and as you know, the Department received
a little over $35 billion under the Recovery Act for various
science, energy and environmental programs and initiatives. As
of March 4, according to the Department's own records, it had
obligated just over $33 billion or approximately 93 percent of
these funds. However, of this amount, $12.3 billion had
actually been spent. These funds were used to provide financial
assistance awards to a variety of recipients and to accelerate
the work of certain existing facilities management contractors.
The Recovery Act called for intensive Inspector General
oversight. Consequently my office has pursued a strategy
designed to prevent, hopefully, and to detect inefficient,
ineffective and abuse of Recovery Act expenditures. Since
passage of the Act, we have issued 47 audit, inspection, and
investigative reports covering activities that received about
$26 billion in Recovery Act funding. These efforts identified
weaknesses in the management and administration of contracts
and financial assistance awards.
In the case of the Department's $5 billion weatherization
program, our work also revealed the need to resolve health and
safety issues some of which could have been dangerous to low-
income recipients of services.
Further, we initiated over 80 Recovery Act-related criminal
investigations. These investigations were predicated on alleged
schemes such as fraudulent claims for rebates and mischarging
for services. To date, they have resulted in two criminal
prosecutions and over $1 million in recoveries.
In addition, 20 percent of the remaining Recovery Act cases
have thus far been accepted for prosecutorial action. And we
provided 258 fraud awareness briefings for nearly 15,000
Federal contractor, State and other officials. These briefings
alerted responsible officials to possible fraud schemes, and in
so doing, we hope serve to prevent abusive Recovery Act
expenditures.
Department officials have told us that these efforts have
helped improve the management of Recovery Act programs. My full
testimony provides additional details regarding our work
including a listing of the relevant Inspector General reports.
As you are no doubt aware, the Department of Energy was one
of the largest recipients of Recovery Act funding in the
Federal Government. This additional funding allowed the
Department to expand longstanding programs such as the
residential weatherization program and create new initiatives,
including the energy efficiency and community block grant
programs.
The goals of the Recovery Act were to be accomplished
expeditiously so as to stimulate the economy and create jobs,
all in an atmosphere of transparency and accountability. The
Department, in our view, responded with a robust, good faith
effort to implement and execute the various aspects of the
Recovery Act. Through our work, we have identified a number of
overarching issues and lessons learned that should be
considered if similar programs are proposed.
First, the demanding nature of the Recovery Act's
implementation placed an enormous strain on the Department's
then-existing infrastructure. Secondly, dealing with a diverse
and complex set of departmental stakeholders complicated
Recovery Act startup and administration. Third, although
shovel-ready projects were the symbolic goal of the Recovery
Act, reflecting the desire to expeditiously create jobs, in
most cases, execution was more challenging and time consuming
than had been anticipated.
Fourth, infrastructure at the State and local levels was
overwhelmed. Ironically, in several States, those charged with
implementing the act's provisions had been furloughed due to
economic conditions in those very States.
Fifth, the pace of actual expenditures was significantly
slowed because of the time needed to understand and address
specific requirements of the Recovery Act.
And finally, in the initial phase, recipients of the
Recovery Act funding expressed their frustration with what they
described as overly complex, complicated and burdensome
reporting requirements.
In summary, massive funding, high expectations and
inadequate infrastructure resulted at times--and I stress at
times--in less than optimal performance. Large portions of the
funds allocated through the Recovery Act have yet to have been
spent. Accordingly, we continue to focus our attention on the
Recovery Act programs, including currently an evaluation of
contingency plans to address transitioning to a post Recovery
Act funding posture. And our investigative efforts continue.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my formal statement. I would
be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of
the subcommittee may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Friedman follows:]

Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentleman.
Our next witness is Mr. Steve Isakowitz, and if you don't
mind just introducing the people that are with you.

STATEMENT OF STEVE ISAKOWITZ

Mr. Isakowitz. Chairman Stearns, Ranking Member DeGette and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today to discuss the Department of Energy's
monitoring and oversight efforts to ensure the effective
implementation of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.
The Department has received $35.2 billion in appropriations
and $6.5 billion in power market administration borrowing
authority. These funds have gone to over 4,500 recipients who
are developing an estimated 15,000 clean energy projects across
the Nation. As of March 13, 2011, over $12.5 billion of the
Department's Recovery Act appropriations had been executed on
projects around the country.
Let me give several examples of how the Recovery Act is
playing a pivotal role in stimulating economic growth, creating
jobs in long-term competitive sectors, reducing energy costs
for Americans and supporting critical environmental cleanup
goals. First, advance vehicle industry is beginning to take
root in America. As a result of the Recovery Act, we will have
the capacity to produce enough batteries for about 500,000
plug-in hybrid electric vehicles a year at 2015.
Second, the Department of Energy's weatherization program
has made it possible for more than 330,000 families nationwide
to reduce their energy use and cut their utility bills. We are
on track to weatherize nearly 600,000.
Third, as a result of the Recovery Act investments in clean
energy, U.S. renewable energy generation is set to double by
2012.
Finally, for DOE's Office of Environmental Management, we
estimate that by the end of 2011, the acceleration of cleanup
of contaminated areas will reduce the Department's cleanup
footprint by 40 percent, potentially freeing up land for local
communities' reuse.
Most at DOE's recovery-funded programs were new initiatives
or significant increases to existing programs, presenting the
challenge of quickly ramping up activities while ensuring that
all taxpayer funds are well spent. Indeed, our mantra within
the Department is to spend fast, spend well. We have initiated
numerous efforts to identify and mitigate risks associated with
implementation of these projects. Many of these efforts have
become government wide best practices. We are working to extend
to our base-funded activities.
Before any Recovery Act awards were issued, the Department
created over 140 individual project plans comprised of project
descriptions, monthly obligation and payment plans, milestones
and performance targets. We also ensure the development of
detailed risk plans for nearly every project which are updated
as necessary to assist with the identification and mitigation
of program execution risks.
The risk plans incorporated lessons learned from the IG and
GAO reports including those focusing on similar programs at
other agencies. And in order to ensure transparency and
accountability of our funds and provide real-time financial
execution, information to the Department's management, we
developed a Web-based tool called I Portal to provide immediate
access to financial and programmatic execution for our
projects. Most of this information is made available to the
public through DOE's Web site at recovery.gov.
As part of our comprehensive risk management efforts, we
have also worked hard to identify those----
Mr. Stearns. I just wonder, is your mic turned on? It is?
Maybe just bring it a little closer to you. Thanks.
Mr. Isakowitz. As part of our comprehensive risk management
effort, we have also worked hard to identify those recipients
that might require heightened monitoring and oversight. We
currently have risk scores for over 4,000 individual Recovery
Act recipients, and over 12,000 sub recipients which we will
use to prioritize oversight and monitoring efforts.
Our risk scoring methodology was recognized by staff on the
Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board which is made up
of agency IGs as a best practice. In addition, the Department
established special monitoring and oversight procedures with
the largest energy efficiencies and renewable energy programs.
To date, the Department has conducted over 700 monitoring
visits for these programs.
Audits and inspections conducted by the DOE, IG and GAO are
an integral part of the Department's monitoring and oversight
efforts. And we are committed to working with the IG and GAO to
facilitate their work and address any issues they identify.
For example, we have given IG and GAO staff direct access
to all contents in our I portal and provided training on using
the system. To date, the Inspector General has issued 47
reports related to the Recovery Act implementation. For 16, the
Inspector General did not identify any issue significant enough
to warrant recommendations for management action.
For the other reports, the IG issued 111 separate
recommendations, and the Department has already resolved 50
percent of these. Costs questioned by the Inspector General
represent only 0.03 percent of the Department's Recovery Act
spending authority. The GAO has issued 10 reports, three of
which contain recommendations for management action which we
are actively addressing.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank you again for inviting
me to testify about the Department's efforts under the Recovery
Act. The Department was charged to ensure that the money is
spent quickly and spent well. We take this responsibility
seriously. I look forward to responding to your questions and I
would like to introduce two of my colleagues who help me in
doing so. Inez Triay is Assistant Secretary for Environmental
Management, and Steve Chalk, the Chief Operating Officer for
the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Isakowitz follows:]

Mr. Stearns. I thank Mr. Isakowitz.
You seem to be very high on the program and indicate that
you have tried to implement most of the GAO Inspector General's
recommendation. Is that what you are saying?
Mr. Isakowitz. Yes, we have moved as expeditiously as we
can.
Mr. Stearns. I think when you look at the program, here we
are 2 years after the program was signed, the stimulus package
was signed, and if I would, pertaining to the weatherization
program, it is still only about halfway to meeting its target,
and I think Mr. Rusco and Mr. Friedman, isn't it fair to say
that the States and the Department of Energy were not prepared
to implement this plan in a way that satisfied what most of us
thought the stimulus bill would do, provide immediate injection
into the economy and jobs for the unemployed? Mr. Rusco?
Mr. Rusco. Well, there were a number of issues early on
that slowed the implementation of this program, and among them
were the Davis-Bacon requirements that required the Department
of Labor----
Mr. Stearns. So the Davis-Bacon Act slowed down the actual
implementation of the plan, particularly with weatherization,
is that correct?
Mr. Rusco. Yes, it did. It required the Department of Labor
to establish rates for weatherization workers in localities.
And they eventually did that in September of 2009.
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Friedman.
Mr. Friedman. I would agree with that, Mr. Chairman. If you
would allow me a moment of personal privilege if you don't
mind.
Mr. Stearns. Sure.
Mr. Friedman. Mr. Isakowitz is a good friend of mine, but I
just want to point out for the record that it took the IG to
show him how to turn on his microphone.
Mr. Stearns. OK, that is good. That is good.
Mr. Bilbray. We are glad to see the Energy Department knew
how to flip a switch.
Mr. Isakowitz. Saving energy.
Mr. Stearns. I have here cases, particularly in Tennessee,
dealing with weatherization which show some gross mismanagement
where they came in to put insulation in, and all they did was
put the bag of insulation. I will be glad to show this to you.
Actually, they were supposed to weatherize a home through the
windows and through the attic, and all they did was paint the
house and I have numerous examples here.
So I think the question is for you, Mr. Isakowitz. What
measures did you take to ensure the quality of the
weatherization was not sacrificed for deadlines? And actually,
did you have some kind of measuring techniques, because I would
be glad to show you these egregious examples where the work was
not done.
In fact, ``during our preliminary analysis of the 444 homes
reviewed, we found deficiencies with 233'' of these, 52
percent, and the work was not even performed in about 45
percent of these homes, and I will be glad to give you this
information.
So I guess the question we have here is what kind of
measuring techniques did you have? I think the GAO, Mr. Rusco,
indicated earlier that--he mentioned in his opening statement
they did not use new good measuring techniques for the jobs
that were implemented.
Mr. Isakowitz. I'm going to turn to Mr. Chalk to answer the
specifics to your question, but let me just say generally the
way we treated this program is the way we treated all the
programs when we got started on the Recovery Act. As has been
mentioned, a number of times this was significant funding and
new funding for the Department. Particularly for the State
programs, many times, this represented anywhere from 20 to 60
times more funding than we get on an annual basis. In the case
of a block grant, it was a brand new program.
So one of the things we did up front for this program and
the others is to, before we start spending money to make sure
we had the necessary controls in place and work with the States
who were going to be recipients of an unprecedented amount of
funding up front, to make sure that they were able to handle
it. As to the specifics of your question----
Mr. Stearns. Before you do that, just based upon what you
said, I think I would take on face value that you are saying
that to create a stimulus package through the weatherization
program, this is not the best way to do it, because you had to
ramp up so much. And when I see what you were dealing with
annually, the program I think was preparing about 100,000
annually, but the stimulus increased it almost to 600,000 over
a 3-year period.
So I think you are implying that you had to ramp up and
perhaps all that ramp up made it more difficult for you, maybe
the stimulus through this weatherization ramp up is not the
best way to create a stimulus. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Isakowitz. No. We think it actually has been a very
effective program. And we think the program impact we have
received as a result has shown that it has been very effective
in saving average Americans and low-income homes significant
funds.
Mr. Stearns. How would you measure that? What measurement
were you using to determine and validate what you just said?
Mr. Isakowitz. Well, just broadly speaking, for low-income
homes, energy costs are usually 15 percent of oftentimes what
they have to pay where an average American it may----
Mr. Stearns. So you are just broadly speaking on your own.
Mr. Isakowitz. Speaking just in terms of the value of this
program back, and in terms of actual homes that we have touched
we have already done for 300,000 homes----
Mr. Stearns. Do you think this will create sustainable jobs
after?
Mr. Isakowitz. Well, in many cases, we are creating the
kind of skills that as we move in our entire economy to a more
energy efficient economy, many of the skills that are being
applied for those homes are same kind of skills that can be
applied elsewhere.
Mr. Stearns. But if they are not creating more work
afterwards, if there is not work afterwards, then they will
suddenly stop and they will not have any more work. But anyway,
Mr. Chalk, why don't you finish so I don't go too far.
Mr. Chalk. If I may, I will address a couple of issues. One
is the late start. The challenges that have been mentioned----
Mr. Stearns. Through the Davis-Bacon Act?
Mr. Chalk [continuing.] With new requirements on the
program that weren't with the legacy program. It was an
increase of about 25-fold in terms of the size of the program.
The program was always structured to be done within 3 years
of the Recovery Act. So even though we got a late start, we are
on schedule, and we are scheduled for just about every State,
every territory, every tribe to be completed in March of '12,
March 2012, 3 years after the Recovery Act was initiated. So
over the last year, we have been running at about 20-to-30,000
homes per month, doing about 300,000 homes a year. So we have
really accelerated the program.
Initially, we had some workmanship problems, and there have
been references to Tennessee and Illinois.
Mr. Stearns. So you are familiar with the Tennessee, all
the cases I have got.
Mr. Chalk. I'm not personally familiar with Tennessee but
we have had workmanship issues in the onset of the program.
Mr. Stearns. I need you to wrap up because my time has
expired.
Mr. Chalk. Essentially, the way we are handling that is a
significant 20 percent of the funding was for training and
technical assistance. We have a massive training, about two
dozen training centers, we are training the contractors, we are
training the sub-recipients who are monitoring the work. Our
State folks now are actually measuring 5 percent of the homes
by sample, and the DOE has about two dozen monitors that go out
regularly and oversee the work. So we have several layers of
oversight to make sure that the improvement measures are being
instituted, the right ones, and that usually is not windows. It
is usually insulation, caulking and things like that.
Mr. Stearns. I'm going to let you wrap up so the ranking
Member----
Mr. Chalk. And what we have now is working very well, and
we are producing quality home weatherization.
Mr. Stearns. All right. My time is expired.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Friedman, the Recovery Act contained quite a bit of
money for oversight and investigation to try to eliminate fraud
and other kinds of misuse of the funds, correct?
Mr. Friedman. That's correct.
Ms. DeGette. Can you explain to this committee very briefly
what kinds of resources were available to the DOE Inspector
General under the ARRA?
Mr. Friedman. Yes. As I recall, the precise number, Ms.
DeGette, it was $15 million. With those funds, we have taken
the following approach: One is we hired temporary employees to
augment our staff, specifically focused on areas where we
thought the most vulnerabilities, the most vulnerable aspects
of the program.
Ms. DeGette. And you have done about 47 reports and audits
on ARRA funding to date, correct?
Mr. Friedman. That's correct, yes.
Ms. DeGette. And Mr. Rusco, I wonder if you can tell us
about the resources and responsibility given to GAO under the
Recovery Act.
Mr. Rusco. Yes, GAO received $25 million to oversee the
Recovery Act. With that money, we hired largely retired
annuitants back into the fold to help us with this work, but we
also used a lot of our other resources in this. We focused on
State programs primarily and we reported on a bimonthly basis
typically.
Ms. DeGette. And you issued 107 reports, correct?
Mr. Rusco. I will take your word for it. It was a lot.
Ms. DeGette. Now, Mr. Isakowitz, I would assume that you
are not trying to imply when you say you had to ramp up
quickly, that there is any view that we shouldn't have quickly
tried to implement this program, correct?
Mr. Isakowitz. No, we think this is a great program and it
has great results and a lot of impacts.
Ms. DeGette. And let me ask you this: Do you think that the
fact that you had to ramp up quickly meant that there was a
disproportionate amount of poor work or improper use of the
funds or anything like that?
Mr. Isakowitz. No. In fact, we have been very careful as we
ramped up to make sure we had all the internal controls the
accountability and transparency in place.
Ms. DeGette. Now, what about situations like this shoddy
work in Tennessee that the chairman was talking about?
Mr. Isakowitz. Well, it is a vast undertaking and when you
have as many homes as we have had to deal with, again, we had
over 300,000 clearly you are going to have cases of issues that
have come up. That is why it was very important up front before
these dollars went out and that we went and visited all 50
States to actually work with them to set up controls to make
sure, in fact, they had appropriate mechanisms in place to take
care. And we had a very exacting monitoring process where we
track and look for issues. In fact, very often we will work
closely with the States and the IG and GAO to try to identify
these problems before they become big problems.
Ms. DeGette. So what you are saying is you feel like where
there are problems like this where certainly none of us would
want to see problems like that, you are feeling that because of
the programs you put in place, it is not endemic throughout the
system?
Mr. Isakowitz. That's correct. We would love to be perfect.
Ms. DeGette. What about Mr. Rusco, Mr. Friedman, would you
agree with that statement, that it is not these problems aren't
endemic throughout the system?
Mr. Friedman. First of all, one of the first things we did,
Ms. DeGette, in early 2009 was issue a lessons learned report
in which we looked back on the work that we had done the prior
couple of years and determined whether there were lessons we
could learn from what had been experienced in the past,
including in weatherization.
Ms. DeGette. And did you learn lessons?
Mr. Friedman. Did we learn lessons? Yes, I think we did,
and it was a teaching moment for us as how to use our resources
to address the most pressing problems.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Rusco, anything to add?
Mr. Rusco. I guess I would say it is a mixed bag. There are
problems identified in our reports that DOE has begun to
implement and respond to. We continue to do work and we
continue to have findings where we will be reporting in a
couple of months on the Energy Efficiency and Conservation
Block Grants program.
Ms. DeGette. I think, Mr. Chairman, that might be a good
opportunity to have that other hearing you were talking about.
They are coming up with another report in a couple of months.
Let me ask you, Mr. Rusco, you said one of the reasons for
the slow start to starting these programs was Davis-Bacon. That
is a law says you have to pay prevailing wages in these areas,
correct?
Mr. Rusco. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. So, say in Tennessee, if you are going in and
adopting weatherization programs or something, you can't
undercut the local wages, right?
Mr. Rusco. Right.
Ms. DeGette. That would seem to me to make sense, given
what we are trying to do with the ARRA money, which is to
promote the job market. Thank you, very much Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentlelady.
The gentleman from Oklahoma is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Rusco, GAO has
completed two reports on loan guarantee programs; is that
correct?
Mr. Rusco. I think it is three now, yes.
Mr. Sullivan. So it is three programs.
Mr. Rusco. Three reports. I am sorry.
Mr. Sullivan. Three reports? OK. The most recent report was
issued July 2010; is that correct?
Mr. Rusco. Correct.
Mr. Sullivan. As you know, the loan guarantee program is
currently the subject of an investigation by this subcommittee,
in particular, a loan guarantee to a California company named
Solyndra. So I don't want to get into the particulars over
certain guarantees at this point. Instead, I want to discuss
the program generally. The first Recovery Act related guarantee
was announced in March 2009; is that correct, sir?
Mr. Rusco. I believe that is correct, yes.
Mr. Sullivan. And that was to Solyndra, a California
company; is that correct?
Mr. Rusco. Yes.
Mr. Sullivan. Was that a $535 million loan they got?
Mr. Rusco. Yes, it was.
Mr. Sullivan. Since then, DOE has announced 15 other loan
guarantees for companies engaging or planning to engage and
producing innovative energy technologies; is that correct, sir?
Mr. Rusco. They have issued now 10 and they have another--I
am not sure exactly how many are conditional loans.
Mr. Sullivan. Aside from Solyndra, was is the status of the
other 14 companies who received loan guarantees? Where are they
in developing these projects?
Mr. Rusco. Well, there are three other companies that have
gotten loans that have identified and submitted job
information. So there are a total of 4 out of the 10 loans that
have actually been issued that were development----
Mr. Sullivan. Have any of these companies under
consideration by you even broken ground yet?
Mr. Rusco. Four have. And Solyndra is far along, if not
finished, with the plant that it was building.
Mr. Sullivan. Of the 10 closed loans, only three have begun
construction. And you say there may be some other activity?
Mr. Rusco. That is what I believe, yes.
Mr. Sullivan. Mr. Isakowitz, the purpose of the stimulus
was to create jobs as everyone was saying, right? Is that
right?
Mr. Isakowitz. That is correct.
Mr. Sullivan. And the loan program's Web site shows the
number of jobs that each loan guarantee is supposedly creating;
is that right, sir?
Mr. Isakowitz. That is correct.
Mr. Sullivan. So the jobs numbers shown on the Web site,
can they be considered created before the facilities have
broken ground?
Mr. Isakowitz. Well, it is important to note how we go
about collecting information. They put the numbers in, the
recipients of those dollars based upon dollars by which we have
obligated. In many cases, some of these applicants would, in
fact, start to break ground and create some of the jobs prior
to it. So what we receive and what we report is what the
recipients give us based upon those that we close.
Mr. Sullivan. But they were considered before they even
broke ground, some of them were, right?
Mr. Isakowitz. Yes. I cannot speak to--it happens usually
when they are breaking ground.
Mr. Sullivan. Also, Mr. Rusco, in the July 2010 report, you
state that the DOE loan program's office had not developed
sufficient performance goals to measure the actual results of
the loan guarantees against the planned or desired results. Why
is this significant?
Mr. Rusco. Well, with any program, we would like to be able
to go back over time and see how they are doing in achieving
their goals. And among the goals for the Loan Guarantee Program
was to create funding for innovative projects, energy projects
that reduce greenhouse gas emissions that also have a high
probability of paying back the loan. And under the Recovery Act
funding, also one of the goals was to create jobs.
Mr. Sullivan. Well, Mr. Rusco, is the Loan Guarantee
Program office making any effort to determine whether loan
guarantees and grants are actually resulting in greater energy
efficiencies or infrastructure improvements? Yes or no?
Mr. Rusco. They may be taking steps to do so. We are not
satisfied with the steps and they have not agreed with most of
our recommendations.
Mr. Sullivan. That would be no? Kind of no? It sounds like
no. Mr. Isakowitz, in the GAO report, DOE states that we will
revisit the performance goals. Has DOE done so?
Mr. Isakowitz. I would have to get back to you on that.
Mr. Sullivan. Could you submit that for the record?
Mr. Isakowitz. We will.
Mr. Sullivan. What are the performance goals?
Mr. Isakowitz. Some of the general I can speak of, and
again, I would have to get you the details for the record. But
generally, we have looked at the impact we have in terms of our
focus on clean energy, in terms of CO
2
sequestration
and on issues on some of the jobs created.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Sullivan. Does the loan program office plan to go back
and determine the actual results of these loans?
Mr. Isakowitz. Yes, we monitor it. In fact, when we close
the loan, we don't step away from the loan. In fact, we are
staying very close to the loans throughout the whole repayment
of the loan itself.
Mr. Sullivan. Mr. Isakowitz, if the DOE does not close a
number of the loans soon, it would stand to lose its unspent
stimulus money, or $2 billion right now, I believe; is that
right?
Mr. Isakowitz. We have $2 billion of unobligated funds.
Mr. Sullivan. And you are going to try to get that out the
door pretty quick?
Mr. Isakowitz. We have the demand to get it out the door,
yes.
Mr. Sullivan. And the office would need to close these
loans soon, right, in order for the companies to meet the
construction deadlines; is that correct?
Mr. Isakowitz. And we have cued it up just for that, yes.
Mr. Sullivan. Does the loan program's office intend to
spend all of this 2 billion? And if so, by what day would it
need to do so?
Mr. Isakowitz. Yes, we intend to and we need to do it by
the statutory date, which is at the end of September.
Mr. Sullivan. Mr. Rusco, are you concerned by this
situation?
Mr. Rusco. Well, we do have concerns about the internal
controls of the program. We have in every report issued
recommendations to improve controls and performance measures
for the program. So there is some concern about--if the program
were to ramp up the speed of issuing loans, we would like to
see those controls in place.
Mr. Sullivan. So, Mr. Rusco, you are still concerned about
this, aren't you, this situation, how they are measuring it?
Mr. Rusco. We are working on our fourth report right now.
Mr. Stearns. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Rusco. And continuing to find issues that we are
concerned about, yes.
Mr. Sullivan. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Stearns. The gentlelady is recognized from the Virgin
Islands, Ms. Christensen.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to
all of the people on the panel. Today, we have heard from DOE
that the funds provided by the Recovery Act helped the
Department and its State, local and private grantees create
tens of thousands of new jobs. In just the last quarter, those
grantees reported supporting employment for 43,000 workers. And
those numbers are quite laudable, but they may understate
actually the impact of DOE's Recovery Act funding.
For instance, I know that DOE has always relied heavily on
both contractors and subcontractors to carry out its mission.
Yet, as the DOE IG noted in an April 2010 audit report, many of
the prime contractors reporting Recovery Act hiring to the
department failed to report any of the job creation that
occurred at the subcontractor level. So, Mr. Friedman, is that
correct?
Mr. Friedman. That is correct. If I may, Ms. Christensen,
I-- not take exception to it, but your characterization may be
a little different. According to the rules that have been
established from the beginning, a subcontractor job creation
was not to be included in the report. So in fairness, at some
point, of course, they changed the rules, the rules did change,
but that was the ``going in'' posture which we felt understated
the job creation capability of the money that had been spent.
Mrs. Christensen. So even though it wasn't absolutely
required initially, the fact that subcontractors may not have
reported may understate the number of jobs. Because it is my
understanding from the same report that perhaps the
subcontractors, the jobs created by them was nearly double that
by the prime contractors.
Mr. Friedman. That is one of the interesting aspects that
we discovered, which was that job creation at the subcontractor
level may have far exceeded that of the contractor level. So I
agree with your fundamental point.
Mrs. Christensen. So you agree that we may have
significantly underestimated the impact of the Recovery Act
spending on employment?
Mr. Friedman. Certainly, as far as that category of
spending is concerned at that time.
Mrs. Christensen. And I know that calculating the exact
number of jobs created by a Federal spending can be
complicated. Some people suggest that this sort of spending
might be crowding out private sector employment or bringing
jobs into the present that would have been created in the
future. So setting aside the validity of those concerns in a
time of full employment, Mr. Rusco, are we worried that DOE job
creation has been crowding out private sector hiring during the
recession?
Mr. Rusco. It varies depending on the economic conditions
in any locality. But in a time when there is high unemployment
and economic activity is very low, we are in a recession, there
is much less concern for crowding out than there would be if we
were at a point of full employment.
Mrs. Christensen. So during recession, there is a benefit
to turning potential future jobs into present jobs; is that
right?
Mr. Rusco. That is something I really can't comment on.
That is a choice.
Mrs. Christensen. And finally, Mr. Isakowitz, do the job
numbers we have talked about capture all the economic benefits
of the Department's Recovery Act spending or did that spending
benefit Americans in other ways as well?
Mr. Isakowitz. I think that is correct. As Mr. Friedman
pointed out, in addition to the subcontracts, the way the
numbers are collected is if there are two people working half-
time on it, it is treated as one person. It also doesn't
include those that it would call the induced and the indirect,
like for those who let us say might be a vendor carrying goods
across country would not be counted and as well as the impact
on the local economy to, let us say, local restaurants and so
on, those are not counted. And then again, a lot of what we are
investing in is, in fact, an investment in the long term.
So, in fact, when our dollars stop from any of these
activities, we hope it will stimulate local opportunities for
small businesses to, in fact--in fact, we spent almost $10
billion of Recovery Act on small businesses that we think would
enable a more vibrant economy than had we not been there.
Mrs. Christensen. Then you have the average savings for
homes that have been weatherized and other benefits. And I
remember Dr. Chu speaking just as he became Secretary about
maybe the lack of a strong record of grand management and
trained staff at the Department. But it sounds as though from
what you have had to do to prepare for the spending and the
monitoring, that the Department is probably in much better
shape going forward. So there is an additional benefit to the
Department of Energy, isn't there?
Mr. Isakowitz. Yes. In fact, we have demonstrated a number
of best practices, that one of my focuses now going forward is
to make sure that our ongoing programs, in fact, benefit from
exactly that.
Mrs. Christensen. We have a situation in the Virgin Islands
where perhaps one of the programs is oversubscribed and others
where our government has passed legislation determining, for
example, that solar water heaters must be in new homes for 70
percent of the hot water and rebates should be allowable up to
50 percent. Is there any flexibility or a possibility, say, for
those programs that are oversubscribed from moving money from
one area to another?
Mr. Stearns. The gentlelady's time has expired. You are
certainly welcome to answer her question.
Mr. Chalk. Within the State Energy Program and within the
Block Grant Program, we can revise activities, as long as there
is money left and then do some of the things that have been
oversubscribed and we would have to cut things that have been
undersubscribed or you don't want to do any longer.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stearns. The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Murphy,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Murphy. This question is for Mr. Isakowitz and Mr.
Chalk. As you review programs within the Department of Energy,
how do you assess of a Federal program that is operating now,
is working efficiently and effectively and it is worth keeping
money in it versus one that you are going to reduce money in
that? Can either one of you give me an idea?
Mr. Isakowitz. Sure. I will just talk more broadly. On what
we have done up front is we had identified these project plans
where we identify specific metrics of what we wanted each
program to achieve. In addition, we identified areas of risk.
We also identified particular milestones in terms of when they
would be delivering. And we had set up a system due to the
unprecedented effort we had in transparency to actually collect
this information. We have regular what we call deep dive
reviews where we go over in great detail how we are doing, is
the recipient delivering as promised. In areas that we see are
running into issues, we work with the recipient to see how it
is----
Mr. Murphy. Recipients of the grants, for example?
Mr. Isakowitz. Yes. Recipients of grants or contracts to
make sure that they remain on track.
Mr. Murphy. Of course, we have heard that some of the DOE
monies, the 33 billion, are having trouble allocating that out
or obligating or releasing it. Of course, one of the problems
made by the administration is that they could rapidly disburse
these funds. I want to see if we can look at a particular
agency within the Department of Energy that executed its
responsibilities from, what I understand in a timely and
efficient manner which I think would meet those standards.
Specifically to my understanding, that the National Energy
Technology Laboratories, or NETL, obligated all of its stimulus
dollars; is that correct?
Mr. Isakowitz. Yes.
Mr. Murphy. I understand they did that pretty effectively,
on time, on budget, without fraud or any terrible thing. Am I
correct on that too?
Mr. Isakowitz. Yes. I want to give commendation not only to
NETL, but a lot of the rest of the organizations, in fact, were
able to obligate 99.9 percent at the prescribed deadline.
Mr. Murphy. So they did a good job disbursing those funds?
Mr. Chalk. Yes, they did.
Mr. Murphy. Now, I am concerned about something and perhaps
you can help me with this. I am concerned there seems to be an
effort in the President's 2012 budget that is going to transfer
operations or programs like having experts out in the field
into Washington, D.C. And in particular, when I look at the
EERE presidential request of 3.23 billion, it is a 37 percent
increase over 2011, presidential request. And yet I see NETL is
projected to receive 14.9 million. It is a $10.6 million
reduction, which would be about a 50 percent reduction of the
Federal staff within NETL.
My concern is here is a program that has done its job, on
time, on budget, without fraud or abuse and yet--correct me if
I am wrong, maybe I am misreading this--but it looks like money
is pulling away from there, expanding into another area. Does
this indicate that this program is going to be reducing its
funding and its mission?
Mr. Chalk. The reduction in program direction, or FTEs of
NETL, is really symbolic of the decrease of workload, Recovery
Act. So it peaked over the last 2 years and then in FY 2012,
when most of the procurements and so forth are completed, it is
dropping back to the FTE level that it saw prior to the
Recovery Act.
Mr. Murphy. But we still have some funds that are yet to be
disbursed? And where will those be?
Mr. Chalk. All funds are disbursed.
Mr. Murphy. Disbursed now? Are there other functions within
NETL that you are looking to pull out and move to Washington,
D.C.?
Mr. Chalk. We are constantly looking at optimal program
management, whether something should be done in the field or at
headquarters. That is under constant evaluation every year that
we prepare for the budget.
Mr. Murphy. When the President gave his State of the Union
address, he also talked about clean coal. And I commented to
him as he is walking up the aisle, I am pleased about that,
every inch of my district is over coal and natural gas. Do you
see us moving forward on some programs like NETL which, in the
past, played a good role in research, et cetera, in coal-
related research? Will those continue to be worked and funded
and maintained?
Mr. Isakowitz. Yes. We had in the President's 2011 request,
and we will see where things come out. But we had important
investments to make, in fact, in fossil energy and we are going
to continue to make important R&D investments. When you heard
the President and the Secretary speak about the need for a
broad effort in clean energy, clearly coal, clean coal
particularly and carbon capture sequestration is a key part of
that. So we have maintained our investment. And, in fact, the
Recovery Act has been very critical, in fact, to demonstrate
the very technologies that are important for the future.
Mr. Murphy. I would be glad to talk with you more and see
how we can support this future too. I know it is important to
have headquarters like that in the middle of coal country and I
know that NETL is in both Pennsylvania, West Virginia. It is
certainly the heart of everything there and a lot of great
workers who have spent their careers and the long legacy of
that across many administrations. And I hope that we can
continue to look at programs that have been very efficient and
effective in that and I will be glad to work with you and see
how we can help on that together.
Mr. Isakowitz. We would be happy to work with you.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Green, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me briefly talk
about prevailing wage or Davis-Bacon. In my part of the
country, we call it prevailing wage. Part of the Recovery Act
also required to hire local workers or local folks, that if you
had the skills in the local area to do the work. And I know not
only was it Davis-Bacon for prevailing wage and that has been
part of Federal law in construction projects as long as I can
remember, is that generally true of our witnesses? Prevailing
wages?
Mr. Rusco. I am sorry. I don't know the full scope of where
the Davis-Bacon Act is----
Mr. Green. Well, maybe it is new to the Department of
Energy because in other construction projects, it is not new.
It has been around, I think, since the 1930s. In fact, we have
had some votes on the House floor in the last 50 years trying
to remove it. And it typically always wins not to remove it on
a bipartisan basis. I don't know if that got in the way as much
because that is required on a lot of Federal projects that they
do all over the country.
Let me ask you about some of the concerns about the DOE
program. H.R. 1 that we had and will continue since we have a
3-week continuing resolution, cuts the budget of the Office of
Energy Efficiency by 35 percent from over 2.2 billion to 1.5
and prevents DOE from spending money for weatherization and
State energy programs. Could you discuss the consequences of
the cuts? What is it going to do to both State energy programs,
but also to home weatherization? I know it has benefited in a
lot of our districts.
Mr. Chalk. Yes. Eliminating the weatherization program is
going to be devastating. As I said earlier, it has been a
tremendous effort to get the program back on schedule. We are
supposed to be completed in March of '12. And without '11
appropriations--and there is tremendous lead time that is
required. We need FY '11 appropriations because this is kind of
a cash business, weatherization, materials need to be bought
prior to the production year that the States have, which is
usually right in the middle of our fiscal year.
So it is a little complicated. But if we don't get the FY
'11 funding, we are in jeopardy of furloughing about 8,000
people, about 34,000 homes that won't be weatherized and,
again, the investment ratio here is for every dollar that the
Federal Government puts in, there is about a $1.80 of savings
out. And this has been well-founded over the years. So we will
lose that savings for low-income people who, again, they pay a
disproportionate amount of their income on energy bills, about
five times what non-low-income people pay. This will be pretty
devastating to the weatherization network, as well as the low-
income families. We jeopardize losing our training centers
which--recognizing some of the startup in workmanship issues,
most of those are behind us. Tennessee, for instance, is doing
very well. We rate every State on how well they do in
monitoring. Tennessee scored very well on our last site visit
for monitoring.
So we feel things are very much on track. And 42 out of our
59 States and territories and Indian tribes, 42 out of 59 will
be totally out of money in the middle of FY '12 with their
annual money and their Recovery Act money. So if the FY '11
money does not come, then we see significant consequences of
essentially a cliff, where work just stops, we lose the
infrastructure related to training, certifying inspectors and
training the actual contractors to do the work.
Mr. Green. It is my understanding about 300,000 homes thus
far has been weatherized using Recovery Act funds.
Mr. Chalk. Well, if you include the January numbers, it is
about 350,000. So we are past the halfway point.
Mr. Green. I am real familiar with the training centers. I
have one in my district. Of course, my folks from up north
wonder why would we weatherize in Texas. But come to Texas
between May and September and you will know why we need to
weatherize, because it gets pretty warm there.
About the State efficiency programs. I know I only have a
few seconds. State offices use DOE funds to leverage
investments and for efficiency upgrades. I understand it is
estimated for every 50 million in State energy program funding,
it produces 333 million in annual energy savings costs and
leverages another 585 million for energy related economic
development. Is that number true?
Mr. Chalk. I would have to get back to you on the record
for that number. I would say that the State Energy Program, as
well as the Energy Efficiency Block Grant Program really are
reinvesting for the future. They are more long-term payoff than
we typically think--the Recovery Act is immediate stimulus,
like weatherization and the environmental restoration that we
are doing. These programs that you are mentioning do have
tremendous lifecycle savings and are really programs investing
in the future.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stearns. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Texas, Dr. Burgess.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr. Rusco and
Mr. Friedman. Again, I apologize also for being out of the room
for part of your testimony today. And if I am asking you
something that has already been asked, please indulge me and
don't embarrass me by pointing it out. On the loan programs,
the loan office program, it is not a huge sum of money by
Washington standards, but it is still a big bunch of money,
$2\1/2\ billion, is that about right?
Mr. Rusco. That is correct.
Mr. Burgess. So this office is currently the subject of
some investigations within this committee and it is the object
of some interest by yourselves; is that correct?
Mr. Rusco. Yes. We are currently doing a review of the
program.
Mr. Burgess. Now, I think one of the things that has raised
some concern is that the loan program's office issued a loan
guarantee to one company prior to receiving a single report
from the external reviewers whose job it was to evaluate the
soundness of the loan guarantee.
Mr. Rusco. I believe that they issued a conditional
commitment prior to receiving a final financial or marketing
report and then issued the loan before having completed--I am
sorry--a legal report.
Mr. Burgess. Now, there is a time commitment to money to be
received under this program, that the construction on the
projects must begin by September of this year; is that correct?
Mr. Rusco. That is correct.
Mr. Burgess. Are you concerned that any other loans might
be fast-tracked in the same nature?
Mr. Rusco. Our concerns are broadly about the way the
program has been set up, both to follow a consistent and
rigorous due diligence process to make sure that before they
issue loans, they have fully gone through their process and
have fully vetted all of the issues that they have that the
program has identified as important, and we found in our last
report that for a number of loans that went to conditional
commitment, they had not finished all of the steps of their due
diligence process.
Mr. Burgess. Well, is there any pressure--pressure is not
quite the right word. But if you have got to be submitted and
constructing by September, that is a fairly condensed time
line, 6 months from now. Is that condensation of the time line?
Is that putting any additional pressure to bear on that?
Mr. Rusco. I cannot speak to exactly where the program is
in terms of the process of all of the existing loan
applications. I can say that the pace at which they have been
able to issue loans up to date would, if that pace were to
continue today, would definitely not make it.
Mr. Burgess. And then what would happen, those loans would
just go away or be reclaimed by the Department of Energy or by
the Federal Treasury?
Mr. Rusco. I think they go back to the Federal Treasury.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Isakowitz, is it appropriate that this
committee is concerned about the loan program's office putting
taxpayer dollars at risk by guaranteeing loans without doing
the due diligence first?
Mr. Isakowitz. First, I want to be really clear. We have
set up a very exacting process of due diligence as we go
through it. I think the report that you are referring back to
was from about 9 months ago. We did not agree with that
particular finding. Just to be clear, there is a major
difference between what we call a conditional commitment and a
closing. A closing is the key milestone. That is when we are
committing and obligating the funds for that particular
project. At a conditional commitment, we have just identified
the issues that we expect the applicant to address before we
close. So I believe in that particular report what they raised
were some issues that some of the reports were not fully in
hand at the time of the conditional commitment. But we
understood that at the time and we were able to address that
risk sufficiently so that we had told the recipient that before
we close on the loan, all the required reports needed to be in.
So we are not cutting any corners to get to closing.
Mr. Burgess. What about now? There is an abbreviated time
line between now and September. Does that put additional
pressure on the program?
Mr. Isakowitz. We have had the opportunity to either close
or get the condition of commitment on 16 projects. And we have
greatly improved the time line without cutting any corners in
terms of getting to it. We had actually staffed up accordingly
2 years ago. We had maybe 10 or 15 people in the office. Today,
we have over 100. In fact, we have put the processes in place
to address the demand that we see in terms of getting to those
funds by the end of the fiscal year.
Mr. Burgess. Let me pose a question to the Inspector
General. So we are told that this is kind of not a big deal,
these are trivial. What is your response? Do you feel that this
is a misplaced concern on the part of the committee?
Mr. Friedman. Well, to put it in some perspective, Dr.
Burgess, essentially the authority under the loan guarantee
program is $71 billion. So there is a significant amount of
money at risk. I cannot address the particular specific issues
that you are raising, but it is obviously for that reason that
both deserves the attention of the Department and the attention
of all of the oversight bodies to make sure that the taxpayers'
risks are protected to the extent possible. Obviously you
wouldn't need a government guarantee if there was no risk. So
there is some element of risk inherently in these programs. So
I think your probing is appropriate and that is basically all,
I guess, I can add.
Mr. Burgess. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentleman. We are going to allow
Mr. Gardner to finish up and then we are going to close the
hearing. I think we have had good timing with the votes. I just
would like to ask for a unanimous consent request to place an
audit report from Tennessee and the Department of Energy IG
report into the record. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Stearns. Mr. Gardner, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and the witnesses
here today. Just a couple of quick questions for Mr. Friedman.
In one of your audit reports, you stated the State resources
have been significantly strained due to the administration of
DOE stimulus dollars; is that correct?
Mr. Friedman. That is correct. And without meaning to be
too clever, we have characterized this as attaching a garden
hose to a fire hydrant. The money is extraordinarily large, in
many cases.
Mr. Gardner. And DOE also then had to ramp up as a result
to manage the DOE stimulus portions; is that correct?
Mr. Friedman. That is correct.
Mr. Gardner. Is that the same hose to fire hose----
Mr. Friedman. Absolutely.
Mr. Gardner. Very good. In your testimony, you state that
you are now in the process of--and I quote--evaluating
contingency plans to address problems with transitioning to a
post Recovery Act funding posture. The immediate concern you
identify is how the Department will deal with the significant,
again, in quotes, ``significant downsizing of the contractor
workforce.'' Do you have any estimate of many contractors will
lose their jobs at DOE after Recovery Act funding runs out?
Mr. Friedman. I don't have that.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Isakowitz, as CFO, can you comment on that
question?
Mr. Isakowitz. Many of these activities we expect and hope
would continue, that the economy would, as was the intent of
the Recovery Act, to be targeted and temporary would allow
activities to follow from that. To speak to some of the
specific ones, I am going to turn to Inez who can speak most
directly to your question.
Ms. Triay. Our approach in the Environmental Management
program was to create temporary jobs and to train those workers
to work in the important field of nuclear and radioactive
contamination areas. So what we did was to concentrate on
footprint reduction, which then creates assets of now
liabilities in the communities where we have installations in
the Environmental Management complex so that the communities
could enter into economic development efforts using the assets
that the Environmental Management program through the Recovery
Act was able to put at their disposal.
We intend to reduce the active cleanup footprint by 40
percent by the end of 2011. In addition to that, of course, we
have the small business development that we have been able to
accomplish. We have awarded $1.8 billion out of the $6 billion
to small business in the Environmental Management Recovery Act.
We have been able to create infrastructure in the small
businesses to be able to compete in the national and
international nuclear industry.
Mr. Gardner. But in terms of estimates of how many
contractors will lose their jobs at DOE, do you have any?
Ms. Triay. In the Environmental Management program, we are
talking about 2,000 jobs just like was stated at the beginning.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you. Mr. Rusco, GAO has spent the last 2
years evaluating how States and localities are implementing the
stimulus. Now that we are nearing the end of its funding in
2012, what impact will this have on the States? And will those
workers that the States added through these programs be
furloughed?
Mr. Rusco. In some cases, we are going to see with the end
of the Recovery Act, we are certainly going to see a cliff
effect of jobs ending, and environmental management is one such
case. Already we are seeing reductions in employment in the
fourth quarter of last year over the third quarter and expected
decreases in employment after that. So if we go back to the
regular annual budget for that, then there will be a large
drop-off in jobs at the sites.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you. And, Mr. Isakowitz, I think in
response to Mr. Sullivan's question, responded if the primary
job, or the primary purpose of the stimulus was to create jobs.
And I believe your answer was yes; is that correct? I think
that was directed to you.
Mr. Isakowitz. It is to create jobs and make long-term
investments for our economy.
Mr. Gardner. There was a grant that was awarded by the
Department of Energy to a city in my district that was over $2
million and it is less than 50 percent completed and it says
zero jobs were created. This is according to the Web site that
reveals information on grants awarded and how many jobs have
been created. How many awards have been granted that have
created zero jobs by the DOE?
Mr. Isakowitz. I cannot speak to that specific one. But in
every case, the recipient who we have worked with identifies
back to us how many people have, in fact, been employed as a
result of the dollars that they received. Anybody who receives
a dollar from us clearly has created some kind of work that
they should be reporting back to the system. But we would be
happy to get back to the specific example for the record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Gardner. Thank you very much. And in terms of--I yield
back my time. Thanks.
Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentleman. We just want to get to
vote. I will just close. Mr. Friedman, I put into the record
your letter of October 14th where you had indicated--and this
is considering the State of Illinois' weatherization assistance
program. You said, ``Our testing reveals substandard
performance in weatherization workmanship, initial home
assessments and contractor billing. These problems were of such
significance, they put the integrity of the entire program at
risk.''
So that was put in. I want to the thank our witnesses for
coming today, for the testimony and Members for their devotion
to this hearing. The committee rules provide that Members have
10 days to submit additional questions for the record to the
witnesses. And with that, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:03 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]


