- THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 10: PIPELINE SAFETY OVERSIGHT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 10: PIPELINE SAFETY OVERSIGHT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 16, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-63

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

71-668                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
MARY BONO MACK, California           BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                GENE GREEN, Texas
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
Vice Chairman                      LOIS CAPPS, California
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JAY INSLEE, Washington
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  JAY INSLEE, Washington
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  JIM MATHESON, Utah
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   GENE GREEN, Texas
PETE OLSON, Texas                    LOIS CAPPS, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia             officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Comonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement.....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     3
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, prepared statement.............................     6
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................   170
Hon. John Sullivan, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Oklahoma, prepared statement................................   182

Witnesses

Cynthia L. Quarterman, Administrator, Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration, U.S. Department of
Transportation.................................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Andrew J. Black, President, Association of Oil Pipe Lines, and on
Behalf of the American Petroleum Institute.....................    18
Prepared statement...........................................    20
Carl Weimer, Executive Director, Pipeline Safety Trust...........    38
Prepared statement...........................................    40
Christopher A. Helms, Executive Vice President and Group CEO,
Nisource Gas Transmission and Storage, and on behalf of the
Interstate Natural Gas Association of America..................    61
Prepared statement...........................................    63
Charles F. Dippo, Vice President, Engineering Services and System
Integrity, South Jersey Gas Company, and on behalf of the
American Gas Association.......................................    85
Prepared statement...........................................    87
Anthony Swift, Energy Analyst, International Program, Natural
Resources Defense Council......................................   104
Prepared statement...........................................   106

Submitted material

Texas Pipeline Best Practices Resolution, submitted by Mr.
Burgess........................................................   184

THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 10: PIPELINE SAFETY OVERSIGHT

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 16, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:33 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed
Whitfield (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Shimkus, Terry,
Burgess, Bilbray, Olson, Pompeo, Griffith, Barton, Upton (ex
officio), Rush, Inslee, Green, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Carl Anderson, Counsel, Oversight; Gary
Andres, Staff Director; Charlotte Baker, Press Secretary; Anita
Bradley, Senior Policy Advisor to Chairman Emeritus; Maryam
Brown, Chief Counsel, Energy and Power; Aaron Cutler, Deputy
Policy Director; Andy Duberstein, Special Assistant to Chairman
Upton; Garrett Golding, Legal Analyst, Energy; Cory Hicks,
Policy Coordinator, Energy and Power; Katie Novaria,
Legislative Clerk; Caitlin Haberman, Democratic Policy Analyst;
and Alexandra Teitz, Democratic Senior Counsel, Environment and
Energy.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call this hearing to order.
This is our 10th day of the American Energy Initiative. We have
had a serious of hearings on the energy needs of the American
people, and today we are going to turn our focus to a
particularly important issue, and that is pipeline safety.
Recent major pipeline accidents in San Bruno, California;
Marshall, Michigan; and Allentown, Pennsylvania have thrust our
attention on the Nation's pipeline system and the regulations
that ensure their safety. Today we hope to reconvene the
dialogue that began last year with a similar hearing called in
response to those accidents. And, of course, the last time that
pipeline safety was reauthorized was back in 2006, and it is
time for us to revisit that as well.
As some in this room might remember, our last pipeline
safety reauthorization bill, as I said, was in 2006. We worked
together in a lengthy bipartisan process that allowed us to
pass the bill under suspension on the House floor. The PIPES
Act expired in December of last year, but funding levels remain
in place under the present Continuing Resolution.
It is our intention to craft a pipeline safety bill that
enhances current authorities and can provide greater protection
for our infrastructure, communities, and the environment. This
process begins today with this hearing. We have wide and
varying interests represented on the witness panel and I look
forward to hearing their perspective on all of these issues.
With the information and discussion provided today, committee
members can get the proper context for the issues we will work
together on later this summer.
Although the major accidents mentioned earlier should be a
part of today's dialogue, I am sure we will not rush to any
conclusion before the National Transportation Safety Board
completes its investigations. We have been told this will not
happen for several months or possibly even next year. Before we
write laws or push for regulations that explicitly address
those accidents, we should wait until all the facts are in.
Until that time, there are several areas where pipeline safety
can and should be improved which we can get moving in the very
near future.
It is my belief that Members from both sides of the aisle
can find a common purpose on these issues and work together to
produce effective and meaningful legislation that protects the
public and environment.
And at this point I would like to recognize Mr. Waxman for
the purpose of making an opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

In our ninth day of the American Energy Initiative hearing,
we will turn our attention to a very important and bipartisan
issue confronting all of our constituents--pipeline safety.
Recent major pipeline accidents in San Bruno, California,
Marshall, Michigan, and Allentown, Pennsylvania have thrust our
attention on the nation's pipeline system and the regulations
that ensure their safety. Today we hope to reconvene the
dialogue that began last year with a similar hearing called in
response to these accidents.
In Kentucky, we have a major artery that serves 140,000
customers and 31 counties, many of which are in my District. I
am sure other Members of this committee can talk about the
impact that pipelines have on their District. We must make sure
these pipelines are safe.
As some in this room might remember, our last pipeline
safety reauthorization bill made its way through committee in
late 2006. We worked together in a lengthy bipartisan process
that allowed us to pass the bill under suspension on the House
floor. The PIPES Act expired in December of last year, but
funding levels remain in place under the present Continuing
Resolution.
Rather than simply pushing this issue further down the
road, it is our intention to craft a pipeline safety bill that
enhances current authorities and can provide greater protection
for our infrastructure, communities, and the environment.
This process begins today with this hearing. We have wide
and varying interests represented on the witness panel and I
look forward to hearing their perspective. With the information
and discussion provided today, committee members can get the
proper context for the issues we will work together on later
this summer.
Although the major accidents mentioned earlier should be a
part of today's dialogue, we should restrain ourselves from
rushing to conclusions before the National Transportation
Safety Board completes its investigations. We have been told
this will not happen for several months or possibly next year.
Before we write laws or push for regulations that explicitly
address those accidents, we should wait until all the facts are
in. Until that time, there are several areas where pipeline
safety can and should be improved which we can get moving in
the near future.
It is my belief that members from both sides of the aisle
can find a common purpose on these issues and work together to
produce effective and meaningful legislation that protects the
public and environment.
I thank the witnesses for being here And I now yield to the
Ranking Member, Mr. Rush for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
The ranking member of the subcommittee, Congressman Rush,
was unable to be here at the beginning of this hearing because
the time had been changed and he had already made a previous
engagement. But I understand he will be given a chance to make
an opening statement when he arrives.
It is clear we need to pay serious attention to pipeline
safety. Experts have been warning of the hazards of
deteriorating infrastructure in this country, and natural gas
and hazardous material pipelines are a prime example. There has
been a burst of new construction in the last few years which
puts further stress on pipeline safety oversight resources. The
system is showing clear signs of strain and people and the
environment are paying the price.
Here is what we have seen over the past year and a half:
two natural gas pipeline explosions that killed 13 people and
damaged over 150 homes and businesses; a spill of over 800,000
gallons of diluted bitumen, a heavy tar-like substance from the
Canadian tar sands into the Kalamazoo River, 30 miles of the
river expected to remain closed over a year after the spill,
and cleanup costs are estimated at over $500,000 million; a
second spill of over 250,000 gallons from the same pipeline 6
weeks later; 12 spills on the new Keystone pipeline in its
first year of operation. This pipeline also carries diluted
bitumen. Most of these spills were small, but after two larger
ones, PHMSA shut down the pipeline finding that continued
operation without corrective action would be hazardous to life,
property, and the environment; a trench collapse for the new
Bison natural gas pipeline in Montana, moving fishers 3 to 4
feet deep and hundreds of feet long.
In addition, PHMSA recently found that some steel pipe
produced between 2007 and 2009 was defective. Five of the seven
pipelines PHMSA investigated contained the defective pipe,
which had to be replaced, but other pipelines may also have
used it. There is no current requirement for them to test for
defective steel pipe.
These pipeline incidents are tragic and we must act to
prevent more loss of life and property in the future. These
incidents are the canary in the coalmine, warning about the
state of our pipeline safety. We may pay a very high price for
ignoring these warnings. We need to make sure that we are
anticipating and preventing these pipeline safety disasters
before they occur. In particular, oil companies are rapidly and
dramatically expanding the quantity of tar sands crude in the
form of diluted bitumen. That they are moving through pipelines
in this country, concerns have been raised that diluted bitumen
poses a greater risk both in terms of the likelihood of spills
and the challenges of cleanup.
We need to understand these risks and address them and we
need to do that before approving another tar sands pipeline,
not after a pipeline is built with inadequate protections. Yet
just yesterday this subcommittee moved legislation to short-
circuit the approval process for the newest tar sands pipeline
before holding this hearing. That legislation is a mistake. We
should understand the unique safety concerns for tar sands
pipelines, not accelerate pipeline approval.
We have had a history of bipartisan action on pipeline
safety, and there is a lot of room for agreement in this area.
I look forward to working with the Republican majority on this
issue.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Waxman. And when Mr. Rush
does arrive, we will give him an opportunity to make his
opening statement.
At this time I would like to recognize the chairman of the
full committee, Mr. Upton, for opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
For years, pipeline safety has been a topic that enjoys
bipartisan cooperation and produces very effective legislation.
The last time this committee took up legislation on the
subject, we were able to pass the bill under suspension on the
House floor. And as the 2006 law expires, it is our
responsibility to put forward meaningful legislation this
summer that will improve pipeline safety and allow our pipeline
infrastructure to remain a dynamic and efficient method for
transporting vital energy supplies.
The first step in the process is certainly today's broad
survey of the world of pipeline safety. We have with us all the
major stakeholders and experts, as well as the lead regulator
on pipeline safety. The Pipeline and Hazardous Material Safety
Administration is an effective enforcer of this Nation's
pipeline regulations and laws, and I look forward to hearing
how their processes, authorities, and resources could be
enhanced with legislation in the future, as well as how the
companies and interests represented at the witness table today
believe that their industry could be rendered even safer.
Pipelines are the safest method of transporting hazardous
liquids and natural gas. The incident rate is extraordinarily
small, but when things do go wrong, they can go wrong in a big
way. That is for sure. And I do not have to look too far for an
example of this, as 20,000 barrels of oil spilled out of a
ruptured line into a tributary of the Kalamazoo River just one
county outside of my district last year. I was aggressive in my
efforts to get the spill cleaned up and the environment
restored, but when it comes to policy changes, we cannot focus
only on the response to a spill. We also have to focus on
preventing pipeline safety failures before they happen.
The overall strong safety record of hazardous liquid and
natural gas pipelines can be marred by isolated failures that
put human life, property, and the environment at risk. Pipeline
safety is an issue that we all take very seriously. And I have
let it be known that this committee is certain to move on a
bipartisan reauthorization bill later this summer. Our goal
should be to craft an effective bill that ensures another
community doesn't experience a spill that affects their
waterways or a massive explosion that levels a neighborhood.
This hearing will give members a broad view of the status
of the pipeline safety laws and regulations and will inform us
of what might be the best path forward as we craft legislation.
I look very forward to the discussion that we are going to host
today and the ideas that will be proposed. I want to
particularly thank the administrator for pipeline safety, Ms.
Quarterman, for her graciousness for allowing us to have one
panel instead of two as we are expecting about 3 hours of votes
in about an hour. So we are able to hopefully get this
adjourned before that starts because I am not sure how many
people are going to have to come back after 3 o'clock.
And I yield the balance of my time to Mr. Terry.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Fred Upton

For years, pipeline safety has been a topic that enjoys
bipartisan cooperation and produces effective legislation. The
last time this committee took up legislation on the subject, we
were able to pass the bill under suspension on the House floor.
As the 2006 law expires, it is our responsibility to put
forward meaningful legislation this summer that will improve
pipeline safety and allow our pipeline infrastructure to remain
a dynamic and efficient method for transporting vital energy
supplies.
The first step in this process is today's broad survey of
the world of pipeline safety. We have with us all the major
stakeholders and experts as well as the lead regulator on
pipeline safety. The Pipeline and Hazardous Material Safety
Administration is an effective enforcer of this nation's
pipeline regulations and laws. I look forward to hearing how
their processes, authorities, and resources could be enhanced
with legislation in the future as well as how the companies and
interests represented at the witness table today believe their
industry could be rendered safer.
Pipelines are the safest method of transporting hazardous
liquids and natural gas. The incidence rate is extraordinarily
small, but when things do go wrong, they can go wrong in a very
big way. I do not have to look too far for an example of this,
as 20,000 barrels of oil spilled out of a ruptured line into a
tributary of the Kalamazoo River just one county outside of my
district. I was aggressive in my efforts to get the spill
cleaned up and the environment restored. But when it comes to
policy changes, we cannot focus only on the response to a
spill--we must focus on preventing pipeline safety failures
before they happen.
The overall strong safety record of hazardous liquid and
natural gas pipelines can be marred by isolated failures that
put human life, property, and the environment at risk. Pipeline
safety is an issue I take very seriously. I have let it be
known this committee is certain to move on a bipartisan
reauthorization bill this summer. Our goal should be to craft
an effective bill that ensures another community doesn't
experience a spill that affects their waterways or a massive
explosion that levels a neighborhood.
This hearing will give members a broad view on the status
of pipeline safety laws and regulations and will inform us of
what might be the best path forward as we craft legislation. I
very much look forward to the discussion we will host today and
the ideas that will be proposed and debated.

Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that
opportunity to thank all of our witnesses for being here.
And certainly just like our national interstate system, we
want to design it so it is as safe as possible to travel on.
Our pipeline system is critical to our energy infrastructure.
And, as we know, as Mr. Upton said and Ranking Member Waxman
mentioned is that sometimes there are problems. The explosion
in San Bruno, California that killed, I think, eight people;
incident in Arizona a couple of years ago. So as Fred said,
when something goes bad, it can really have devastating effects
on loss of life. So we need to get it as close to perfect as we
can. So your testimony here will help do that.
I do want to add to Mr. Waxman's comments about the
TransCanadian pipeline. I think after 3 years of reviewing it
and sitting on a foot-and-a-half environmental impact studies
and supplementals that it is time for them to start action in
the State Department and make a decision. So I don't think it
was hasty or irresponsible at all. In fact, I think the
irresponsible is the foot-dragging by our Agencies on several
energy projects.
With that I will yield back.
Mr. Burgess. Would you yield to me?
Mr. Terry. I will not yield back. I am going to yield to
Mr. Burgess.
Mr. Burgess. I appreciate you yielding me a generous amount
of time.
Mr. Chairman, I am going to ask unanimous consent to insert
my entire statement into the record.
But I live in an area of Texas where there is a complex and
complicated network of natural gas pipelines above the Barnett
Shale. I just want to point out that not all regulations need
to be at the federal level. The consortium of mayors got
together in my area and collaborated on a Pipeline Best
Practices Guideline, and Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask
unanimous consent to submit that for the record.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Burgess. And I will yield back Mr. Terry's time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Michael C. Burgess

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This hearing is an important one for this committee to be
having. Last year, we watched as other committees held hearing
after hearing on pipeline safety, chipping away at the
jurisdiction this committee should have been exerting from the
start. Pipeline safety as a matter of energy policy is crucial
to what we do here.
Last year's events in Michigan and California were tragic
reminders that safely upkeeping our nation's energy
infrastructure is an ongoing process, and we must be diligent
in protecting the lives of those around pipelines. It is true,
in many areas of the country, including my backyard in north
Texas, civilization is encroaching on pipelines just as
pipelines are encroaching on civilization. Homes are being
built closer and closer to infrastructure that was laid decades
ago, in what used to be rural lands. Now, as the population has
increased and urban density is forcing people to move further
and further into the country, pipelines that were once miles
from anywhere are suddenly right underneath residents'
backyards.
As people require more and more natural gas--one of the
cleaner fuels on the market--more pipelines and infrastructure
will be needed to meet the demand. What is not clear is how
best to move forward with regulating this increased
infrastructure. Some on this committee have called for new
federal regulations. And that might be required, but we must
fully review the conclusions from the investigations of past
pipeline explosions and incidents to learn from them. Not all
regulations must be at the federal level--a consortium of
mayors in my district collaborated on a `Pipeline Best
Practices' guideline.
I am glad we are here today. We need to be looking into
what is happening that has caused the isolated incidents over
the past few years--is it a wild coincidence that these
incidents have occurred within such a short span of each other,
or is there a fundamental flaw in how we monitor and design our
pipelines? We need firm answers to questions like these in
order to best know how to move forward, balancing our need for
increased, clean energy with the health and lives of those who
live so close to energy infrastructure.
With that, I yield back.

Mr. Whitfield. You went over 16 seconds.
Well, that concludes the opening statements except for Mr.
Rush's. And I want to thank all the witnesses for being with us
today and also we appreciate your flexibility in allowing us to
change the time of the starting of the hearing.
And with us today we have Ms. Cynthia Quarterman, who is
the administrator of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration at the Department of Transportation. We
have Mr. Andy Black, who is president of the Association of Oil
Pipe Lines and on Behalf of the American Petroleum Institute as
well. We have Mr. Carl Weimer, who is the executive director of
the Pipeline Safety Trust. We have Mr. Christopher Helms, who
is executive vice president and group CEO of NiSource Gas
Transmission and Storage, and also on behalf of the Interstate
Natural Gas Association of America. We have Mr. Charles Dippo,
who is vice president, Engineering Services and System
Integrity for South Jersey Gas Company, and also on behalf of
the American Gas Association. And we have Mr. Anthony Swift,
who is the energy analyst for International Programs at the
Natural Resources Defense Council.
So thank you for being with us. All of you have a great
deal of expertise in this area, which we know will be
beneficial for us. And each one of you will be given 5 minutes
for the purpose of an opening statement. And there is a little
device there that will say green when it is time to go, yellow
when you think about stopping, and red, I hope you might stop
at that point. But we do look forward to your testimony. And at
this time, Ms. Quarterman, I will recognize you for 5 minutes
for your opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF CYNTHIA L. QUARTERMAN, ADMINISTRATOR, PIPELINE
AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORTATION; ANDREW J. BLACK, PRESIDENT, ASSOCIATION OF
OIL PIPE LINES, AND ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN PETROLEUM
INSTITUTE; CARL WEIMER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, PIPELINE SAFETY
TRUST; CHRISTOPHER A. HELMS, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT AND GROUP
CEO, NISOURCE GAS TRANSMISSION AND STORAGE, AND ON BEHALF OF
THE INTERSTATE NATURAL GAS ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA; CHARLES F.
DIPPO, VICE PRESIDENT, ENGINEERING SERVICES AND SYSTEM
INTEGRITY, SOUTH JERSEY GAS COMPANY, AND ON BEHALF OF THE
AMERICAN GAS ASSOCIATION; AND ANTHONY SWIFT, ENERGY ANALYST,
INTERNATIONAL PROGRAM, NATURAL RESOURCES DEFENSE COUNCIL

STATEMENT OF CYNTHIA L. QUARTERMAN

Ms. Quarterman. Thank you. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking
Member Rush, members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak today to discuss the Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration's oversight of
America's vast network of energy pipelines.
Safety is the number one priority of Secretary LaHood,
myself, and the employees of PHMSA and we are strongly
committed to reducing transportation risks to the public and
environment. More than 2.5 million miles of pipelines across
the Nation deliver energy to homes and businesses, connect
communities, and support our way of life. PHMSA's role in
ensuring the safety of each and every mile is vital. To get the
job done, we develop and enforce regulations and maintain
strong partnerships with States, who oversee most of the
intrastate pipelines. Through strong regulations and integrity
management programs, PHMSA has significantly reduced accidents
and increased accountability for managing the risks of pipeline
operations. Serious pipeline incidents have dropped by more
than half over the past 20 years. However, we still have much
work to do.
In the wake of several recent serious pipeline incidents,
PHMSA is taking a hard look at the Nation's pipelines. The
pipeline infrastructure needs more attention to help ensure it
will continue to meet the huge demand later generations will
place on it to meet America's energy delivery needs.
In April, Secretary LaHood and I developed an action plan
requiring pipeline stakeholders to act, to be aggressive, and
be transparent in charting a course to accelerate the
identification, repair, rehabilitation, and replacement of
high-risk pipeline infrastructure. As part of our action plan,
we brought together everyone with a role in pipeline safety to
engage in discussions. We have also met with government,
industry executives, pipeline employees' representatives,
States, and the public interest community to discuss the
actions all pipelines can take to raise the safety bar.
While we continue think about next steps, PHMSA looks
forward to working with Congress on the reauthorization of its
Pipeline Safety program. While previous reauthorizations have
helped to advance pipeline safety by providing additional
resources to better exercise the Department's enforcement
authority, enhanced protection through integrity management
requirements for distribution pipelines, and increased support
for state pipeline safety agencies, we still need to do more.
Pipeline safety could be greatly improved with the passage of
reforms pushing stronger enforcement authority, expanded
integrity management requirements beyond those areas where
there are existing high-consequence areas, improved pipeline
data collection, and by advancing safety in many other ways.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to testify
before this subcommittee and report on PHMSA's oversight role
of pipelines and the opportunities that exist to strengthen
oversight. I look forward to answering any questions you may
have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Quarterman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Ms. Quarterman. And at this time,
Mr. Black, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW J. BLACK

Mr. Black. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield. I appreciate the
opportunity to appear on behalf of AOPL and API.
Pipelines have long been the safest way to move crude oil
and refined petroleum products such as gasoline, diesel fuel,
jet fuel, home heating oil, and propane. Pipelines are also the
most reliable and efficient way to move these fuels, which
American consumers and workers depend upon in our economy and
our quality of life.
The safety record of the liquid pipeline industry shows
strong improvement over the past decade. There are
significantly fewer pipeline accidents and less volume released
of product than 10 years ago because of new laws and
regulations, vigorous company actions, and improving
technologies. Each of the major causes of pipeline accidents
also showed marked decreases during this time period reflecting
the successive strategies to manage risks better.
Pipeline operators have every incentive to invest in
safety. Most important is the potential for injury to members
of the public, on employees, our contractors, and effects upon
the environment. Operators can incur costly cleanups, repairs,
litigations, and fines, and a pipeline may not be able to
provide service to its customers if a facility needs to be shut
down. Operators of liquid pipelines invest millions of dollars
annually to maintain their pipelines to comply with safety laws
and regulations. One survey of a group of members showed that
$3.3 billion was spent on integrity management activities in
just the past 6 years.
These costs will only increase as integrity management
tools become more expensive, more differentiated, and more
effective at identifying issues for operators to address. These
costs are ultimately borne by the shippers who pay for
transportation services and the consumers of products that are
shipped through the pipeline. Operators work hard to learn from
pipeline incidents and share ideas and improvements for best
practices. The industry has standing teams and workshops to
assess integrity management issues, review incidents and near-
misses, analyze data, and make technically-based
recommendations to industry leaders. Industry invests in R&D to
develop new technologies and practices to confront pipeline
challenges and pushes technology vendors to do the same.
We continue to work very hard at the company and
association level to achieve the goal of zero releases.
Congress has provided PHMSA with broad authority to regulate
pipeline safety. PHMSA is an aggressive regulator, conducting
rigorous inspections and vigorously enforcing compliance with
pipeline safety laws. PHMSA has the tools and uses them when
necessary. Operators face a comprehensive set of requirements
for construction, operation, and maintenance of a pipeline.
Regulations cover everything from design standards to
operational controls, qualification of personnel, public
awareness, infrastructure and incident reporting, emergency
response, and much more.
While we do not yet have the final results in
investigations in a recent high-profile pipeline accidents, it
is important to note that existing laws and regulations already
address the leading causes of pipeline failure, including
corrosion, materials and equipment failures, and operations
errors. If investigations unexpectedly identify any gaps, we
are ready to work with you to address them.
We were pleased to see the Senate Commerce Committee
advance Pipeline Safety Reauthorization as 275, which passed
the committee unanimously. The bill is a positive step forward,
although we do not agree with every provision. My written
testimony covers a number of recommendations.
We call your attention to Section 3, which would
essentially require PHMSA to prohibit one-call exemptions for
state and local governments and their contractors. It is a
great start. We urge this committee and the House to go further
by eliminating still more exemptions for mechanized excavators.
Third-party damage is less frequent today but it is still the
leading cause of accidents that kill or injure people. In some
cases, state laws requiring the use of 8-1-1, the national
call-before-you-dig number, exempts state agencies,
municipalities, or other entities such as railroads from
requirements to use the one-call system. These exemptions
create a gap in enforcement and safety. The pipeline does not
care who hits it.
PHMSA can close the gap by exercising one-call civil
enforcement authority granted by Congress in 2006. PHMSA can
induct enforcement proceedings for a one-call violation within
the boundary of a State if the secretary has determined that
the State's plan or enforcement is inadequate to protect
safety. The draft PHMSA rulemaking on this issue is a great
start but does not go far enough on ending these exemptions. We
urge DOT to complete its rulemaking soon and urge Congress to
require PHMSA to terminate these exemptions.
We also applaud the provision in S. 275 to bring some of
PHMSA's pipeline procedural rules up to par with those used by
other regulatory agencies, including elsewhere at DOT.
Requiring an impartial presiding officer to conduct hearings
and allowing access to a hearing transcript are basic elements
of due process we support. We encourage the Congress to go
further by also requiring a separation of function of PHMSA
staff to help ensure impartiality. Also, Congress should
require PHMSA to allow timely hearings to review corrective
action orders after they are issued.
We are glad PHMSA may implement some of these safeguards
administratively, but we know that they are reversible unless
codified by Congress. We look forward to working with Congress,
PHMSA, the Pipeline Safety Trust, and others to continue
pipeline safety gains, and we authorize the pipeline safety
laws. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Black follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Black. Mr. Weimer, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CARL WEIMER

Mr. Weimer. Good morning, Chairman Whitfield and Upton, and
Ranking Member Waxman and members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for inviting me to speak today on the important subject of
pipeline safety.
The Pipeline Safety Trust came into being after a pipeline
disaster in Bellingham, Washington that occurred 12 years ago
which left 3 young people dead, wiped out every living thing in
a beautiful salmon stream, and caused millions of dollars of
economic disruption. Borne from that tragedy and other
tragedies in places like Edison, New Jersey; Carlsbad, New
Mexico; and Walnut Creek, California, we have testified to
Congress for years about the improvements needed in regulations
to help prevent more disasters.
For years we have talked about the need for more miles of
pipelines to be inspected by smart pigs. We have pleaded for
clear standards for leak detection and the placement of
automated shutoff valves, closing the loopholes that allow some
pipelines to remain unregulated, and for better information to
be available so people know if they live near a large pipeline.
So here we are again after new tragedies in Marshall,
Michigan; San Bruno, California; and Allentown, Pennsylvania
asking for the same things we have asked for at other hearings
following previous tragedies. We are pleased to see some of our
recommendations included in part of the legislation recently
passed unanimously by the Senate Commerce Committee, and we
hope this body will build on that legislation to provide an
even stronger, more comprehensive bill. It is our sincere
desire not to be back here again in the future saying the same
things after yet another disaster.
Pipeline safety should be an easy task. The pipeline
industry, regulators, and citizen groups all agree that safety
is Job 1. Every trade association has come out with some
statement that the highest priority is no deaths, no injuries,
and zero incidents. So if we all agree that zero incidents is
the goal, then let us look at what changes in the rules can get
us to zero.
Clearly, providing PHMSA and the States with more funding
and personnel so they can better inspect industry efforts and
analyze safety needs should move us towards zero incidents, so
we all should support that. Since integrity management
requirements were passed nearly 10 years ago, more than 34,000
flaws were found in pipelines and repaired, reducing the
possibilities of many failures. Since 75 percent of all the
deaths caused by the failures of transmission pipelines have
occurred in areas that fall outside of the current integrity
management requirements and only 7 percent of the gas pipelines
and only 44 percent of liquid pipelines fall under these
inspection requirements. It is clear we could reduce incidents
by requiring integrity management inspections on all miles of
these pipelines.
We are glad that INGAA in their recently-released new set
of guiding principles commits to ``applying integrity
management principles on a system-wide basis.'' Likewise, any
pipelines near people should be required to operate in such a
way that prevents failures. Unfortunately, with the rapid
expansion of new shale gas drilling in more populated areas,
there are now hundreds of thousands of miles of gas gathering
lines that are under-regulated or not regulated at all. Many of
these lines are the same size and pressure as transmission
pipelines. Clearly, if our priority is safety, then these
gathering lines need to fall under the same safety regulations
as other similar pipelines.
If zero is our goal, then state agencies need to continue
to be pushed to move to improve their pipeline damage
prevention laws, and the efforts of state pipeline safety
agencies need to be clearly evaluated and those evaluations
shared with the public. If safety is our highest priority, then
the disconnect that exists between the agencies that cite new
pipelines and PHMSA, the Agency in charge of pipeline safety,
needs to be corrected. PHMSA needs to have the authority and
the resources necessary to engage in safety reviews as these
pipelines are planned and to inspect them thoroughly as they
are going into the ground.
And if getting to zero incidents is really our priority,
then local governments who have zoning and permitting authority
regarding land uses near pipelines need to be engaged actively
in these pipeline safety discussions since more and more
development is encroaching near these big pipelines.
NTSB's recommendation that companies can clearly document
that the operating pressure they run their transmission
pipelines at is based on real knowledge of what is in the
ground needs to be adopted. Also requirements for excess flow
valve installation on appropriate multi-family and commercial
applications needs to be moved forward.
I see my time is about up so let me close by saying that
there are many things that clearly can be done to make
pipelines safer. We have outlined many of those specific ideas
in our written testimony. Many of the leaks, spills, and
injuries and deaths that are still occurring are preventable.
Instead of just saying getting to zero is our highest priority,
we all need to start doing things that will actually get us
there. You have the opportunity this year with this legislation
to help guide us all towards zero incidents. We hope you seize
that opportunity and help hold us all to our fine talk.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Weimer follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. Mr. Helms, you are recognized for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER A. HELMS

Mr. Helms. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member
Rush, and members of the committee.
My name is Chris Helms. I am CEO of NiSource Gas
Transmission and Storage and chairman of the INGAA Board
Taskforce on Pipeline Safety. NiSource operates more than
15,000 miles of natural gas transmission pipelines extending
from the Gulf Coast to the Northeast.
Today, I am testifying on behalf of INGAA, the Interstate
Natural Gas Association of America. INGAA represents the
Nation's interstate natural gas transmission pipeline industry,
and as seen on Slide #1, our members operate a 200,000-mile
network of large-diameter pipelines that transport natural gas
throughout the Nation.
[Slide shown.]
I would like to state at the outset that while the safety
record of the natural gas transmission system is very strong,
we recognize that continuous improvement is imperative. We want
to work with you and other stakeholders to achieve our primary
goal of zero pipeline incidents. Demand for natural gas is
growing, and as a result, maintaining the public trust in
pipeline safety is critical.
[Slide shown.]
Slide 2 shows the interstate natural gas transmission
pipelines that have been approved for construction by the FDRC
over the past decade. Due to the growing demand for domestic
shale gas, gas pipeline infrastructure has expanded
significantly and will likely continue to grow. Ensuring the
safe and reliable operation of these systems will remain
critical and is the highest priority for this industry.
As part of the Pipeline Safety Improvement Act of 2002,
natural gas transmission pipeline operators were required to
implement an integrity management program. Integrity management
is a strategic risk-based approach that focuses on identifying
and mitigating risk in populated areas. The program requires
continual pipeline assessments and the repair and remediation
of any potential safety problems that are found.
The vast majority of baseline assessments under the program
are nearing completion. Consistent with the schedule
established by Congress, while only 4.5 percent of INGAA member
pipeline members are located in populated areas covered under
the program, baseline assessments have been completed on more
than 50 percent of the pipeline miles to date.
With the first round of assessments almost complete, we
believe now is an ideal time to reflect upon the effectiveness
of this program. Last year, the INGAA Board established a
senior-level task force and then adopted clear guiding
principles to define and lead our industry to improve safety
performance. Our 5-point principles are outlined in Slide 3 as
follows:
Our goal is zero incidents, a perfect record of safety and
reliability for the national pipeline system. We will continue
to work every day towards this goal. We are committed to safety
culture as a critical dimension to continuously improving our
industry's performance. Third, we will be relentless in our
pursuit of improving by learning from the past and anticipating
the future. Fourth, we are committed to applying integrity-
management principles on a system-wide basis, as Mr. Weimer
said. And last, we will engage our stakeholders from the local
community to the national level so they can understand and
participate in reducing risk.
To translate these principles into action, the taskforce
has commissioned an initiative we call ``Integrity Management
Continuous Improvement.'' Our objective is to assess our
performance, identify lessons learned, and target areas in need
of improvement. Action plans have been developed and teams are
already working in key areas to move us towards achieving our
goal of zero incidents.
In light of recent pipeline incidents, it is important to
reassess our infrastructure and better characterize the
conditions that contribute to pipeline failures. A pipeline
fails when its conditions deteriorate or service environment
changes to a point where the pipeline is no longer fit for
service. To achieve zero incidents, our focus must remain on
that standard. Any pipeline not fit for service, regardless of
age, should be repaired, replaced, or retired. Older pipelines
can remain fit for service if operating conditions are
controlled and the pipeline is properly maintained. On the
other hand, even the newest pipelines can be susceptible to
failure due to threats like excavation damage or outside
forces. Age is an important consideration but is only one
indicator of a pipeline's fitness for service.
Pipeline safety is a shared responsibility which requires
close cooperation among all stakeholders. We are actively
engaged in critical call-before-you-dig programs, and as you
can see this morning, I am wearing the 8-1-1 call-before-you-
dig pin. We work with local governments to educate them about
development around existing pipelines. We are working with
first responders to train emergency personnel on how to prevent
and respond to natural gas pipeline emergencies. Our efforts to
engage our stakeholders are numerous and this interaction is
critical to achieving our goal of zero incidents.
In drafting a reauthorization bill, INGAA believes that
legislation recently approved by the Senate Commerce Committee
provides a good framework to follow.
I see that my time is about up, so Mr. Chairman, what I
would like to say in closing is we hope that Congress will
complete reauthorization of a bill this year and view the
progress being made in that regard as encouraging. Thank you
for the opportunity to testify today and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Helms follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. Mr. Dippo, you are recognized for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHARLES F. DIPPO

Mr. Dippo. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members of the
Committee. I am Charles Dippo, Vice President of South Jersey
Gas, and Chairman of the American Gas Association Operation
Section. I am here testifying today on behalf of AGA, which
represents 200 local energy companies that deliver clean
natural gas to more than 64 million customers throughout the
United States.
Industry has demonstrated it can increase the delivery of
natural gas while continuously improving safety. Data from
PHMSA shows serious incidents and leaks have been reduced by
nearly 50 percent over the last 20 years but clearly more needs
to be done. The tragic incident in San Bruno reminds us that
one accident is too many. The NTSB has not issued a final
report on the San Bruno incident, but the industry is already
taking away important lessons from the information that has
been produced thus far in the extensive investigation.
The factual reports show that the event appears to be an
isolated incident with no evidence of national system safety
problems. Nevertheless, pipeline operators are assessing their
systems to determine if the circumstances encountered in San
Bruno bear any similarity to their operations.
The pipeline industry leadership has joined Transportation
Secretary LaHood in his call to action to repair, replace, or
rehabilitate the highest-risk infrastructure and to raise the
bar on pipeline safety. How do we raise the bar on pipeline
safety? First, we must keep our focus on key initiatives that
are showing success. This includes distribution and
transmission integrity management, control room management,
public awareness, excavation damage prevention, and voluntary
initiatives such as AGA's Best Practices program.
Second, we have an opportunity to enhance safety through
better excavation damage prevention programs, establishing a
data quality committee, reducing hurdles to implementing new
technology, adopting the latest consensus standards, and
enhancing pipeline safety legislation. One key safety
initiative is distribution integrity management. This
comprehensive regulation provides an added layer of protection
to the already-strong safety programs executed by distribution
companies. Operators are given until August 2011 to write and
being implementation of their individual risk-based programs
and are already aggressively implementing this rule.
Excess flow valves, EFVs, have another added layer of
safety. AGA supported the 2006 congressional mandate and most
operators were voluntarily installing EFVs well before the
congressional deadline. However, due to the inherent
uncertainties and complexities associated with service lines
for multiple-family dwellings, commercial and industrial
customers, it is inadvisable to attempt mandatory installation
of EFVs beyond single-family homes. PHMSA should be given
adequate time to finish its technical analysis and complete the
final rule-making process.
Excavation damage represents the single-greatest threat to
gas distribution, safety, reliability, and integrity. AGA
supports legislation that will require a state one-call program
to have appropriate participation by all underground operators
and excavators, including government entities; to have flexible
and effective enforcement; and prohibit exemption of
municipalities, state agencies, or their contractors from the
one-call requirements.
AGA also believes pipeline safety can be improved through
an independent review and analysis of the data collected by
DOT. AGA recommends the creation of a data quality team that
mirrors PHMSA's technical advisory committees. This team would
analyze and improve upon the data collected by DOT, identify
areas where the data tells us there is an opportunity to
improve pipeline safety, and to communicate consistent messages
about what the data is telling us.
AGA supports continued funding of research, development,
and deployment of new technologies, as well as the refinement
of current technologies that are essential to improving
pipeline safety. We recommend that emphasis be placed on the
deployment of new technologies and the reduction of regulatory
barriers operators currently face when attempting to implement
new technologies.
The industry is presently restricted by federal pipeline
safety regulations that require operators to follow obsolete
standards as they relate to pipeline safety. AGA suggests that
Congress consider legislation to require DOT to codify within 2
years the most recent addition of a standard that DOT has
adopted into the pipeline safety code.
Finally, it has been suggested that the transmission
integrity management program be changed to eliminate high-
consequence areas, thus requiring integrity management
assessments on all transmission pipelines. AGA believes this
would be contrary to the intent Congress had for the program,
which was to focus resources on areas where an accident could
do the most damage.
AGA believes it is reasonable for Congress to direct DOT to
evaluate the effectiveness of transmission integrity management
program within 2 years of the completion of the baseline
assessments. This study could include evaluations of maximal
allowable operating pressure, potential expansion of high-
consequence areas, installation of remote or automatic shutoff
valves, and expansion to areas of seismic activity.
In conclusion, the natural gas utility industry has a
strong safety record and we are committed to working with all
stakeholders to improve. To that end, we applaud this
committee's focus on moving pipeline safety reauthorization
forward. Passage of this important bill this year will help us
all achieve a common goal: to enhance the safe delivery of this
vital energy resource.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dippo follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Dippo. Mr. Swift, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANTHONY SWIFT

Mr. Swift. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member
Rush, and members of the committee. I am a policy analyst for
Natural Resources Defense Council. NRDC is a national nonprofit
organization dedicated to protecting public health and the
environment. As a personal note, coming from West Texas in a
family with 4 generations in the oil and gas industry, I value
the opportunity that allows me to participate in the critical
process and ensures the industry's infrastructure is held to
the highest standards of safety.
Over the last few years, the U.S. hazardous liquid pipeline
system has been used to transport a substance called diluted
bitumen from the tar sands region of Canada. By itself, bitumen
is virtually solid at room temperature. To move it through a
pipeline, producers must dilute it with light, highly volatile
natural gas liquids. The thick, abrasive mixture called diluted
bitumen is then pumped through pipelines at high pressure
generating enough friction to reach temperatures of up to 150
degrees. Over the last decade, imports of diluted bitumen have
increased six-fold, yet regulators haven't moved to assess its
risk, including both the potential for increased spill
frequency, as well as greater safety risks when those spills
occur.
The U.S. pipeline system may already be showing signs of
strain. For example, pipelines in Midwestern States, which have
the longest history of transporting Canadian tar sands crude
has filled nearly 3 times more crude per mile than the national
average over the last 4 years.
Enbridge transports the majority of Canadian diluted
bitumen to the United States. In 2010, its Lakehead System had
over a dozen spills, accounting for more than half of all crude
oil spilled in the United States that year. Meanwhile,
TransCanada's Keystone pipeline, one of the first pipelines
dedicated to move tar sands crude from Canada to the United
States, has had 12 leaks in less than 12 months of operation,
the largest of which was approximately 21,000 gallons. Keystone
is the newest liquid pipeline system to ever be deemed by PHMSA
an immediate threat to life, property, and the environment.
During a spill, natural gas liquids and diluted bitumen may
increase the risk of explosion and exposure to toxic vapors. As
the 840,000 gallons spilled into Kalamazoo appears to have
confirmed, in a spill, diluted bitumen behaves differently than
conventional crude requiring different, more expensive, and
time-consuming cleanup methods than conventional crude oil
spills. These are early warning signs that present a compelling
case that more study is needed on the risks of diluted bitumen.
Building TransCanada's Keystone XL, a high-pressure
pipeline that would move up to 830,000 barrels per day of hot,
corrosive, diluted bitumen through the heart of the Ogallala
Aquifer creates hazards that a conventional crude oil pipeline
does not. The Ogallala Aquifer is a critical source of fresh
water for the United States, provides 30 percent of our
irrigation water and drinking water for millions of Americans.
A spill in the deepest part of that aquifer in the Nebraska
Sandhills could be a disaster. Given the limits of leak-
detection technology, which on a pipeline like Keystone XL
could allow a leak of hundreds of thousands of gallons a day to
go unnoticed, the worst-case scenario is simply one we cannot
afford.
NRDC recommends the following actions. First, Congress
should require PHMSA to conduct a detailed study of diluted
bitumen. This study should include both the risks of increased
spill frequency, as well as unique hazards that such spills may
pose to public safety and the environment.
Second, PHMSA should be actively engaged in all stages of
major pipeline infrastructure development. This includes
issuing comments during environmental review for significant
pipeline projects such as the proposed Keystone XL pipeline. It
should be noted that it is the quality and not the time spent
conducting environmental reviews that ensures the safety of new
projects.
Finally, Congress should direct PHMSA to develop necessary
regulations to protect our major fresh water resources like the
Ogallala Aquifer from pipeline spills. Under current pipeline
safety regulations, aquifers like the Ogallala receive the
lowest level of federal oversight. During the Gulf spill, we
witnessed the sad consequences that come of allowing an
accident-prone company to replace expensive but prudent safety
measures with reckless optimism. Let us not court a similar
disaster in the deepest waters of our Nation's greatest
aquifer.
Once again, NRDC thanks you for the opportunity to present
its views and I would be pleased to answer any questions you
may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Swift follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Swift, thanks very much.
And at this time, I would like to recognize the ranking
member, Mr. Rush, for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to
thank all of the panelists for being here today.
Mr. Chairman, I find it curious that this subcommittee is
holding the hearing on pipeline safety after the majority
pushed through a bill to cut out the review period for public
and agency input in order to influence the administration to
hastily come to a decision regarding the Keystone XL pipeline
on behalf of the TransCanada Corporation. Yes, this is the same
TransCanada Corporation who built the original Keystone
pipeline that was temporarily shut down following two leaks on
a line that had only been in operation for less than 12 months.
I might seriously question on which side the majority falls
when it comes to actually ensuring pipeline safety versus
accommodating the interests of corporate entities. So forgive
me if it seems like this hearing is a day late and a dollar
short when it comes to this subcommittee actually putting into
practice whatever lessons we may learn here today. And it
appears doubtful that the majority will allow safety concerns
to interfere in the weighing of industry moving forward at all
costs.
Let it be said I am not opposed to industry but industry's
pathway forward must not be oiled by this subcommittee. With
that being said, I still believe that this hearing is warranted
and necessary and I am pleased to have heard some of the
testimony from our distinguished experts and our witnesses on
the panel.
Mr. Chairman, in the past, pipeline safety has been an
issue that this subcommittee has addressed in a bipartisan
fashion. And despite yesterday's markup forcing a hasty
decision on the Keystone XL pipeline, I hope that we will
continue in that tradition in this session as well. In light of
recent pipeline accidents, including Keystone 1 leaks, the PG&E
explosion in San Bruno, California, the 2 Enbridge fails in
Marshall, Michigan and Romeo, Illinois and the Allentown gas
line explosion in Pennsylvania, it is extremely important that
we learn from these cases so lessons can be applied to our
overall pipeline safety standards.
I look forward to this hearing and I look forward to asking
questions of these witnesses. And I look forward to asking
questions of the Pipeline Hazardous Materials and Safety
Administration on their updated plans for safety transporting
tar sands crude from Canada through the heart of the United
States, including my State. These tar sands contain bitumen, a
heavy, tar-like substance which, compared to conventional
crude, has higher sulfur content, higher chloride salt content,
and higher quantities of emergent particles, all of which
increases the potential for corrosion.
I will also like to hear and ask questions on how PHMSA
plans to address the issue of companies using substandard steel
for their pipelines that do not comply with industry standards
and in many cases leads to stretching and leakage. At a time
when Congress and the administration is considering approval of
one of the largest new pipeline projects in recent history, the
Keystone XL, which will carry Canada tar sands through the
middle of the country, it is imperative that we examine these
important issues and assure the American people that we have an
effective and comprehensive plan in place to both prevent
future spills as well as to deal with accidents once they take
place.
So, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to the questioning part of
this hearing, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Rush. And I will recognize
myself for the purpose of 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Quarterman, and in fact for all the panel members, all
of you, I am sure, are familiar with the Senate bill that has
been working on over there. Would each one of you give me your
succinct analysis of one or two of the major flaws of that
legislation or areas that should have been covered that is not
in the bill? Ms. Quarterman?
Ms. Quarterman. Yes, thank you. The administration has not
had an opportunity to come forward with an administration
position on that particular bill. We have in my testimony today
several administration proposals that the administration has
been supportive of in the past. I don't know of anything in
that bill that is necessarily a showstopper from our vantage
point.
Mr. Whitfield. But is there any major item that they failed
to cover?
Ms. Quarterman. I don't believe there is.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Black?
Mr. Black. No major flaws, Chairman Whitfield. AOPL and API
supported the bill moving out of the committee. We hope the
Senate will move it without change and then work with the
Congress as it considers its bill. We would like the Congress
to go further on damage prevention eliminating more----
Mr. Whitfield. On damage prevention?
Mr. Black. Damage prevention, exemptions from the one-call
system in the States. We believe PHMSA should use its authority
and Congress should encourage PHMSA to do it or direct it to
eliminate more mechanized exemptions than S-275 does now. They
added an amendment on due process protections. We think they
should go a little further on hearings after issuance of a
corrective action order and requiring a separation of functions
in PHMSA's staff.
And one more issue that is in the testimony on leak
detection, there is a requirement for a study on leak detection
technologies which is very complex. We think that is fine. We
know PHMSA recently studied this I think in 2007. But there is
an assumption that PHMSA must do a rulemaking even before
knowing what the study suggested. We think that should be
changed to permissive authority to do the rulemaking on leak
detection, first a study and figure out if there something more
that should be done.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Thank you. Mr. Weimer?
Mr. Weimer. Yes, we are pretty pleased with Senate Bill
275. It is comprehensive. It covers a number of the issues we
have. There are a few things that we think could be done
better.
There is a need for fees for inspections of new pipelines
and the bill addresses that a little bit but it only applies to
very large pipelines. We think it should be expanded. I think
the bill that came out from the administration asked for such
fees. We also think there needs to be fees for special permits.
That is an area where PHMSA gets spread too thin trying to deal
with lots of special permits.
And the other area that we really think needs to be
expanded is regulation of natural gas gathering lines. Like I
said in my testimony, there is hundreds of thousands of miles
of those going into places like Texas and Pennsylvania and New
York, and a lot of those are unregulated or very much under-
regulated. So that is an area that needs to be looked at.
Mr. Helms. Yes, we believe the bill is a good bill and it
has been a bill that has really brought in a lot of the
stakeholders into the discussion, Mr. Chairman. And it is kind
of interesting you are now hearing the administration, the oil
pipeline guys, the Public Safety Trust and interstate natural
gas industry agree that this is a good way for us to go
forward.
In pages 8 through 12 of my testimony, we have some
specific recommendations, and I would probably characterize
them more as tweaks as anything else.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Helms. I think we have a good start.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. Mr. Dippo?
Mr. Dippo. Yes, likewise. The American Gas Association also
believes that this is a good bill for our members. It was a
good bipartisan product. A few areas we might recommend some
tweaking or changes to the section on maximum allowable
operating pressures seem to be a bit rushed. We would suggest
possibly more time to review how that is written.
And the other thing, that seismicity, that section in there
is actually already being addressed by operators on Subpart O,
Part 192, which requires operators' integrity management
operations under the preventive and mitigative measures to
consider outside forces. So I am not really sure why that came
up all of a sudden but we feel that is already being addressed
by its members through the existing regulation.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Swift?
Mr. Swift. The NRDC defers to the Pipeline Safety Trust on
most issues in the Lautenberg bill, but we are very pleased to
see that there was a study required of the safety issues and
regulatory sufficiency for tar sands crude. We would like to
see language that gives PHMSA the authority to act on what they
find in that study from a regulatory perspective.
Mr. Whitfield. And Ms. Quarterman, what is the budget for
PHMSA?
Ms. Quarterman. For the pipeline program?
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, the pipeline program.
Ms. Quarterman. I don't know the exact number, around $200
million.
Mr. Whitfield. How much?
Ms. Quarterman. Around $200 million.
Mr. Whitfield. 200, OK. I see my time has expired. Mr.
Rush, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Thank you. Ms. Quarterman, in my opening
statement I referenced the fact that just yesterday this
subcommittee green-lighted a bill that will short-circuit the
review process and force the administration to hastily come to
a decision on the Keystone XL pipeline by November 1. Your
Agency suggests recently shutting down Keystone 1 pipeline
temporarily due to leaks from a pipeline that has been in
operation for only 11 months. Can you discuss with the
committee the events surrounding the temporary shutdown and
eventual restricted opening of the Keystone 1 pipeline? And why
did PHMSA initially make the decision to shut down the pipeline
and then reverse itself and open it up with restrictions?
Ms. Quarterman. This is fairly common practice in the way
we operate on the enforcement side of things. We found a
condition that had occurred on 2 occasions with respect to the
Keystone pipeline, both on May the 7th and May the 9th where
there was a leak from a similar component. And in those
instances where we think it could be a systematic problem, the
regional director puts forward an order telling them they need
to shut down and come forward with a plan on how they plan to
fix this, not only these 2 instances but across the board.
In this instance they came forward with a plan very quickly
and that is why they got the restart plan I think a day or two
after that.
Mr. Rush. What were the conditions?
Ms. Quarterman. I will have to get you the details of what
the leak related to. I think it was in a pump station. There
was a stripping of a valve or something like that.
Mr. Rush. Is it unusual for a pipeline that has only been
in operation for less than a year to have these problems? And
have you ever issued a corrective order for a pipeline that has
been in operation for less than a year?
Ms. Quarterman. I am going to have to go back and look at
our records to answer that question.
Mr. Rush. OK. Does PHMSA have an updated and comprehensive
plan for transporting diluted bitumen from the Canadian tar
sands through the heart of the country as the Keystone pipeline
would do?
Ms. Quarterman. There is a requirement in the Senate bill
that was passed out, I believe, of committee that would require
PHMSA to do just such a study. We have not done a study on that
in the past. If that were to be part of the final bill that
came out of this committee and was passed into law, we would
certainly be pleased to do that.
Mr. Rush. All right. Mr. Weimer, the first Keystone
pipeline, which brings Canadian tar sands to refineries in
Illinois and Oklahoma was predicted to spill no more than once
every 7 years. However, in just 1 year of operation it has
reported 12 separate oil spills through the NRC, the National
Response Center. You are considered an expert on pipeline
safety and your work on pipeline safety issues is known far and
wide. And as members in this subcommittee debate the importance
of streamlining the permit process while also taking into
account safety and environmental concerns, do you advise that
we err on the side of safety or expediency? Is there a way to
do both? And how should one member who is not necessarily
opposed to the pipeline who is interested in creating more jobs
because I represent a district where there is high
unemployment, how should I approach this? From an expedited way
or should I approach this from a public safety way? Give me
some insight in how you would handle this situation.
Mr. Weimer. Right. Thank you for the question. The Pipeline
Safety Trust always embraces a precautionary principle that
tries to answer as many of the questions as possible before you
move forward. You know, Keystone 1 has had 12 spills in the
last year, which is a lot of spills, although they were all
fairly minor, all within kind of pump station areas. We have
reviewed the corrective action order from PHMSA and think it
was appropriate and even their backing off, you know, a few
days later was appropriate because the company had done what
they needed to address that system.
As far as permitting for Keystone 2, you know, we have
joined with a number of national groups questioning--done
research and have questioned things about the corrosiveness and
the abrasiveness of the material moving through those pipelines
from the tar sands and we have asked those questions of PHMSA.
And to date, just as Ms. Quarterman said, they have not done
that study so we don't know the answers to those questions. So
using a precautionary principle, we would prefer to wait until
those questions are answered before that pipeline moves
forward.
And then we have also heard from EPA just last week that
they also didn't know, you know, the toxicity of some of the
material used to dilute that bitumen. So there is a number of
unanswered questions and, you know, it is certainly up to the
policymakers to decide whether they are big enough questions to
allow something like that to move forward or not.
Mr. Rush. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Upton, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Upton. Well, thank you all. And again, I want to
appreciate the administrator serving on one panel, particularly
with these votes coming in.
I want to ask a question of each of you, and again this
goes back to the personal experience of what happened in
Michigan last year. Sadly, we had a pipeline break, a pretty
large spill, and one of the issues that came from that was as
we examined the existing legislation, I want to say that they
were supposed to report in a timely manner. And there was some
thought that perhaps the notice should have been given quite a
bit earlier. And had it been within an hour or so of when it
was first discovered, perhaps--and again there was great
response by the first responders and they did a remarkable
job--but had they had a little more time, they would have been
able to kink the damage and do a much better job long-term.
It is my understanding that the Senate legislation does not
have a specific time frame as to when it has to be reported to
the national number. From what happened last year, our former
colleague, Mr. Schauer, who represented that district
introduced legislation that was 1 hour, I believe, from the
time that it had to be reported. That is not in the Senate bill
as I understand it. What are your thoughts as to tidying up so
that you had to report it nationally within 1 hour so that
they, in fact, could be able to get the first responders there
on the scene? And maybe we will start with the administrator
and we will go down the line. And sadly that is the first
buzzer of votes so I will make this my only question so I can
let other members speak before 3 o'clock.
Ms. Quarterman. Well, I can't speak to the specifics of
that particular instant, but as to the broader question of the
timeliness of notification, that is one that is obviously of
great interest to us. And we have historically required
companies to respond within an hour or two of notification. I
believe that is in one of our safety advisories. And we would
be happy to reconsider if that is not long enough or too long.
We would be happy to talk about that further, but certainly we
believe that when there is an incident, the emergency
responders and we need to know as soon as possible.
Mr. Upton. The national office is maintained 24/7, right?
So if a call comes in at 3:00 in the morning, somebody is there
to physically answer the phone, is that right?
Ms. Quarterman. Not officially but in reality, yes, that is
the case.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Black?
Mr. Black. Operators are supposed to notify the National
Response Center within the timelines the administrator said. I
understand that in the Marshall, Michigan accident, part of the
investigation is what the company went through to identify that
there is a leak. We don't have a problem with the existing
requirements. We would ask for the committee's help with the
National Response Center.
There are 2 problems with the notification system that
cause an inherent tendency to just make sure you have got it
right. One is it is difficult to revise the estimate of a
release once you make it, and you have to make it right there
very quickly. So a company wants to make sure they get it
right.
And second, you have got to quantify it very specifically.
We would like to be able to report a general range of a liquid
release. And that might remove some of the hesitancies. I have
not heard that in the Marshall, Michigan accident, but if we
could work to improve NRC, National Response Center,
regulations there, I think we would improve incident
notifications.
Mr. Weimer. We think response to the National Response
Center as fast as possible is good. I don't have a time in mind
clearly. I think what most companies are doing is probably
adequate. Another important question is how quick either the
NRC or the operator themselves contact the actual local first
responders, because those are the people that need to hit the
ground.
I think a bigger question that this brings to from the
Michigan spill was why the leak detection system on that
pipeline didn't work and it leaked all night long that delayed
the response to anybody for 10 or 12 hours.
Mr. Helms. There is a bit of a difference between liquids
pipelines and gas pipelines. Our pipes will either leak or they
will rupture and that can be detected through normal
monitoring. So there is a little bit difference. I would defer
to my colleagues and say that as soon as possible is a pretty
good standard. We are judged by that. If we have an incident,
our regulators come back in and they do review our control room
procedures to determine whether we have been responsive or not.
In most cases I think we have found to be.
The issue for us, obviously, is having an appropriate
supervisory control and data acquisition system that identifies
the place where the incident may happen. And so we can notify
local first responders as well as our own personnel to respond
to it. I am very proud that our company has put together a fire
school in southwestern Pennsylvania, and we have been training
local firefighters across Pennsylvania to be able to respond to
such emergencies.
Mr. Upton. I know my time has expired so just go yes or no
for the last two. One hour, yes or no?
Mr. Dippo. No. As distribution operators, I would just say
that we respond to distribution leaks on a 24/7 basis, 365 days
a year and our concern would be that incidents or that they
would overwhelm the NRC center in terms of with calls that are
not true emergencies.
Mr. Swift. NRDC agrees with PST that as soon as possible.
Mr. Upton. Thank you. Yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Waxman, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Ms. Quarterman, we have seen the terrible string of
pipeline accidents over the past year. Is this just a lot of
bad luck or is our pipeline safety system under substantial
stress?
Ms. Quarterman. I wish I could say one or the other. I
mean, I certainly have been greatly concerned by the incidents
that have occurred. The fact that all 3 of the incidents have
occurred in every part of the pipeline sector distribution
transmission and hazardous liquids is of concern and the fact
that they have all been in high-consequence areas is one of
great concern to me, which is why we have been already
undertaking many of the initiatives that are a part of this
legislative proposal on the Senate side.
Mr. Waxman. Let me move through some other questions for
you.
Ms. Quarterman. Sure.
Mr. Waxman. Does your Agency have the resources it needs to
ensure pipeline safety, and if you had additional resources
would we see fewer explosions and spills?
Ms. Quarterman. We have good resources as part of the
proposal the administration put forward in 2010. We did request
additional resources and we could certainly use them.
Mr. Waxman. I think your Agency is stretched pretty thin. I
believe you are directly responsible for about 500,000 miles of
pipeline but you have only 136 employees responsible for
inspection and enforcement. That is over 3,500 miles of
pipeline per inspector.
Mr. Weimer's written testimony identified numerous critical
areas where PHMSA needs to issue rules or take other actions.
These activities also require resources. In the testimony Mr.
Weimer and Mr. Swift both highlighted safety concern related to
pipelines that transport diluted bitumen. Ms. Quarterman, when
PHMSA adopted its basic safety requirements, such as
establishing maximum operating pressures or setting integrity
management requirements, were many U.S. pipelines transporting
diluted bitumen and were any of your regulations developed with
the properties of diluted bitumen in mind?
Ms. Quarterman. When the Integrity Management program
requirements were first put in place on the hazardous liquid
side I think it was 2000 and 2002, there were pipelines in
existence that transport diluted bitumen. I don't believe any
study was done at that time of the characteristics of the
crude.
Mr. Waxman. Were your regulations developed with the
properties of diluted bitumen in mind?
Ms. Quarterman. I don't believe it was a part of the
equation, no.
Mr. Waxman. Have you received your regulations to assess
whether they adequately address any risks specific to diluted
bitumen?
Ms. Quarterman. We have not done so.
Mr. Waxman. OK. I was pleased to hear your response to Mr.
Rush regarding the requirement in S. 275 that PHMSA analyze the
safety risks of tar sands crudes.
Mr. Swift, why should we be concerned about pipeline safety
with respect to diluted bitumen from tar sands?
Mr. Swift. We have seen many indications that this crude is
both more damaging to pipeline systems and potentially more
dangerous in the event of a spill. We have done comparisons of
the Albertan pipeline system that moves more of this stuff in
which we found that that system had 16 times as many incidents
of internal corrosion per mile. We have seen earlier
indications on the U.S. pipeline system that has been used
early to move this stuff. I mean we have only seen it in the
last 10 years really explode by volume----
Mr. Waxman. It not only is more corrosive; it may be moved
at higher temperatures and pressures.
Mr. Swift. That is right.
Mr. Waxman. OK. Mr. Weimer, do we know whether the term
``pipeline safety statutes'' are adequate to address the issues
Mr. Swift identified with pipelines transporting tar sands?
Mr. Weimer. I don't think we do. As Administrator
Quarterman has said, they haven't done that study specifically
yet like the Senate bill asks them to do. And there are some
questions about the corrosivity and the abrasiveness and the
pressure and temperature that need to be answered.
Mr. Waxman. Well, I am concerned that the industry is
changing but the safety regulations are not keeping up with the
changes. That could be a recipe for disaster down the road.
Mr. Swift, what steps could Congress take to ensure that
pipelines carrying tar sands are properly regulated?
Mr. Swift. I think the first step is we have to thoroughly
examine the nature and magnitude of the risk. And so once we
have the science, we can regulate the pipelines based on that
science. So basically we need a study and then we need to get a
system in place before we build more pipelines to move this.
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Weimer, do you agree?
Mr. Weimer. Yes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes. The gentleman from Texas is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. And Mr. Chairman, I am not going to use all 5
because I know we have a series of votes.
First, I just want to welcome Andy Black to the committee.
I think most of the senior members remember Andy as a committee
staffer back when I was chairman. Before that, he was also my
legislative staff director. So it is interesting to see him on
the other side of the desk there.
My first question is just a general question. Is there
anybody here at the table that does not support reauthorization
of a pipeline safety bill in this Congress? So everybody is
supportive of that? Is everybody supportive of continuing the
general policy where we have kind of an interactive cooperative
working arrangement between the regulators and the regulated
parties? Is anybody OK with that? OK.
My friend Mr. Waxman just commented on something called
diluted bitumen. I think that is a fair question. My physics
and chemistry is pretty limited. My engineering degree is about
40 years old now but my recollection is that there are 3 kinds
of items. You have a gas, a liquid, or a solid. Obviously, on
pipelines you are not going to be transporting too many pure
solids, but we do have gas pipelines and liquid pipelines.
Within those general categories, different liquids, different
gasses obviously have different characteristics, temperatures,
flammability, volatility, viscosity, things like that. But is
there any reason, Mr. Black, to feel that this diluted bitumen
is of a special nature that it requires special regulations?
Mr. Black. No. It is a heavy crude when it is moved through
the pipelines. The bitumen is mixed with a condensate before it
is a pipeline-quality transportation. That is like a heavy
crude from California, Venezuela, and other oil sands. Diluted
bitumen has been moved through pipelines for many years. There
is a FERC tariff about elements of sediment and water that
TransCanada Keystone XL would have to live up to. There are
corrosion regulations implemented by PHMSA that Keystone XL
will have to live up to.
While there has not been a formal study by the
administration, this has been a part of the multi-agency review
process. There were many special conditions proposed for
TransCanada by PHMSA. None of these deal with this idea that
there is some incremental corrosiveness in the product. It is a
heavy crude.
Mr. Barton. OK. I want the record to show that I did not
pre-clear that question with Mr. Black, but it sounds like he
knew I was going to ask him the question. That was a very
thoughtful answer.
Administrator Quarterman, do you generally share the view
that Mr. Black just proposed to the committee?
Ms. Quarterman. Well, I don't believe that I am in a
position to opine. My engineering degree is not quite as old as
yours but it sounds like you remember more than I do. I would
defer to any studies that might be performed by our Agency on
answering that question.
Mr. Barton. I think it is something, Mr. Chairman, we need
to look into but I don't think it is definitive or
determinative that that one thing should stop a reauthorization
bill. With that, I would yield back to the chair.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. We do have 24 votes on the House
floor, and what we are going to do, we are going to try to give
everybody here an opportunity to ask questions. So Mr. Green,
we are going to go to you and then Mr. Olson and then Mr.
Inslee because I don't want you to hang around for 2-1/2 hours
or so.
Mr. Green, you are recognized.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be as quick as I
can.
I have a district in Houston in East Harris County. I have
never not lived on a pipeline. And I have noticed during my
lifetime how much it is so much better than what we are
getting. And I have a house now that we, on a regular occasion,
get contacts from our pipeline safety state agencies, obviously
the federal agencies. So our reauthorizations over my career on
this committee have been thorough and I hope this would be the
same thing.
Let me go quickly, so Ms. Quarterman, I want to applaud you
and the secretary for addressing the issue of pipeline safety
head-on. There is a national dialogue on pipeline safety
because that is probably the most number one issue in the
district I represent because we live and work there. Pipelines
are much safer than having them run down the road on a tank
truck, but we have plenty of tank trucks, too.
What kind of responses have you heard or you see from
industry and others when you rolled out your call for action?
Ms. Quarterman. The responses have been very positive. The
secretary and I met with the leaders of several companies,
presidents, and sat down and told them we wanted to have a
conversation. We wanted to all work together, bring all the
constituents together and try to figure out how we might move
forward with our agenda. We just had a meeting yesterday out
near Dulles. We are in the midst working with our technical
advisory committees of putting together a report to America
about the current status of pipeline safety in this country and
how we might move that ball forward. So everything has been
positive so far.
Mr. Green. Can you explain when NEPA was triggered--I know
that was a concern from Ranking Member Waxman--and when NEPA is
triggered from your office?
Ms. Quarterman. We are not involved with the Keystone XL
project or the NEPA analysis. We are not performing the NEPA
analysis. It is being led by the Department of State. I don't
know if that is where you are going to.
Mr. Green. OK. And I understand that if you have more
corrosive going through a pipeline and some of the substance,
you just have to make sure you inspect it a lot more and, you
know, and you check it because metrology is something that has
been done for decades.
Mr. Black, if Congress decides to expand the PHMSA's reach
on the offshore gathering pipelines, what are your concerns?
And my understanding is that these gathering lines may not be
large enough to use smart pigs.
Mr. Black. Right, gatherings generally intrastate can be
regulated by the States. If it is on the OCS it can be
regulated by interior. Like you said, Congressman, these are
small lines, maybe 2 inches to 8 inches in diameter operating
at low stress. Some of these things are marginally economic or
serving marginally economic wells. Depending on what PHMSA
would do with regulations, it could result in some shut-in
supply.
Mr. Green. Well, and I know because shallow-well drilling
you do have marginal wells, ones that may not be big, although
our committee was actually on a rig in deepwater and those
pipelines--from that deepwater is a Chevron rig off Louisiana--
actually were big enough because they had enough production,
you know, 110,000 barrels a day you could have that.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it and I would like to yield
what I have left to my colleague from Washington.
Mr. Inslee. Thank you, Mr. Green. First, I want to thank
Mr. Weimer for your leadership. I think of Liam Wood and Wade
King and Stephen Tsiorvas. We appreciate your leadership.
Quick question for Ms. Quarterman. The information we have
today and others have suggested that there is some viable
concern about this relatively new product from the tar sands
and what risks it may or may not present. Doesn't it make sense
from a first-do-no-harm sense for us to have a sophisticated
analytical objective analysis of this particular product before
we decide what the appropriate maintenance systems and
inspections systems are?
Ms. Quarterman. I would have to leave that up to Congress
in terms of whether or not you would like to legislate such a
requirement. I don't want to get into the Department of State's
jurisdiction in terms of whether or not to approve this project
or not. I am going to leave it with them to give an opinion
about----
Mr. Inslee. Well, I am not thinking of just whether or not
to approve this particular project. The issue is shouldn't we
have an objective assessment of the corrosive properties and
perhaps new maintenance requirements for this or any other line
just as a matter of national policy? Don't we really need that
from your Agency?
Ms. Quarterman. Well, our Agency is not really involved
until a pipeline has been permitted. The secretary has gone
around and said quite a bit about the fact that we have a bit
of a patchwork here in that the FERC, for example, is
responsible for deciding on whether or not a gas pipeline will
be approved and we only come in after the fact. On the oil
side, the only time there is any oversight on whether a
pipeline will be put in the ground is if it crosses
international boundaries, and that is the case with respect to
Keystone XL. Otherwise, there is no federal regulatory review
or approval of putting a pipeline in the ground. That is a
broader question, I think, for the committee about how that
works and whether it makes sense.
Mr. Inslee. We have some work to do. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Olson?
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair for his exceptional courtesy
and want to welcome the witnesses and thank you for coming and
giving us your time and your expertise.
First of all, I just want to start by giving some of my
perspectives as a representative of Texas 22. No one here in
Congress cares more about pipeline safety than Congressman Pete
Olson does. I represent Texas 22, which is part of the energy
capital of the United States. And we are Texans. Texas is the
energy capital of the world, and we have these tremendous
petrochemical facilities along the Port of Houston, which is
the largest--the tonnage and gross international tonnage in
America. And the pipeline infrastructure that supports the port
and the petrochemical industry is critical to our economy not
only in Southeast Texas but the entire country.
But not only are the pipelines part of our economy, they
are a part of our quality of life. And just an example that is
about a mile from my house in Sugarland, Texas is Sugarland
Memorial Park, and right next to that is the University of
Houston, Sugarland. These are fairly new facilities built the
last 10 years. I take my dog Riley walking through the park
every day I am home. And they are built right on a natural gas
pipeline, which runs right through the middle of them. Again,
very, very safe.
And since I have joined Energy and Commerce, I have spent a
lot of my time when I am back home talking to some of the
pipeline operators just to get up to speed on what they are
doing and what their safety is like. And one great privilege I
have representing this district is I also represent the Johnson
Space Center, you know, home of NASA, Mission Control. And I
can tell you, I can assure you that having seen Mission Control
on the inside and having seen the control room for these
pipeline operations, it is very hard to tell which one is
which. I mean the technology is amazing.
I mean one pipeline--one company I toured had pipelines all
across the northeastern part of the United States with the
control room right there in Houston, Texas. They had an
automatic system. If there is a drop in pressure somewhere
between all the little terminals they have, automatically
downstream it would be shut off. They had a man just in case
the system didn't work. A man was there, a human being,
watching, monitoring the system who could hit a button and shut
it off from Houston, Texas. It is just an amazing, amazing
amount of safety that these pipeline companies have. And I
think the American people deserve to know that.
I know we all agree that there should be zero pipeline
incidents. That should be our goal. But again, I am concerned
about some of the things we are talking about doing here from a
regulatory perspective. And my first question is going to be
for Mr. Black and Mr. Dippo. And I would like these comments
from you, Administrator Quarterman.
But as I understand right now, the determination of what is
considered a high-consequence area is risk-based, makes sense.
If our pipeline miles, all of them are concerned under HCA
standards, wouldn't that diminish the focus of where we should
be focusing? I mean where it truly has a greater consequence,
population centers, unusually sensitive areas, environmental
areas, drinking water intakes, wildlife refuges, my home in
Sugarland, a mile and a half of pipeline? I mean shouldn't that
pervade as opposed to making it standard all across the
country? And again, Mr. Black, would you like to take a shot at
that?
Mr. Black. Well, we think it is right to have high-
consequence areas. And Congress and PHMSA are right to
implement them that way. It would divert the focus on those
areas of highest consequence if the integrity management areas
were going to be expanded. Operators do a lot on the areas of a
pipeline beyond high-consequence areas, and there are a lot of
federal regulations that require that. There are voluntary
assessments of those areas outside of a high-consequence area.
But you don't follow the same rigid repair criteria that you do
inside. So we think it is right to keep the focus on a high-
consequence area, yes, sir.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Dippo, do you care to comment, sir?
Mr. Dippo. Yes, I would agree with everything Mr. Black
said, and in addition I would just like to indicate that, you
know, as an operator in New Jersey being the most densely
populated State, our State Regulatory Commission has looked at
it from that perspective and has regulated and asked us to look
at more than just high-consequence areas. But that is specific
to our State and our operations in New Jersey. So I don't
believe and I don't think that it should be applied across the
board. Certain areas, yes, but other than that, no.
Mr. Olson. Yes, sir. I have 26 seconds. Administrator
Quarterman, would you like to make a comment, ma'am?
Ms. Quarterman. Yes. We have a pending rulemaking asking a
question regarding this and there are two ways to think of
this. One is whether or not the definition of a high-
consequence area is adequate as it stands. There have been some
incidents that occurred recently where it was obvious to me it
was a high-consequence area because there were spills in a
large body of water except it wasn't clear when we were trying
to figure out was this in fact a high-consequence area. So I
think we have to make sure that the definition is adequate.
The second is that in terms of dealing with high-risk areas
first, I think that is absolutely appropriate. However, that
doesn't mean that the remaining areas could not also be
assessed perhaps on a longer time period, something like that I
think those are things that we are considering and want to
discuss further.
Mr. Olson. Yes, ma'am. If I could just sum up, the people
in my district want a high-consequence area to be a high-
consequence area. I appreciate my time and yield back the 43
seconds that I am over.
Mr. Whitfield. That concludes today's hearing. We actually
had other questions we wanted to ask but, as I said, we have
got these 20-some votes on the floor and a Motion to Recommit.
So we look forward to working with all of you as we move
forward with reauthorization legislation. Thank you for your
time and your input. And this hearing is concluded.
[Whereupon, at 12:00 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. John Sullivan

Today marks the 11th day in our American Energy Initiative
hearing. While the series has allowed us to examine a multitude
of issues regarding energy production, regulation and
consumption, today we will focus on what can be done to improve
the safe and secure delivery of oil and natural gas via
pipeline.
Several tragic pipeline accidents have occurred over the
past year which demonstrates the need to reauthorize and
enhance current safety laws. Despite this Committee room
frequently being the site of many tense debates and
discussions, pipeline safety is an issue I hope we all can work
together on to produce meaningful and effective legislation to
ensure the safety of our oil and gas pipeline infrastructure
for the future while protecting the American people and our
environment.
Over the past several years, we have been able to pass
bipartisan bills on pipeline safety sometimes under suspension
on the House floor. This is because our pipeline infrastructure
touches every congressional district and accidents can happen
anywhere and at anytime. Before us at the witness table we have
a Democrat from California and a Republican from Montana. Both
have dealt with major accidents recently and both understand
Congress must act to strengthen current pipeline laws.
It is critically important that our pipeline infrastructure
is both reliable and durable and to this end, the discussion
draft under examination today makes many important
modifications to existing law that will promote greater
pipeline safety standards. We are glad to have an opportunity
today to hear from the experts how this discussion draft might
be improved or otherwise modified to ensure pipelines remain a
safe and economical means of transporting vital energy supplies
that help power our economy and create jobs.
With that, I yield the balance of my time to Mr. Barton for
an opening statement.
----------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


