- WHERE THE JOBS ARE: CAN AMERICAN MANUFACTURING THRIVE AGAIN?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

WHERE THE JOBS ARE: CAN AMERICAN MANUFACTURING THRIVE AGAIN?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 19, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-139

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
81-915                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JIM MATHESON, Utah
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JOHN BARROW, Georgia
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade

MARY BONO MACK, California
Chairman
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       JIM MATHESON, Utah
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio)
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Mary Bono Mack, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. G.K. Butterfield, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina, opening statement.....................     8
Hon. Cliff Stearns, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Florida, opening statement..................................     9
Hon. Bill Cassidy, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Louisiana, opening statement...................................     9
Hon. Adam Kinzinger, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................    10
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    91

Witnesses

John E. Bryson, Secretary, Department of Commerce................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Answers to submitted questions...............................    92
Robert D. Atkinson, President, Information Technology and
Innovation Foundation..........................................    41
Prepared statement...........................................    43
Answers to submitted questions...............................   108
Al Lubrano, President, Materion Technical Materials, on behalf of
the National Association of Manufacturers......................    55
Prepared statement...........................................    57
Answers to submitted questions...............................   114
Craig A. Giffi, Vice Chairman and U.S. Consumer and Industrial
Products Practice Leader, Deloitte LLP.........................    70
Prepared statement...........................................    72
Answers to submitted questions...............................   120
Ken Tindall, Vice President of Science and Business Development,
North Carolina Biotechnology Center............................    77
Prepared statement...........................................    79
Answers to submitted questions...............................   130

Submitted Material

Report, dated January 2011, of the U.S. Manufacturing
Competitiveness Initiative, ``Ignite 1.0: Voices of American
CEOs on Manufacturing Competitiveness,'' submitted by Mrs. Bono
Mack \1\
Report, dated June 2011, of the U.S. Manufacturing
Competitiveness Initiative, ``Ignite 2.0: Voices of American
University Presidents and National Lab Directors on
Manufacturing Competitiveness,'' submitted by Mrs. Bono Mack
\1\
Report, dated December 2011, of the U.S. Manufacturing
Competitiveness Initiative, ``Ignite 3.0: Voice of American
Labor Leaders on Manufacturing Competitiveness,'' submitted by
Mrs. Bono Mack \1\
Report, dated 2011, of Deloitte and The Manufacturing Institute,
``Boiling point? The skills gap in U.S. manufacturing,''
submitted by Mrs. Bono Mack \1\

----------
\1\ Internet addresses and links to the reports are available on
page 90.

WHERE THE JOBS ARE: CAN AMERICAN MANUFACTURING THRIVE AGAIN?

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 19, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:06 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mary Bono
Mack (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Bono Mack, Blackburn,
Stearns, Harper, Lance, Cassidy, Guthrie, McKinley, Pompeo,
Kinzinger, Upton (ex officio), Butterfield, Dingell, Rush, and
Sarbanes.
Staff present: Paige Anderson, Commerce, Manufacturing, and
Trade Coordinator; Charlotte Baker, Press Secretary; Michael
Beckerman, Deputy Staff Director; Kirby Howard, Legislative
Clerk; Brian McCullough, Senior Professional Staff Member,
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Gib Mullan, Chief Counsel,
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Shannon Weinberg, Counsel,
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Tom Wilbur, Staff
Assistant; Michelle Ash, Democratic Chief Counsel; Felipe
Mendoza, Democratic Senior Counsel; and Will Wallace,
Democratic Policy Analyst.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Please now come to order. Good morning.
When it comes to the future of manufacturing in the United
States, let us be a Nation where help-wanted signs hang on
factory gates over closed-for-business signs. Today, our
subcommittee will tackle a critically important subject, can
American manufacturing thrive again? The future of our economy
could well be at stake. And the Chair now recognizes herself
for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARY BONO MACK, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Throughout our Nation's long history, a growing and robust
manufacturing sector has helped to make America great. It has
been a driving force in our economy since the Industrial
Revolution as generations of hard-working Americans, armed with
machines, tools, and a determined work ethic, cranked out
everything from airplanes to toasters.
But as our Nation has moved from the Atomic Age to the
Space Age to the Information Age, manufacturing has not kept
up, losing nearly six million American jobs since the beginning
of the 21st century. Aging, rusting, and abandoned factories
litter the U.S. landscape.
Today, we stand at an important crossroads. One direction--
lined by job-killing regulatory hurdles, a punitive tax code,
and indecisive political leadership--will lead ultimately to a
further erosion of our manufacturing base and lost prosperity
for future generations of Americans.
The other direction--where smart policies and smart minds
eventually intersect--could lead, instead, to a resurgence in
U.S. manufacturing, putting millions of Americans back to work
again and breathing new life into the beleaguered middle class.
Secretary Bryson, as chairman of this subcommittee, I look
forward to working closely with you on this very important
issue. Let us make ``Made in America'' matter again. Let us
throw the ``start switch'' right now. And let us get the
widgets moving. Clearly, we don't have any time to waste.
Statistics show the manufacturing sector was the hardest
hit in terms of job losses during the Great Recession. While
manufacturing accounts for just a 10th of our Nation's jobs,
manufacturing suffered a third of our Nation's job losses.
What is more, in 2009--for the first time ever--the number
of unemployed Americans actually exceeded the numbers of
Americans employed in the manufacturing sector, a fact that
remains true today, despite a slight uptick in recent hiring.
So what happened? The U.S. was the undisputed leader in
manufacturing for decades with the world's largest
manufacturing economy producing nearly a quarter of all
globally manufactured products. But that leadership is now in
serious jeopardy, so it is vitally important to consider what
is at stake for our Nation.
According to a report by the National Association of
Manufacturers, American manufacturing supports nearly one in
six U.S. jobs, which pay on average over $75,000 with benefits.
Additionally, manufacturing jobs have the highest multiplier in
the U.S. economy--every dollar in direct spending produces
$1.35 in additional indirect output. Conversely, every
manufacturing job eliminated in America results in the loss of
two other jobs elsewhere in the economy.
So as policymakers, we are facing several critically
important questions. First, what is the true state of the
manufacturing sector today? Second, what factors are impeding a
comeback? And finally, and most importantly, what policies
could aid the manufacturing sector's recovery?
Here is the good news. Historically, manufacturing is the
hardest hit during a recession, but the quickest to recover due
to pent-up demand for goods. Recent numbers from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics provide a glimmer of hope that the U.S.
manufacturing sector may indeed be rebounding. Last year, for
the second consecutive year, American manufacturers actually
added jobs. Prior to that, the manufacturing sector had
suffered job losses every year since 1997.
What is more, according to a recent report by the Boston
Consulting Group, rising wages in China, the rising cost of
energy and real estate in China, and the rising cost of
transporting goods back to America for consumption are
beginning to make the United States a much more attractive
option once again for many manufacturers.
But still other observers see a real cause for concern
buried within the recovery numbers. Overall, the U.S. lost 5.7
million manufacturing jobs since 2000, a rate of decline that
exceeded even the Great Depression, according to a study by the
Information Technology and Innovation Foundation.
Compounding this problem is a very sobering fact: the U.S.
lost a staggering 66,000 manufacturing firms--an average of 17
per day--over this same period. At the current rate of
recovery, ITIF estimates the manufacturing sector would not
return to 2007 job levels until at least 2020.
There are other factors contributing to this slow rate of
recovery as well. In its 2009 report, ``Facts About Modern
Manufacturing,'' the National Association of Manufacturers
identifies external policy-related costs such as a persistently
high corporate tax rate, the high cost of healthcare, the
rising cost of energy, regulatory costs, and tort costs as
serious barriers to manufacturing. Simply put, there is a
prevailing sense among many people that the U.S. is falling
even further behind in fostering an environment conducive to
job creation.
So when it comes to U.S. manufacturing, is the glass half
full, half empty, or will it remain shattered on the kitchen
floor for millions of out-of-work Americans?
Mr. Secretary, let us work together to sweep up the glass
and then set the table for a manufacturing comeback. I continue
to believe in the greatness of America, and ``Made in America''
should continue to be a shared pride for all of us.
And with that, I now recognize the ranking member of our
subcommittee and want to in advance wish him a happy 65th
birthday, which we will be celebrating next week. So Mr.
Butterfield, you are recognized for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Bono Mack follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.004

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. G.K. BUTTERFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA

Mr. Butterfield. Let me thank you, Chairman Bono Mack. And
I especially thank you for those kind words in wishing me a
good birthday next week. I have been looking forward to it for
a long time, and it has finally come.
But let me also thank the witnesses for their anticipated
testimonies today. We know the schedule is kind of disjointed
this morning, but thank you so much for your patience.
Madam Chairman, there is no more important issue to working
Americans than the ability to get and keep a job, provide for
their families and ensure that when their children grow up,
they, too, can succeed. The causes of the most recent recession
are many. They are indeed complex. While the solutions can also
be complex, one thing is certain: the creation of jobs benefits
the entire economy, and in recent monthly employment reports,
we have begun to see the fruits of that labor.
Over the past 2 years, the manufacturing sector has added
more than 450,000 jobs. Not since the Clinton administration
has this sector seen such fast growth. And in a 1-year period
from January of 2010 to January of 2011, immediately after the
worst of the recession, the manufacturing sector added 47,000
machinery manufacturing jobs, 74,000 jobs in fabricated metal
manufacturing, and 24,000 in computer and electronic
manufacturing jobs.
My State of North Carolina is the fifth-largest
manufacturing State in the country and the largest in the
Southeast. The manufacturing sector provides about $80 billion
to our GDP, or roughly 19.5 percent of the total. The nearly
11,000 manufacturing companies in North Carolina employ almost
15 percent of the total workforce, equating to well over
500,000 jobs that pay $65,000 annually on average. Many of
these jobs are in advanced manufacturing and produce high-tech
goods used in the defense industry.
For example, Telephonics is a defense and Homeland Security
contractor located in Elizabeth City. Telephonics designs and
manufactures sensors and communications equipment and tests and
integrates these systems into U.S. military and Department of
Homeland Security aircraft. DSM, also located in my
congressional district in Greenville, North Carolina, produces
all of the revolutionary Dyneema, fiber that is the key
component in the new enhanced combat helmet, which will better
protect our service members in the Marine Corps and Army
without increasing the weight of their helmets. AAR, another
corporation located in Goldsboro, North Carolina, designs and
manufactures a wide range of machines and composite structures
for aerospace and defense applications.
There is also the North Carolina Biotechnology Center. This
center was created out of necessity as traditional industries
like textile and furniture manufacturing began to disappear.
The Center is the most experienced organization of its kind in
the world and works to promote the cultivation and development
of biotechnology applications throughout North Carolina,
whether they are taking place for medical, agriculture, or
energy purposes. And they join us today and I am excited to
hear from them. I hope I can be here when we have the testimony
of the witness. I am going to have to leave shortly but
hopefully I can be around for his testimony.
It is clear that American manufacturing is prime for a
renaissance, and House Democrats are making an America agenda
that provides even greater opportunities for success through
key policy initiatives. Several ``Make it in America''
initiatives have already become law, including bills that cut
taxes and created loans for small businesses, sped up the
patent process, lowered cost of raw materials, and helped to
end tax loopholes so that companies are discouraged from
shipping jobs overseas.
In the 111th Congress, the House also passed ``Make it in
America'' legislation to support American clean energy firms,
invest in job training partnerships, and hold China accountable
for the unfair currency manipulation that cost American jobs.
When more products are made in America, more families, too, can
make it in America.
And so I look forward to the testimony today and thank each
of the witnesses for being here and being so gracious with your
time. I will submit my entire written statement for the record.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Butterfield.
And now we have several Members on our side who wish to
make an opening statement in a total of 5 minutes, so I urge
them to keep their remarks as brief as possible. And I will
yield the 5 minutes to Mr. Stearns, who will then yield
accordingly.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CLIFF STEARNS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Madam Chair.
This is the third hearing we have had on this subcommittee
on jobs and it is, of course, a concern for all of us. And what
we are also concerned about is the high tax rate in America. I
think just simply lowering the corporate tax code and
prioritizing the need for a skilled workforce would help. Other
factors like the high cost of healthcare costs are going to
impact this country and rising energy prices, so we need to
have a full energy program.
And furthermore, we know that legitimate U.S. companies are
losing jobs as they are forced to compete with offshore
companies that steal American technologies. Having the FTC, the
Federal Trade Commission, use its narrow Section 5 authority to
bring targeted cases against these offshore companies will
simply demonstrate that access to U.S. markets will not be
permitted to companies whose business model is based on theft.
These are things we can all work together on to strengthen our
economy and I look forward to our hearing.
With that, I recognize Dr. Cassidy.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BILL CASSIDY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF LOUISIANA

Mr. Cassidy. Thank you.
Clearly our problem in our economy right now is
unemployment, and we know that that unemployment is
disproportionately focused upon blue collar workers. Those
workers have traditionally been employed in mining,
manufacturing, and construction. Now, I think we are all
encouraged that the renaissance in mining in North American
energy assets--fossil fuel in particular--have led to a
renaissance in manufacturing, as recently discussed in the New
York Times, CNN, Money, and elsewhere.
Now, this is fantastic and if we take it as a moral
imperative to increase blue collar prosperity, then I almost
see it as a primary variable we should take it as the moral
imperative to develop our domestic energy resources. My concern
is that much of what has happened has happened despite Federal
efforts, which have been actively inhibitory of bringing those
domestically or those North American resources to the benefit
of our blue collar workers.
So, Mr. Secretary, I thank you for being here. I look
forward to the discussion and ask you specifically to address
really what appears to be a hostility towards fossil fuels,
which inevitably raise input cost, which will inevitably put a
damper on this renaissance in blue collar employment in
manufacturing.
I now yield to Mr. Kinzinger.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM KINZINGER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Kinzinger. Well, thank you. And thank you for coming in
and joining us. I want to thank the administration for the
enactment of the Colombia Free Trade Agreement, which I think
was very important.
I am concerned, Mr. Secretary, with the state of our
economy and the state of U.S. manufacturing as well. The March
Manufacturing Output Index slipped to .2 percent from .8
percent, which is a dangerous sign in my mind that our economy
is slowing due to high cost of transportation.
It is clear when I am home in Illinois that what
manufacturers are asking of the Federal Government--they want a
fair and competitive tax code, they want less intrusion from
Federal agencies, and they want a sound supply of affordable
energy. They simply want a level playing field to be able to
compete with other countries overseas. I hope that you will be
able to discuss some of the work you are doing to make America
competitive again.
And with that, I guess I will yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman and now we will turn
our attention to the panels. We have two panels of witnesses
joining us today. Each of our witnesses has prepared an opening
statement that will be placed into the record. Each of you will
have 5 minutes to summarize that statement in your remarks.
On our first panel we have the Honorable John Bryson,
Secretary for the United States Department of Commerce. Good
morning, Secretary Bryson. It has always been a pleasure to
work with you. As a fellow Californian, we have had a long
history together. I welcome you to our subcommittee and I am
very thankful that you are here. We look forward to working
with you closely on this and many other important issues. You
will be recognized, as I said, for 5 minutes. To help you keep
track of time, the timer is right in front of you. When it
turns yellow, you will have 1 minute to try to sum up if you
could. Please remember to turn the microphone on and bring it
close to your mouth so the audience at home can hear your
remarks. And with us again, welcome, Mr. Secretary. You are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN E. BRYSON, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

Mr. Bryson. Thank you, Chairwoman Bono Mack. We have worked
together for many, many years. I appreciate working with you
here on this.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Especially if you are complimenting the
chairman, it is a good thing to have the microphone very close
to your mouth.
Mr. Bryson. How is that?
Mrs. Bono Mack. Much better. Thank you.
Mr. Bryson. All right. So I said thank you to the
chairwoman and now to the Ranking Member Butterfield and to all
of you, the members of this subcommittee. We thank you for your
support for the incredibly diverse array of manufacturers in
your districts and throughout the United States. Today, I am
pleased to provide an overview of the administration's efforts
to support manufacturing.
After a decade in which we lost six million manufacturing
jobs, as you know and some of you touched on this, we are now
seeing positive momentum in U.S. manufacturing. Over the past
25 months, our manufacturers have created nearly half a million
jobs. So that is the best streak in the United States since
1995. And 120,000 of those came just in the last 3 months.
I travel widely visiting manufacturers. Last week, I saw
this firsthand in Tennessee. For example, I saw there a new,
just-constructed one million square foot Whirlpool facility. It
is now the largest cooking product facility of its kind in the
world, extraordinary. And these examples are important because
manufacturing jobs tend to be high-paying jobs with good
benefits for middle-class working families.
And manufacturing is truly key to America innovation and
competitiveness. Manufacturing accounts for 70 percent of our
private sector R&D, 90 percent of our patents, and 60 percent
of our total exports, including a record 1.3 trillion in goods
exported last year. So today, I think we all agree need to
build on this moment. And I heard it in your comments. After
all, if we lose the ability to turn American ideas into
American products, if we lose that, our innovation chains would
break and we would lose our long-term capacity to compete and
create jobs.
As you have seen in my written testimony, we are focused on
four key areas at the Commerce Department. I will touch on
these quickly. First, promoting innovation and protecting
intellectual property; second, establishing regional
manufacturing partnerships; third, promoting investment and
trade; and fourth, providing information and analysis on the
manufacturing sector.
On a broader scale, the President has laid out a number of
proposals to support U.S. manufacturing. For example, he has
proposed that we reform our corporate tax code for the first
time since the 1980s. This would lower the effective rate for
U.S. manufacturers to 25 percent. Also, through the Commerce
Department at NIST, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, the new budget, the 2013 budget requests $1 billion
for a national network of manufacturing innovation. And this
would help maximize the industry strengths in each of our U.S.
regions. I will comment on that later if you would like to go
into that.
Overall, our focus at the Commerce Department is powerful
and sharp. The way we express it is build it here and sell it
everywhere. Manufacturing--build it here, sell it everywhere.
I want to close by thanking you for continuing to support a
vibrant and dynamic manufacturing base. Thank you for passing
H.R. 4105, the bipartisan GPX legislation. This allows our
manufacturers to challenge and seek relief from unfairly
subsidized products entering our market. Efforts such as these
will help strengthen our recovery, create more jobs, and ensure
that American manufacturing continues to lead in the 21st
Century.
I am pleased now to take your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bryson follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.015

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I will recognize
myself for the first set of questions.
And my question to you begins with the Manufacturing
Council was intended to be a strong voice advising the
government of the private sector's views on issues that affect
manufacturing, yet that voice is not always heard by the
regulatory agencies, most notably the EPA. What can you do to
make sure that other Federal agencies pay attention to the
needs of American manufacturers?
Mr. Bryson. Let me address the Manufacturing Council; then
I will touch on the EPA point if I could.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Sure.
Mr. Bryson. So the U.S. Manufacturing Policy Council, which
I chair across the entire Federal Government, is a big step to
bring all the departments together so that we operate exactly
with the same perspective, the same voice. We reduce
redundancy, we work across Federal departments--the Department
of Defense, Department of Energy, and so on. So I think that is
a way to reduce the bureaucracy, to be more productive, to be
more efficient.
With regard to the point about EPA and regulation, I can't
address specifically the EPA issues, but if I could, I will
just touch generally on regulation. I regret I just, you know,
don't know the specifics of the EPA regulation very well, but
what the President has done and what I strongly believe in--and
I hear it all the time and I work with manufacturers a lot--is
we have to reduce regulation to the maximum extent we possibly
can. And what the President has repeatedly said is we will
allow regulation only to the extent it is essential to our
economy, the growth in the economy, the national security, and
to education. So those are the criteria, and as a consequence,
for example, I think it is pretty widely known that the level
of regulation and new regulation is less than the first 3 years
of this administration than the comparable 3 years in the prior
administration. We have to keep working very hard on that.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. In the sake of
time because I know we have a time crunch, I am going to cut my
questioning short recognizing that you and I spent a fair
amount of time together yesterday and you answered a whole host
of my questions. So at this point I am going to yield back my
time and recognize Mr. Butterfield for 5 minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, the steel industry is a major employer in my
district employing hundreds of hardworking men and women with
solid jobs that they can support their families with. The
industry is still recovering from the Great Recession and
increased imports of low-priced imports have hampered that
recovery.
Specifically, imports of hot rolled steel from Russia have
surged into the U.S. market increasing by more than 50 percent
between 2010 and 2011. There is a trade agreement covering
these imports, and in fact, the Commerce Department and the
U.S. International Trade Commission ruled last year that this
remedy should stay in place to prevent injury to the industry.
However, the remedy is no longer effective in preventing
dumping. The pricing mechanism in the agreement is so outdated
it literally gives Russian producers a license to dump their
steel in the U.S. My constituents brought this to the attention
of the Commerce Department and I understand that you may be
currently negotiating with the Russian Government to update the
agreement so that it reflects current conditions and is
effective in preventing dumping.
Can you give me and my colleagues an update on those
efforts? Can you assure me that you will hang tough and make
sure the agreement is revised in a way that prevents further
injury to the industry and workers? I appreciate you giving
this matter the urgency that it deserves.
Mr. Bryson. We have the responsibility in the Commerce
Department to see to it the trade laws are respected, honored
and we prosecute many, many cases in which it appears there has
been anti-dumping countervailing duties that we needed to
impose because subsidies and other means of undermining U.S.
manufacturing were being hurt. I don't know the Russia case. I
will have to get back on that to you later.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. Please do that. That is a big
deal----
Mr. Bryson. Yes.
Mr. Butterfield [continuing]. To the steel industry.
Mr. Bryson. I understand.
Mr. Butterfield. Mr. Secretary, we have heard all sorts of
reasons for why there has been a long-term decline in
manufacturing. We have heard it is because of labor costs, we
have heard it is because of currency manipulation, we have
heard it is because other countries invest substantially more
in that sector. The list goes on and on but after reading the
New York Times article, ``How the U.S. Lost Out on iPhone
work,'' I am not sure these reasons accurately depict the role
of overseas workers in the shift away from U.S. manufacturing.
According to the article, one reason manufacturing plants
locate in China is the ability to scale up and down so easily.
In China, a manufacturer was able to hire 3,000 people
overnight and of course it could fire them all 3 weeks later if
necessary. It hired 8,700 industrial engineers in 15 days,
which could take about 9 months in the U.S. Also, it was given
access to a warehouse filled with glass samples free of charge
and the engineers were made available at no cost and were
staying at onsite dorms to be available 24 hours a day.
Mr. Secretary, we know that we can compete on scale and
ideas. Americans are hard workers. When we hear this talk about
speed and flexibility, are we really talking about an overseas
workforce conditioned to work 12- to 16-hour shifts and live in
dorms next to the plant? Is that really what we have in mind?
Mr. Bryson. Mr. Congressman, I think you raise an extremely
important point. We have the responsibility at the Commerce
Department to see to it that trade laws are honored. And we
take many, many cases and many cases relative to China in which
we go forth with that. So to give you a little background on
what we do--and let me start with a special thanks to this
Congress--GPX, that was an action that you took at the request
of the President and we were deeply involved as the Commerce
Department to see to it that the tens of thousands of American
jobs in the 38 States that were being attacked by, we believe,
unfairly subsidized imports in non-market economy countries--
China would be one of those--and you passed the legislation out
at our request and it puts us in this position. Several things
we have done plus now the protection of those steps, we have,
as of February 2012, 283 antidumping countervailing CVD orders
in place, which puts tariffs on 120 products. So there is a lot
more to do.
For example, in March the administration recently filed a
case in China's exports on rare earth. It is a violation we
believe of the World Trade Organization rules. It is a policy
designed by China to force manufacturing to relocate to China
and to limit foreign competition. So we have to keep doing
that. We do it with a very capable and large team of people and
these things are done under U.S. law and U.S. requirements.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Butterfield.
And the Chair now recognizes Mr. Stearns for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Secretary, I come from this a little perhaps
differently than you. You talked in your opening statement
about an energy plan. The energy plan that I think you and the
administration supports is based upon using solar panels, wind
panels, solar thermal devices and things like that. so it seems
to me if we are talking about where are the jobs, if we use our
natural resources in this country--fracking of gas, oil and
shale, burning clean coal, offshore drilling, ANWR, the
Keystone pipe--all those things would create a plethora of new
jobs. And towards that end, I think that is where we come from
a different perspective here.
I read in a quote in the L.A. Times recently that you
support the reauthorization of the Export-Import Bank. Is that
true? And I think that is in your statement here that you are
asking for Congress to continue to reauthorize it. That is
true?
Mr. Bryson. Yes, it is.
Mr. Stearns. Yes. Now, one of the things I have with that
is that when I look at their annual report, they gave $10
million loan guarantees to Solyndra, and I chair the Oversight
and Investigation Committee on Solyndra and I found, you know,
that the due diligence of the Export-Import Bank was
negligible, and of course, the Department of Energy did not do
their due diligence and they went bankrupt. And I guess the
question is is there any guarantee that the American people
would have that the Export-Import Bank when they go to
companies like Solyndra and others that are involved with this
idea of wind panels and solar panels and things like that, what
confidence do we have that the Export-Import Bank will do their
due diligence again?
Mr. Bryson. So let me start within the Solyndra question
you are raising----
Mr. Stearns. No, it is not so much Solyndra. It is just
that you are recommending the Export-Import Bank provide more
money and lots of it is going to these companies like Solyndra
so I think you should be aware that before you ask us to do
this, there should be due diligence and caution the Export-
Import Bank to be careful about giving out money without being
sure that it is kind of worthwhile. Does that make sense?
Mr. Bryson. The Export-Import Bank plays a very big role in
exports.
Mr. Stearns. No, I understand that. But the point is they
gave Solyndra $10 million without due diligence. I just want
make sure it doesn't happen--let me go on. Let me ask you
another question.
You have been chairman of the board of BrightSource Energy,
is that correct?
Mr. Bryson. I was for a time, yes----
Mr. Stearns. Yes.
Mr. Bryson [continuing]. For about 9 months.
Mr. Stearns. Now, that is another company that, you know,
this goes into my idea of developing jobs in this country could
be done through our natural resources and not, you know,
feathering up a lot of these solar panels and solar thermal and
wind turbines. For example, when you were the CEO of that,
didn't that get $1.6 million from the Department of Energy?
Mr. Bryson. I am sorry. When I was the CEO--I didn't get
the last part of your question. I was the CEO----
Mr. Stearns. I was told that the loan guarantee to the
company that you were CEO was $1.6 million--billion rather, but
I don't think you got all that. Do you remember how much of
that that you got?
Mr. Bryson. I am afraid I don't.
Mr. Stearns. OK. I understand. I understand. Do you
remember anything about the loan guarantee that the Department
of Energy gave the company that you were CEO, BrightSource? Do
you remember that at all?
Mr. Bryson. I----
Mr. Stearns. Just yes or no.
Mr. Bryson. I will check, but I----
Mr. Stearns. OK.
Mr. Bryson. I don't believe my company had--you are talking
about when I was the CEO of----
Mr. Stearns. BrightSource. It says the Department of----
Mr. Bryson. Oh, BrightSource. So that----
Mr. Stearns. Yes, when you were CEO----
Mr. Bryson. That was not the company that I was----
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. Of BrightSource.
Mr. Bryson [continuing]. Ever the CEO. That was after I had
stepped down for Southern California Edison, the major electric
utility in Southern California and the parent company of which
I----
Mr. Stearns. No, but at the time of your nomination to the
Secretary of Commerce on May 31, 2011, you were chairman of the
board of BrightSource Energy----
Mr. Bryson. Yes.
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. Isn't that correct?
Mr. Bryson. That was that 9-month period, yes.
Mr. Stearns. OK. So my question is----
Mr. Bryson. Chairman, not the CEO----
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. Do you remember getting----
Mr. Bryson [continuing]. I was on the board, yes.
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. $1.6 billion from the Department
of Energy when you were CEO. Do you remember that? Yes or no.
If you don't, that--I mean I guess the real larger question is
this idea of----
Mr. Bryson. The answer is no, I don't.
Mr. Stearns. You don't remember?
Mr. Bryson. I don't.
Mr. Stearns. So the real question is we are giving money to
a lot of companies that are being provided loan guarantees,
they are going bankrupt--Abound, Beacon. I mean the list goes
on. And yet we are talking about jobs. If we gave jobs to the
natural people where the resources are, we would have
unemployment down where it is in South Dakota, North Dakota,
Montana would be down to almost zero. And I guess when you are
talking about Department of Energy getting $1.6 billion, that
is a lot of money. And I am sure you are aware in announcing
this, when I look at these companies, the jobs they create are
negligible. And I guess the question would be when you as a CEO
of BrightSource Energy got all this money, how many jobs did
you create?
Mr. Bryson. I was never the CEO of BrightSource. I was
never, ever, ever----
Mr. Stearns. You were chairman of the board, excuse me. You
were the chairman of the board. Yes.
Mr. Bryson. I was chairman of the board, yes.
Mr. Stearns. And chairman of the board, the question is how
many jobs were created by this $1.6 billion loan guarantee? And
that is sort of what all of us are concerned about because we
are spending all these taxpayers' money, and they are either
going bankrupt, holding on just by a thread, and yet we are not
creating any jobs.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman. Time has expired.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Sarbanes for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for being here, Mr. Secretary, obviously a very
important issue for us. And I want to commend the
administration and you and other Cabinet-level officials for
the commitment and I think much more coordinated commitment to
reviving American manufacturing.
I am very focused on some of the special initiatives that
have been undertaken at NIST. You referenced NIST in your
comments. In particular there is the Manufacturing Extension
Partnership, which I know you are familiar with. Within that in
the last couple of years there has been a special outreach
effort called the Supplier Scouting Initiative. And I don't
know if you are familiar with that or not, but basically, the
idea there is to work harder to find a match between these
contracting opportunities with the Federal Government and
domestic manufacturers and suppliers and vendors so that we
don't have as many instances where somebody is applying or
asserting that a waiver should be granted from, say, a Buy
American provision--excuse me--because in fact if you look a
little harder and you get the word out and you are more
affirmed in the outreach, you can in fact find American
manufacturers and suppliers, you can do the job so you don't
have to deploy these waivers and so forth. And obviously, it is
better in terms of creating jobs.
I wondered if you could speak to the potential of that kind
of outreach. I mean it goes to the question of, you know, doing
better with creating clearinghouses of information that can
connect these opportunities in the Federal Government with the
suppliers that are out there. And you can speak to the Supplier
Scouting Initiative if you have some knowledge of it or you
could speak more generally to these efforts that we need to
make to connect the dots for people and also if you have a
sense of which agencies among the Federal agencies are doing
the best job. I have been impressed with the Department of
Transportation's efforts, and Secretary LaHood has within sort
of discretionary authority to be more affirmative. He has
really stepped up and done that and maybe you have some
impressions as well of that agency's work and some of the
others across the Federal platform that are trying to really
reach out and bring in those American manufacturers.
Mr. Bryson. I can give you an initial response. I am only
slightly informed about the Supplier Scouting portion of this.
That is new. It is done across several departments as you are
suggesting. Let me start with the Manufacturing Extension
Partnership Centers. They are in all 50 States. I think what
you are affirming is they have made an enormous difference in
the development particularly of small- and medium-sized
manufacturing businesses because they work with those
businesses and they work, for example, in training programs
that are in support of those businesses. And we increasingly
strengthen our manufacturing base through this Manufacturing
Extension Partnership.
Once again, manufacturing, we have this goal. Make it here,
sell it everywhere, and the Scouting Initiative, as I
understand it, it is one that has worked as you are
suggesting--and I don't know the Department of Transportation
case--but has been valuable in working over other Federal
agencies and has potential value that we would like to move
forward, but I will get back to you on--we have not done this
yet to my knowledge, so I believe what is going on at NIST
right now is further work on taking that kind of an initiative.
Mr. Sarbanes. Well, I am very supportive of it and we want
to avoid looking back from the future and having vendors and
subcontractors and other American manufacturers out there when
they are told that an agency said, well, we couldn't find
anyone who could fill this niche or do this job and then you
have a whole bunch of folks who would raise their hands and
say, well, we were there; we could have done it.
Mr. Bryson. Yes.
Mr. Sarbanes. But we didn't know, the effort wasn't made,
and so I think there are things underway that will bridge that
gap. The Scouting Initiative is certainly one of them. There
are others and I commend the agencies that are moving forward
with it.
And I yield back. Thank you, Madam.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Bryson. I am 100 percent firm we want it done here in
the U.S. We want it done at all levels right here in the U.S. I
agree. Excuse me.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank you.
And I am going to recognize Mr. Harper for 5 minutes, but
before you start, I just want to remind Members that the
Secretary has to be out of the door by 12:15 to catch a plane
and I know we are all sympathetic to that. So if you could be
judicious with your time in hopes that we can give every Member
an opportunity to ask their questions.
Mr. Harper, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here. Now that I have 3
minutes it appears instead of 5 I will try to move through this
as quickly as I can, but thank you for your attendance today
and appreciate your time here.
And, you know, I am very fortunate in my district to have a
very aggressive economic development university in my district
in Mississippi State University. They realized a long time ago
that a major land grant institution, you know, can serve as a
strong catalyst for a lot of economic development from
generating spinoff advanced manufacturing companies from
research but also assisting in attracting major industry into
the State by providing that cutting-edge research that is
available. And it benefits not only the university and the
State but private industry as well.
And you mentioned the Advanced Manufacturing Partnership,
or AMP. Will universities like Mississippi State be able to
play a role in that partnership and will AMP expand on what
Mississippi State and other universities are already doing?
Mr. Bryson. Yes. The idea of this what is called NNMI, this
initiative which is in our budget this year one time out of
NIST, and the idea of this is to really work hard on the
advanced manufacturing of the future, of this year, next year,
years beyond this because we are the leader in the world in
manufacturing. We are the leader in manufacturing, but advanced
manufacturing is where this sector, as you know from
Mississippi State, is going.
Mr. Harper. Yes.
Mr. Bryson. And so what we have to be very smart about is
the very best advanced technologies for application in
manufacturing. And the reality is technology is going to be a
big part of this, and we have to work with these outstanding
universities. So this NNMI initiative is to bring together just
what you are describing, the outstanding universities working
in this area, the outstanding private sector leaders that are
working in this area, working in the labs with NIST, the
National Institute of Standards and Technology. And the plan is
to build as many as 15 of these around the United States
regionally. In other words, the greater Mississippi areas, the
teams that you might work with there would absolutely be a
place where there would be special strength that you would
bring and there are other places around the country. So the
idea is to do this and we want to move as fast as we can on
this.
Mr. Harper. Right. Mr. Secretary, we also are very proud to
have in my district in Flowood, Mississippi, a Nucor steel
plant. And they have, you know, gone through a lot of difficult
times, you know, when the demand for steel fell below 50
percent, they still didn't lay off a single worker. It is a
great story there. While the market has gotten better--and you
touched on this with Mr. Butterfield--and, you know, a surge of
imports of rebar from other countries are kind of stopping this
recovery in its tracks. And so, you know, my understanding is
there are certain countries, as we sort of touched, on that do
not have maybe a natural economic advantage to produce steel
and some even import steel scrap from the United States in
order to produce their steel products. It does seem that some
of these governments in these countries may be subsidizing
their steel industry. You said I believe that it is imperative
the Department of Commerce look into that and we certainly
encourage you to do so.
With that, I will yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Bryson. Thank you. Yes.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Dingell for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dingell. Madam Chairman, thank you and I commend you
for the hearing.
I want to welcome my old friend, Secretary Bryson, here.
Mr. Secretary, welcome. He has a distinguished record as a
public servant and also as a very successful businessman who
was interested in his community and produced great things.
Welcome and we are delighted you are with us.
Mr. Bryson. Thank you.
Mr. Dingell. It is clear to me that manufacturing and
innovation are connected and in order to equip future workers
with technical skills, it is now more important that we work
hard on this than ever. I had some questions I think would be
useful in us understanding what the administration is doing.
This will require a yes or no.
Mr. Secretary, is it correct that for every $1 of Federal
investment in MEP, American manufacturers generate
approximately $30 in new sales growth and that that growth is
shown to result in close to $4 billion in new sales annually?
Mr. Bryson. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Now, is it true that
MEP helped----
Mr. Bryson. You have worked in this for a long time and I
respect it enormously, yes.
Mr. Dingell. Well, I don't mean to hurry you in your
response----
Mr. Bryson. No, I don't feel hurried at all.
Mr. Dingell. These questions are given with respect but we
have very little time, as you can observe.
Mr. Secretary, is it true that MEP helped create 19,000
jobs and retain over 40,000 jobs in fiscal year 2010?
Mr. Bryson. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. And that was a year of depression, was it not,
or recession?
Mr. Bryson. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. The administration has requested level funding
for MEP in fiscal year 2013, about 128 million, is that
correct?
Mr. Bryson. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. So you are telling me that the 128 million
investment in this will yield close to 4 billion in new sales,
is that correct?
Mr. Bryson. That is exactly right.
Mr. Dingell. It seems like a good investment to me.
Now, Mr. Secretary, I would simply observe that we ought to
be quarrelling up here whether we are going to put that much
money in or whether we are going to put more because it seems
to be an investment that pays off and that a sensible
businessman would like it very well. Do you agree with that
statement?
Mr. Bryson. I do agree.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Secretary, a lot of companies depend on
very expensive software for advanced manufacturing such as
Ford, Chrysler, and GM in my district. The software is more
often than not developed by American firms. American
manufacturers purchase software legally but I am sure many
companies overseas pay nothing for pirated software and use it
without a license. That puts our people at a tremendous
disadvantage. What can the administration do to level the
playing field for honest manufacturers that lawfully purchase
software and other information technology that they use? I
think, Mr. Secretary, given our time problem, you should give
me a brief answer and then I should request that you submit
further comments for purposes of the record. Thank you. Go
ahead, Mr. Secretary. Give me a response. We have a minute, 59
seconds.
Mr. Bryson. It is absolutely unfair that our intellectual
property be taken from us without compensation and be used
elsewhere as if it was not originated here. So we need to stand
strong against that and I won't go further but I can commit
something. I would like to tell you about the instances in
which the Commerce Department in various ways has addressed
that issue. I won't take that time right now.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Mr. Secretary, we lose twice at this.
Once our software people lose and very significant and then our
manufacturers pay higher prices than do the people that use or
buy or acquire in other ways knockoff software. Is that right?
Mr. Bryson. That is entirely right.
Mr. Dingell. And that hurts us twice?
Mr. Bryson. It does.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Secretary, it is a pleasure to see you
here. Thank you.
Mr. Bryson. Thank you.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Secretary, with your help, I yield back 58
seconds.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Dingell.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Lance for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
And good morning to you, Mr. Secretary. It is my honor to
meet you here today, sir.
The innovative U.S. biopharmaceuticals sector generates
high-quality jobs and enormous economic output and exports for
the economy of this country. As I understand it, nationwide,
the total economic output from the biopharmaceutical sector in
direct, indirect, and induced impacts was almost a trillion
dollars and the sector supported a total of four million jobs
in 2009, including 700,000 direct jobs. The district I serve in
New Jersey is arguably the medicine chest of the United States.
What is the administration doing, Mr. Secretary, to retain this
country's global leadership position in biopharmaceutical R&D
and manufacturing?
Mr. Bryson. I know generally your district and we are
seeking to advance U.S. pharmaceuticals through the
International Trade Administration in many, many ways and
perhaps you are aware of that----
Mr. Lance. I am, sir.
Mr. Bryson [continuing]. Work. We stand strong country
after country after country with respect to those
pharmaceuticals, and that may be the most important respect in
which we work on these things. And, you know, I am just going
to take it as a very large number of countries around the world
in which our commercial foreign services officers are working
on this virtually daily. I, for example, have just come back
from India. I had a trade mission taking U.S. businesses to
India. About 2 weeks ago, there for a week. Pharmaceuticals
came up again and again and we strongly support.
Mr. Lance. I thank you. I look forward to working you and
the Department in this area.
Related to my last question, there is a trade agreement,
the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which the United States is
currently negotiating with eight countries in the Asia Pacific
region. Ensuring strong IP protections abroad for all U.S.
industries will be critical to our economy and to American
jobs. I strongly urge that the administration secure strong
pharmaceutical IP provisions in the Trans-Pacific Partnership,
including 12 years of data protection for biologics so that all
American manufacturers can benefit from these agreements and I
would invite you to comment on that, sir.
Mr. Bryson. Yes, and I would like to comment on that.
Trans-Pacific Partnership is a high-grade form of free trade--
--
Mr. Lance. Yes.
Mr. Bryson [continuing]. Arrangement, so we have these
agreements now. And what we need to do is bring them to greater
specificity and expand them more broadly across the Pacific
Rim, Southeast Asia, those countries. And this is the
President's stance for this--and I enormously stand for it--
because what we have to have in these agreements is not the
kind of agreements that have so many holes in them that, for
example, are incredibly able. The pharmaceutical industry may
be left out to some degree. We can't afford that. This is what
we need to do with the talent we have in this country, so
absolutely, I am supportive of that.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much. I look forward to working
with you on this and other issues.
And Madam Chair, I yield back 1 minute, 13 seconds.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Lance.
Mr. Rush, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Secretary, I commend you for your leadership and for
the vision that you are bringing to the agency.
You have the difficult task of advancing the President's
manufacturing agenda at a time when U.S. corporations are
facing global competition, at a time when American corporations
are losing market share to growing export countries like China,
Southeast Asia, and India. The policies you are currently
implementing aim at ensuring the U.S. access to global markets
and to enable manufacturers to reach 95 percent of consumers
who live outside of our borders.
I would add that our industries not only have to be
competitive but they also need to be one of the fastest in
terms of the market share gain before we would be able to
reduce the incurring trade deficit. Obviously, we have to be
innovative, proactive, and not overlook any market. And in
light of this, I am curious to know which particular markets
are you targeting in your investment strategy? In other words,
which markets do you think are right to receive American
products?
And I have another question, and I will ask these
questions. Nowhere in your statement--and I might be wrong--
have I seen reference to the African market, which according to
many reports is the fastest-growing region in the global
economy. You are aware, I am sure, of the Economist article
that states that over the past 10 years, ``no fewer than six of
the world's 10 fastest-growing economies were in sub-Saharan
Africa.'' And the only BRIC country to make the list of the top
10 is China, which comes after Angola. And predictions are that
Nigeria, Ethiopia, Chad, Mozambique, Tanzania, the Congo,
Ghana, and Rwanda are projecting to increase and take the lead
and that Africa's economy will go at an average annual rate of
7 percent over the next 20 years, slightly faster than China's.
And also according to The Economist and other reputable
sources, the last Secretary of Commerce who visited Africa was
Secretary Evans, who visited in 2012. So--and also I want to
just add that if we double our exports to Africa, we can create
up to 315,000 jobs domestically. So the question is, What
regions are you targeting for the export of the U.S. that your
department is targeting and how do you feel about the market in
Africa? And are you planning on visiting Africa in the near
future, to take a delegation to Africa?
Mr. Bryson. Thank you very much, Congressman.
The question of targeting exports, we target all over the
world, all over the world. So, for example, I am just back, as
I indicated, from India, took 16 U.S. outstanding businesses. I
think things will follow very positively. We already have some
arrangements.
With regard to sub-Saharan Africa, though, I have
personally been there. In this new role, I have not been there
yet. I would like to talk with you a little further about the
opportunities you see there. I have been meeting with senior-
most leaders from sub-Saharan Africa to a degree. For example,
I met with the--is it Prime Minister or President of Ghana when
he was here. I have met senior officials from Nigeria when they
were here. In my own business I did quite a lot in South
Africa. That was in my energy business. But I think you are
right that that deserves priority and focus and I would like to
go further with it and I would like to talk to you about any
ideas you have about how we might take that further.
Mr. Rush. Madam Chair, I yield back 5 seconds.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you for your generosity.
The Chair recognizes Dr. Cassidy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Mr. Secretary, I
have a PricewaterhouseCoopers article which speaks about how
the availability of shale gas has just been tremendous in terms
of jumpstarting manufacturing. For example, lower feed stock
and energy costs could help U.S. manufacturers reduce natural
gas expense by almost $12 billion annually through 2025 and
that because of this there may be one million more workers
added by 2025 in manufacturing, really tremendous. Now, my
concern is if we take the old John Marshall maxim, the power to
tax is the power to destroy, the President's insistence upon
denying energy companies the same manufacturing tax incentives
as other manufacturing companies, does that denial of a Section
199 for an energy company imperil or at least potentially harm
the manufacturing renaissance we are enjoying because of the
work these energy companies are doing?
Mr. Bryson. Let me address the energy and then I will do
what I can on the tax--I am not an expert. Tax is really one
out of the U.S. Treasury, not the U.S. Commerce.
Mr. Cassidy. But it is so interrelated to the ability of a
manufacturing company to do so; that is why I raise the point
now.
Mr. Bryson. And I have indicated what the President has set
out for manufacturing companies, but let me also say to you I
absolutely agree that your point about the incredible value to
the United States now of this natural gas find so that we
become more dependent on U.S. sources of all forms of energy,
which is just the position we most want to be in. So it
enhances our national security and reduces the risk----
Mr. Cassidy. I totally accept that----
Mr. Bryson. Yes.
Mr. Cassidy [continuing]. So with your business background,
if you raise the cost of the company to produce that energy,
which in turn increases the input cost for the manufacturing
companies which depend upon that energy, won't you decrease the
competitiveness if you will of our manufacturers vis-a-vis
those in other countries? Our input costs are raised because of
tax policy, whatever, imperiling our ability to compete.
Doesn't that just make sense?
Mr. Bryson. Yes, getting taxes right in our country for
business is very important. I can't give you a response on the
specifics. I just don't know in the case you are describing.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, next question--thank you. You said
earlier build it here and sell it everywhere. Would you accept
that this should also apply to the export of natural gas-based
products?
Mr. Bryson. What I am trying to puzzle through in my mind
as you are asking this is with regard to manufacturing in every
respect I am in favor of build it here and sell it everywhere.
If you take me deeper into the manufacturing component of what
you are addressing, I will say if it is manufacturing, that is
what I am supporting and we are working hard in every way. And
I think you would find, for example--well, I have been very
supportive, for example, with the U.S. oil companies in
supporting their overseas positions. I am very strongly
supportive of that.
Mr. Cassidy. So some would argue that we should not explore
natural gas or natural gas refined products.
Mr. Bryson. Yes, I----
Mr. Cassidy. You would accept if we have an abundance of
natural gas, you would accept that that or its refined products
could be exported?
Mr. Bryson. I would, yes.
Mr. Cassidy. OK. That is fine. I have plenty more questions
but I yield back for my colleagues.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman and now recognize Mr.
McKinley for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Secretary, I have got a question. Back in Pittsburgh in
2008 then-candidate Obama was very aggressive in contending
that China was manipulating its currency. Is China still
manipulating its currency? Remember, he said they were. Are
they still?
Mr. Bryson. I believe that China is still manipulating its
currency. I believe that currency still is lower than the
market price.
Mr. McKinley. What he went on to say in his remarks, Mr.
Secretary, he said if they are, then we are going to start
shutting off access to our markets. What market have we shut
off?
Mr. Bryson. Say it to me again.
Mr. McKinley. He said if they are going to continue
manipulating their currency, we are going to start shutting off
access to our markets. I am curious which markets now 3 years
into his administration has he shut off?
Mr. Bryson. Let me address what is within my area of
responsibility. The Department of Treasury deals with the tax
issues, deals with the currency issues, but what we are
responsible for at the Department of Commerce is seeing to it
that there is no violation of trade laws. And it is important,
in direct response to your question, that anything that is
done, for example, out of China or any other----
Mr. McKinley. OK. You are saying it is not in your
department, then?
Mr. Bryson. What I am saying is that the reason that we
have right now the very, very large number of orders that make
it such that we impose heavy tariffs on goods that come from
these countries is an offset to the fact that they are
subsidizing unfairly under those laws----
Mr. McKinley. OK.
Mr. Bryson [continuing]. So that is----
Mr. McKinley. Maybe if you could get back to us with a
little bit more in writing, I would appreciate that. If you
could maybe explain it because we are short time on this and I
would like to understand--you have acknowledged that they are
manipulating their currency.
The second is you made an interesting remark that I
appreciated----
Mr. Bryson. Let me just say if I could we can refer that to
the U.S. Department of Treasury. I would be happy to refer it
to them. That is where the judgment is reached about Treasury.
Mr. McKinley. The second issue that you made an interesting
remark earlier about how they were reining in some of the
regulatory effects and you said as long as it doesn't have an
impact on manufacturing and jobs, but yet we are already seeing
that using the Clean Air Act, the EPA has now caused up to
approaching 40 gigawatts of power. Coal fire generating plants
have now indicated they are going to shut down. So would you
not suggest that that probably is going to increase the cost of
electricity to some manufacturers when you have over 10 percent
of our electric generating plants closing? Isn't that likely to
increase the cost of utilities?
Mr. Bryson. You will have to give me a little more on the
case in point, but let me say in general what the President has
stood for very strongly is limiting, reducing----
Mr. McKinley. I hear what he stands for, but it is what he
is doing, he is allowing to happen. Does the Commerce recognize
that decreasing electric generating facilities is likely to
increase the cost of electricity? Yes or no?
Mr. Bryson. Let me address regulation and then I will
address utilities briefly if I could. The regulation is the
only thing that is allowed in this administration with regard
to regulation is things that bear strictly on health, safety,
and security. That is it. That is all. So what, as perhaps you
have seen in some EPA cases, for example, the President has not
allowed those to go forward.
With regard to happens to utility power costs, new forms of
generation are less expensive than old forms of generation in
many cases.
Mr. McKinley. If they are subsidized I suppose I would go
along----
Mr. Bryson. No, no, no----
Mr. McKinley. The last comment that the Congressman from
New Jersey mentioned about the letter about Russia. This is a
letter sent to you in February, February 17, so for your staff
to be able to find that there was a letter directed to your
attention on February 17 asking--so perhaps they need to
communicate that to you.
Mr. Bryson. All right.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you very much.
Mr. Bryson. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. The Chair recognizes Mr. Pompeo
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pompeo. Great. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Good morning, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Bryson. Good morning.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you for joining us. I appreciate your
enthusiasm for the growth of American manufacturing. I
represent south central Kansas. It is the air capital of the
world. The President has more times than we have minutes
remaining in our day talked about corporate fat cat jet owners.
We have one of the last great manufacturing jewels left in
America that has not asked for a dime, doesn't want a grant,
doesn't want a loan, doesn't want to be bothered, would just
like to have your supervisor, President of the United States,
stop talking down this incredibly important industry. Can you
walk me through how he thinks the customers for these union
workers, these engineers that live in the heartland of America
who are building these airplanes, how talking down that
industry has anything to do with job creation in America?
Mr. Bryson. So I am sorry, just take me a little further.
What industry----
Mr. Pompeo. The general aviation industry. We have Cessna
and Beechcraft and Learjet and Boeing and hundreds of suppliers
that live in south central Kansas and make their livings
building these very airplanes that are sold to the folks that
the President refers to as corporate fat cat jet owners. And it
hurts the industry when he makes it politically incorrect to
fly around in a business tool. And so I am asking you what the
job creation rationale for talking down the aviation industry
could possibly be?
Mr. Bryson. My experience--and I know this directly--I was
for 18-1/2 years a member of the Boeing Board of Directors. The
President has been very, very supportive of U.S. aviation. And
when I do the tours that I do around the world I am again and
again and again espousing U.S. aviation, component parts----
Mr. Pompeo. Well, I appreciate that.
Mr. Bryson [continuing]. That is what I do.
Mr. Pompeo. I appreciate that. It is an incredibly
important industry. It is one of our largest export industries
in America. It is incredibly important. He may be supportive of
it but the things he says when he speaks and his notion that we
should increase user fees and that he wants to increase taxes
on generation aviation users are inconsistent with your
statement that he is supportive of that. So anything you can do
to help make sure that folks want to use these as business
tools, they are very efficient. They are a great product and we
make them here in the United States of America.
I want to turn to a second topic. You said you go out to a
lot of manufacturers. I actually was a manufacturer for a few
years before I came here. When you ask them the things that
restrict their ability to create and grow jobs and they list
the top three or four, do any of them talk about receiving
Federal grants as important as their desire to continue to grow
jobs? Do they say, Mr. Secretary, the most important thing you
could do for me would be to provide a Federal grant to my
business?
Mr. Bryson. In the advanced manufacturing area,
principally, possibly exclusively the advanced manufacturing
area, yes, because the focus there is, in a globally
competitive world, to retain the smarts, the very best
technologies, the most outstanding means of retaining and
enhancing our competitive position. In technology in the form
of advanced manufacturing will be a significant part of that.
And the role that the Federal Government plays by way of a
stimulus by the way the kind of work that is done at NIST, so
right here in this area----
Mr. Pompeo. Um-hum.
Mr. Bryson [continuing]. The D.C. area, where we are doing,
for example, this work on nanotechnology right now, and that
has opened in every case invited the only such thing, at least
in the United States, the only thing I know--let us just say in
the United States----
Mr. Pompeo. Um-hum.
Mr. Bryson [continuing]. Where you, as a manufacturer,
folks down in advanced manufacturing can go and use the lab and
bring in your best people, the universities that you work with,
best people, and so on.
Mr. Pompeo. I appreciate that. But most of the grant
programs--the Economic Development administration as a good
example--aren't providing for advanced manufacturing
technology. These are grant programs that are going to old line
industries. Do those folks talk about grants? What I hear from
them is I hear about get the government out of my way, get
regulation out of my way, and allow me to go grow my job and
help me with trade so I can have access to markets. I mean even
the President said when he was campaigning he said we need to
cut back waste at agencies like the Economic Development
Administration, his words, September of 2008. I haven't seen
that. I have seen continued efforts of this Commerce Department
to try and pick winners and losers in the manufacturing space.
Mr. Bryson. The Federal Government is involved in
manufacturing in multiple ways, the Commerce Department is
involved in multiple ways. The Manufacturing Extension
Partnership works with so many of these small and medium-sized
manufacturers and in the communities and in the community
colleges and so on that work with them. So, yes, there is
Federal Government that there are dollars associated with that.
What we try to do is use those dollars really, really well.
Mr. Pompeo. Well, I----
Mr. Bryson. In regards to the Economic Development----
Mr. Pompeo. I am sorry, my time is--go ahead.
Mr. Bryson. The Economic Development Administration
likewise small agency, modest budget, very, very tight control
over cost, and what it does, it is the only Economic
Development Administration across the entire Federal Government
and it does things and we could provide you----
Mr. Pompeo. Well, I would welcome that. I appreciate it.
Thank you.
Mr. Bryson. Yes.
Mr. Pompeo. The Commerce Department has the opportunity to
do so many good things. I just wish you would spend less time
trying to redistribute wealth and more time creating
opportunities for everyone. So I thank you very much----
Mr. Bryson. Thank you.
Mr. Pompeo [continuing]. For your time.
Mr. Bryson. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Mr. Secretary, do you have time for one
more question from the last Member? If it is a rather brief
question, the last Member has a quick question for you.
Mr. Bryson. OK, yes, we can do one more.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Your staff is indicating they will drive
quicker to the airport. So the Chair recognizes Ms. Blackburn
for her question.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
And, Mr. Secretary, you have been patient with us today and
we are appreciative of that. And I know that Congressman
Dingell asked you a little bit about information technology. In
my district in Tennessee we have got a lot of performers, as
well as having a lot of small business manufacturers who
purchase information technology in order to try to get a
competitive edge. And then it turns around that they are
competing with companies in China or Russia or somewhere that
have stolen that information technology. And what I want to
know from you is what can you do and can the Federal Government
do anything about the competitive harms that are caused by the
theft of that information technology that drives the
efficiencies and also about other U.S. intellectual property
that is stolen? And specifically, are you going to put any
strong IP protections in trade agreements like the Trans-
Pacific Partnership?
Mr. Bryson. So the short answer is intellectual property
that we do not get compensated for that is taken in other
countries and there is no compensation and no recognition of
where that initially came from is flat out a loss to the people
in our country who deserve the right to be compensated for what
they provide, and with that, those people would only make
better products rather than not getting the compensation they
should have. So that is our responsibility at the Commerce
Department to see to it that those obligations are honored, and
then when it is not done, that we file these mini-proceedings
against them that I have described earlier to see to it that it
is done. And that is a nonstop job at the Commerce Department.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. And then, are you going to insert
stronger IP protections with trade agreements like the Trans-
Pacific?
Mr. Bryson. Yes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you. Yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentlelady.
And Mr. Secretary, you have been very gracious with your
time. We appreciate you being with us today. We all look
forward to working with you in the future on these issues that
we all care about so deeply. And together let us just make
printing help wanted signs a booming business in America.
Again, thank you for your time. We wish you safe travels.
Mr. Bryson. Could I put one thing on the record that I have
just been asked to be sure that I----
Mrs. Bono Mack. Sure.
Mr. Bryson [continuing]. Have left some confusion possibly
with regard to this question that I had about the manipulation
of currency in China and what I repeatedly answered is that is
the U.S. Treasury's role. But what I don't want to let not
stand is that we believe that China absolutely must allow its
currency to appreciate. That is critical. And thank you very
much. I apologize for putting this last word in.
Mrs. Bono Mack. That is OK. I appreciate your clarification
there. And again, safe travels to and from California and thank
you for your time. And at this time, we are going to take a
very brief recess as we seat the second panel.
Mr. Bryson. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mrs. Bono Mack. --to begin with our second panel. Joining
us today are Dr. Robert Atkinson, President of Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation; Alfonso Lubrano,
President of Materion Technical Materials, Inc., and Vice
Chairman of National Association of Manufacturers Small and
Medium Manufacturers; Craig Giffi, Vice Chairman and U.S.
Leader, Consumer and Industrial Products at Deloitte; and Dr.
Kenneth Tindall, Senior Vice President, Science and Business
Development from North Carolina Biotechnology Center.
Good afternoon. Thank you all for being with us here today
in front of our subcommittee. You will each be recognized for 5
minutes. To keep track of time, please watch the timers in
front of you. When it turns yellow, you have a minute to wrap
up. And if you can, please make sure to turn your microphone on
and bring it close to your mouth. The audience at home needs to
hear you and only they can if you are speaking clearly into the
microphones.
Dr. Atkinson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF ROBERT D. ATKINSON, PRESIDENT, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION FOUNDATION; AL LUBRANO, PRESIDENT,
MATERION TECHNICAL MATERIALS, ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF MANUFACTURERS; CRAIG A. GIFFI, VICE CHAIRMAN AND
U.S. CONSUMER AND INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS PRACTICE LEADER, DELOITTE
LLP; AND KEN TINDALL, VICE PRESIDENT OF SCIENCE AND BUSINESS
DEVELOPMENT, NORTH CAROLINA BIOTECHNOLOGY CENTER

STATEMENT OF ROBERT D. ATKINSON

Mr. Atkinson. Thank you, Madam Chairman and members of the
committee. It is a pleasure to be here.
ITIF has been doing a fair amount of research on what has
actually happened to the U.S. manufacturing economy and we will
be releasing a report shortly on what do we need to do to fix
it. As we have shown in our work, we lost a larger share of our
manufacturing jobs in the last decade than we did in the Great
Depression. The consensus among most economists is that this is
a reflection of superior performance, that all of these jobs
were lost due to high productivity, and our analysis suggests
that is only partially true. Some of those jobs were due to
high productivity. As companies get more efficient, they don't
have to hire as many workers, which is good for the economy.
But we argue that at least 2/3 of those jobs were lost due to
the fact that U.S. companies were not able to be competitive in
global marketplaces. And my testimony goes into more detail on
that.
But just one I think important point there, 13 of 19
manufacturing sectors actually are producing less today than
they were in 2000 in real, inflation-adjusted terms. This is
unprecedented in American history. That has never happened
before. Every decade before this, we have had expansion of
manufacturing. We argue that when measured properly, U.S.
manufacturing output declined 11 percent in the last decade in
inflation-adjusted terms. And one indicator of that is when you
look at the amount of capital investment that manufacturers
make. The Bureau of Economic Analysis measures this. They
measure what is called capital stock, which is the amount of
machines, the amount of computers, everything that manufactures
have. And in most decades since 1940 to the present, capital
stock is growing about 30 percent a decade, sometimes 50
percent a decade. In this last decade, it grew 1.2 percent.
So we think there is a big challenge. We think that we have
to respond to that challenge. And so what should Congress do? I
think there are a number of areas that are important. Actually,
let me just mention I don't want to sound overly pessimistic. I
think we have big challenges but there are certainly some
trends in the right direction. We heard earlier in the hearing
about natural gas and the reduction of input costs to certain
industries like chemicals. That is an important new benefit
that the U.S. economy didn't have 5 to 10 years ago. Certainly,
some costs are going up in countries like China. Many companies
now are taking a new look at offshore and using full cost
calculus. So there are some good things happening, but I still
think we can't just rely on that. We have got to get new policy
changes.
What are some of those? Let me just say three major ones.
One is on the tax side. We have the dubious honor now as of
April 1 to have the highest corporate tax rate in the world and
that is also close to on the effective rate. So we have a high
statutory rate but a knot of studies have shown we have a high
effective rate as well. So we have got to something on the
corporate tax side that doesn't just re-jigger the deductions
and the incentives and leaves the effective rate the same. We
have got to focus on reducing the effective rate I would argue.
But as I have argued before, we also should do that in a
way that keeps key incentives that are critical to
manufacturers. One of those is MACRS or Modified Accelerated
Cost Recovery System, which is essentially being able to write
off equipment sooner than you would otherwise. That is a
critical incentive. The R&D tax credit and Section 199,
Domestic Production Deduction, those are all very critical tax
incentives that help U.S. manufacturers become more
competitive.
I think one other area we need to focus on is I would argue
we should be focusing on a new kind of regulatory review so
that major regulations have to go through essentially a
competitiveness screen. There are certainly needed regulations,
but when you are focusing on impacts of sectors that are
globally traded, we need to look at that more carefully because
those could have much bigger impacts than say on sectors that
don't face global competition.
Having said that, though, I think it is not enough just to
focus on cost reduction. Cost reduction is important, but the
Germans, their wages are 45 percent higher than ours, so we
also have to get better, not just cheaper. One key area is
trade. A number of people have talked about that. Our view is
that there is rampant what we would call innovation
mercantilism going on in countries like China, Brazil, India,
Russia, and we simply have to get a lot tougher. And that is
not about being protectionist. That is about defending
globalized trade. It is about defending the free trade system,
which they are systemically violating. And I give the
administration credit there, but I do think we need to do a lot
more.
Last point is technology. I don't think we can win this
without doing all three things. We have to have the tax system,
the trade system, but I do argue we have to have a technology
system. And I give the administration credit and others here
who have supported things like the MEP program and this new
national institute, NNMI, National Network of Manufacturing
Institutes. Many of our major competitors have these kinds of
industry-university cooperative partnerships that help develop
advanced technology and get it out to companies. I think we
could do a better job there as well.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Atkinson follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.027

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Atkinson.
Mr. Lubrano, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF AL LUBRANO

Mr. Lubrano. Thank you very much, Chairman Mack, and thank
you to the members of the subcommittee in allowing me this
opportunity to testify on behalf of the National Association of
Manufacturers.
I would like to start off by saying this is an extremely
exciting time for our country and for manufacturing. I am
president of Materion Technical Materials in Lincoln, Rhode
Island. We are a subsidiary of Materion Corporation, which is
headquartered in Mayfield Heights, Ohio. We have offices
throughout North America, Europe, and Asia, and we serve
customers in more than 50 countries.
Materion Technical Materials is the world's leading
resource for engineered specialty strip products and offers a
wide range of products and expertise in numerous markets,
including automotive and consumer electronics. I have been
leading the company since 1992. It is my privilege to serve on
NAM's board of directors. As vice chair of the small to medium-
sized business group, manufacturing group, and on the board in
general, I also serve as chairman of the Rhode Island
Manufacturers Association and on ITAC 11 here in Washington.
I would just like to make a quick statement about what
creates jobs. And a critical component for sustained economic
recovery is job growth. With 95 percent of the potential
consumers out of the United States, manufacturers everywhere
have to compete globally. The way jobs are created is we go out
and we have to compete for that global business. If we are
competitive, we book the business. If we book the business, we
have to make things. If we make things, we hire people. Very
simple. Manufacturers have been proud to be leading the
Nation's economic recovery with increased productivity, renewed
investment, employment, export, and innovation. As we have
heard many times today, we are the top manufacturing economy in
the world, accounting for 21 percent of global manufacturing.
Nonetheless, we remain extremely concerned about the
challenges facing us in the United States. It is 20 percent
more expensive to manufacture product here. If you look at that
20 percent and add China's currency manipulation, we come out
of the box at a 60 percent--in some cases--disadvantage, not to
mention the trade barriers they are putting up. As president of
a small business, I deal directly with these costs on a daily
basis. I have an email on my laptop about a new opportunity in
China. Their trade barriers are quite likely going to prevent
me from getting that opportunity. It is for a small company
called Apple. That is two to five jobs right there I am not
going to be able to get potentially. So the situation on a
global basis and the uncertainty, really, really hurts our
ability to create jobs.
We created roughly 150,000 jobs in manufacturing in the
last 4 months. If you look at the multiplier, which has been
estimated to be anywhere from two to four, you could be talking
about 600,000 jobs. In order for us to continue to drive and
create these jobs in this country, we need Congress to help us
get more competitive. It is all about global competition. There
are four goals that NAM has put together for economic growth. I
would defer you to read those goals. I am trying to move as
quickly as I can to get through everything here. But the United
States needs access to global markets to enable us to get and
reach 95 percent of these consumers who live outside our
borders. To do that, we need effective tax policy, energy
policy. We need to stop these insane regulations.
And let me just make a quick point about the environment. I
have children. I have grandchildren. I want them to breathe
clean air. Overregulating is going to hurt the global
environment. How is that going to happen? We are driving
business out of this country into other countries that are not
as careful with the environment as we are. So in theory,
overregulation is going to backfire and hurt the global
economy.
Lowering the tax rate is important. The Ex-Im Bank is
another important parameter that we need. We need FTAs. I want
to make a quick statement about FTAs. The FTAs we have in place
actually have trade surpluses. As a matter of fact, over the
past 4 years where we have FTAs in place we have a cumulative
trade surplus of $120 billion. That equates directly to jobs.
We need jobs for that sustained economy. I have talked about
that early on.
Workforce development, I have three technology jobs I can't
fill right now. If you multiply that by all other kinds of
small companies, we could be talking 600,000 to a million and a
half jobs unfilled because of workforce.
I know I am out of time. I just want to end with this is a
time of great optimism for manufacturing in the United States.
We ask for your help. Help us get more competitive. Please, I
am begging you. We can do it. We can get those jobs back here.
We can make this economy rock but we need your help. We can't
do it without your help.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lubrano follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.040

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Lubrano.
Mr. Giffi, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CRAIG A. GIFFI

Mr. Giffi. Good afternoon, Chairwoman Bono Mack and members
of the subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me to testify this
afternoon. The work of this committee and your leadership to
help bolster U.S. manufacturing competitiveness is essential to
this country and well appreciated.
For the past several years, Deloitte has had the privilege
of working in collaboration with the World Economic Forum, the
U.S. Council on Competitiveness, and the Manufacturing
Institute to better understand the capabilities necessary to
drive superior manufacturing competitiveness. Deloitte and the
Manufacturing Institute have conducted a national survey of the
American public annually for the past 3 years.
The results indicate that Americans remain steadfast in
their commitment to creating a strong, healthy, globally
competitive manufacturing sector in the United States. The most
recent survey of Americans reveals that 85 percent believe that
the manufacturing sector is very important to our standard of
living. Asked how they would prefer to create 1,000 new jobs in
their communities with any new business facility, Americans
indicated that they wanted those jobs to be in the
manufacturing sector more so than any other industry choice.
As part of our work with the World Economic Forum on their
Future of Manufacturing Project, we uncovered compelling
research from the Harvard Kennedy School and the MIT Media Lab,
which indicates that the advancement of manufacturing
capabilities is directly linked to a nation's economic
prosperity, and importantly, to the prosperity of its middle
class. This research also indicates that the capabilities of a
nation's manufacturing sector is the best predictor of economic
growth and prosperity for a nation over the long-term. It shows
that the more advanced the products are that a nation can make
and trade and the more advanced the manufacturing capabilities
it possesses, the greater the prosperity.
Finally, the research suggests that a great competition is
underway between most nations for the benefits that their
citizens can derive from a vibrant manufacturing sector. And
this competition is showing an increasing emphasis on advanced
manufacturing capabilities and products.
In a parallel effort, in collaboration with the U.S.
Council on Competitiveness, Deloitte conducts a survey of CEOs
at manufacturing organizations around the world to gain their
perspective on the drivers of competitiveness, as well as their
view of the relative ranking of nations in terms of
competitiveness.
In addition, we conducted a series of one-on-one interviews
on behalf of the Council with CEOs, labor union leaders,
university presidents, and the directors of some of America's
national laboratories over the past 18 months. Many of the
leaders participating in those interviews describe the critical
relationship between manufacturing and innovation in an
ecosystem that extends to include community colleges,
universities, national laboratories, and the private and public
sectors, and they refuted any notion that America can maintain
its competitive advantage in research and scientific discovery
over the long run without also maintaining strong capabilities
in manufacturing. They must go hand-in-hand.
Not surprisingly, all of these participants identified
talent-driven innovation as the key driver of a country's
competitiveness while also noting the growing skills gap in
America as one of the most concerning challenges affecting the
U.S. According to a recent survey of U.S. manufacturers
conducted by Deloitte and the Manufacturing Institute, 67
percent of executives reported moderate to severe shortages of
qualified workers for open positions translating into more than
600,000 available jobs that can't be filled today simply
because employers can't find workers with the skills they need.
America's ``secret sauce'' for success must lie in a
workforce where, at all levels, it is equipped with the
science, technology, and math backgrounds necessary to compete
with the very best and the creativity and leadership to be
solution pacesetters for the world.
A common theme across all of this research, the Council's
Ignite series of recommendations to policymakers from U.S.
business leaders, university presidents, national laboratory
leaders, and labor union leaders, the input from the American
public in our Unwavering Commitment Report, or the perspectives
on the future of manufacturing from our work with the World
Economic Forum is that the U.S. needs a comprehensive
competitiveness strategy for the 21st century. And we will need
an effective public-private collaboration resulting in the
United States being consistently recognized as the leader in
workforce talent, in innovation, energy availability and cost,
and in business climate. Actions that facilitate that
collaboration across all the stakeholders will enable the U.S.
to drive high-value job creation and economic prosperity for
generations to come.
Thank you for this opportunity. I look forward to
addressing your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Giffi follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.045

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Giffi.
And Mr. Tindall, 5 minutes is your time.

STATEMENT OF KEN TINDALL

Mr. Tindall. Good afternoon, Madam Chairman, members of the
committee. Thank you for the invitation to share my experience
at your hearing today.
My answer to your question, ``Can American Manufacturing
Thrive Again?'' is a strong yes. Let me explain. My
organization, the North Carolina Biotechnology Center was
mentioned in Congressman Butterfield's opening remarks. We are
a state-funded nonprofit that works to create an environment
conducive to innovation, company creation, recruitment, and
growth resulting in biotech jobs.
Critical to the biotechnology industry is biomanufacturing.
These factories make some of our most advanced therapies and
the handling is specialized. Process technicians may have
associate's or bachelor's degrees. Engineers develop new
processes and maintain the plants in virtually all of these
facilities, employ individuals with varying education levels
from certificate to Ph.D. These are great jobs. Salaries begin
around $30,000 for a high school graduate with some additional
training and go on to top six figures. The average salary for
all biotech jobs in North Carolina is more than $75,000,
approximately twice that of our private sector.
So how did North Carolina create these jobs? As
biotechnology was being developed some 40 years ago, North
Carolina's economy revolved around tobacco, textiles, and
furniture, industries in decline. In 1984, the North Carolina
Biotechnology Center was created to support biotechnology
research, business, and education across the State for long-
term economic development.
North Carolina has taken a consistent and systematic
approach to biotech job creation. We fund researchers to
develop ideas with commercial application, we help spin ideas
out of universities, and we work with partners, notably the
North Carolina community college system, public and private
universities, and industry. Today, some 58,000 people work at
about 500 North Carolina biotech companies. Of these, 18 to
20,000 work in manufacturing. In addition, the State's
biomanufacturing companies showed modest growth since 2002 and
are projecting 6.2 percent annual growth between 2011 and 2014.
To meet the growing workforce demands, the State
established a sector-specific training consortium in 2006. This
partnership, called NCBioimpact combines the resources of North
Carolina's university and community college systems with
industry expertise to form a unique academic industry and
government collaborative. The practical impact is that multiple
companies have located their biomanufacturing facilities in the
State, at least in part because of the comprehensive training
capabilities of the NCBioimpact partnership. Across the board,
site managers from companies like Novartis, Merck, Biogenetic,
and others are able to fill almost every entry-level vacancy
from within North Carolina.
Finally, how does North Carolina's challenge from the early
1980s reflect the challenge the United States faces today?
First, we need a strong pipeline of products in order to
increase manufacturing jobs. Second, training programs must
produce workers who are job-ready day one. Third, we must
recognize that other countries are beginning to affect our
competitiveness in this sector.
Increasing manufacturing jobs requires a culture of
innovation. Quite simply, more ideas in the pipeline provide
more chances for a product to be developed to a point of
manufacture. Certainly, this concept holds true for biotech
products but also can be applied to many of the new knowledge-
based industries that will require advanced manufacturing to
develop and produce new products for their industries.
Second, these biomanufacturing jobs require a different
skill set than the assembly line jobs created at the turn of
the previous century. In North Carolina, our training programs
work to complement one another and stay in sync with industry
needs, but success in these jobs also requires strong STEM
education as early as possible.
Third, the competition and pressures for this industry are
global. In North Carolina, one biotech job yields 4.6 total
jobs according to the Patel Institute. Everyone wants these
high-impact jobs, and it is not just other U.S. States in
competition for these jobs. Increasingly, all of our States are
competing against a growing international contingent of
biotechnology clusters.
In summary, Madam Chairman, I believe manufacturing can
thrive and continue to create jobs in the U.S. The
infrastructure that supports these high-tech manufacturing
centers lies in our education system and our capacity to
innovate and develop new products, not just biotech products
but products from new and emerging high-tech industries as
well. Strengthening math and science education, linking
workforce training programs with industry, and consistently
supporting innovation will continue to improve the environment
necessary for the creation and manufacture of specialized
biotechnology and other technology-based products here in the
U.S.
Thank you, Madam Chairman and committee members, for the
opportunity to speak with you today. I am happy to answer
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tindall follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.051

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Tindall. I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes of questions. And I would like to start
with Mr. Giffi, but I am going to open this question up to
anybody on the panel.
I believe that the people who are most hardest hit by the
economic downturn right now are women in the workforce. There
is no question that they are being hit the hardest. But I have
also met a bunch of women who are now in manufacturing and they
are very enthusiastic; they are optimistic. And I understand
that you have done a study on women in manufacturing, Mr.
Giffi, and I was wondering if you could share some of your
information or your thoughts specifically about women in
manufacturing.
Mr. Giffi. Well, women in manufacturing represent an
incredible talent source that, unfortunately, American
manufacturers have inadequately tapped into thus far. American
manufacturers are pursuing the best talent in the world and
they are pressed to fill their job openings, they are pressed
to fill their management ranks with outstanding talent.
Unfortunately, today's education system, counseling
approaches often result in women not pursuing careers in both
science, technology, math, engineering degrees that are
necessary, technical degrees that are necessary and often opt
out of a potential career in manufacturing much earlier in
their life than would be necessary. This results in
manufacturers unfortunately not getting access to that
incredible talent and workforce.
And I think more can be done, more will be done to both
encourage women in our primary and secondary schools and our
universities to pursue the careers that can lead to a very
productive career in manufacturing and contributions to this
country. It would also help U.S. manufacturers solve one of
their largest issues, which is getting enough talent into their
organizations to drive their competitive capabilities.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you.
Does anybody else care to comment specifically on women in
manufacturing? Mr. Lubrano?
Mr. Lubrano. Yes, I would agree with that. I think the
problem is not that there aren't women in manufacturing,
especially high-technology manufacturing. I think the problem
is we can't find anybody with the backgrounds and technology
expertise that we need. I think there would be absolutely no
hesitation on hiring women if we could find qualified women to
come into the company.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. It seems to me the manufacturers
I have met, the women are entrepreneurial and they are
recognizing their opportunities there and they are bringing
their own great ideas into the sector. So if nobody else cares
to comment on that, I will move to Dr. Atkinson.
You state that the country can restore its manufacturing
competitiveness if we adopted the right set of policies in the
tax, trade, talent, and technology arenas. Why do you believe
the changes you suggest to these policies will restore our
competitiveness? Have they been proven elsewhere?
Mr. Atkinson. Well, I think they have. If you look at the
change in real manufacturing output as a share of GDP, the
worst four countries in the world are United States, Spain,
Italy, and Great Britain. Spain and Italy we all know about
having real serious problems now and Great Britain has had I
think very serious problems. There are lots of countries that
are high-wage countries that have not lost manufacturing.
Sweden, for example, Germany, a number of other countries have
actually been able to perform quite well. And many of those
countries have taken all four of those steps. The overall tax
rate in the non-U.S. OECD now is 10 percentage points lower
than the United States.
And these countries have put in place very high R&D tax
credits. You look at a country like France, for example, where
their research and development tax credit now is six times more
generous than the U.S. credit. So they have put in place these
kinds of incentives.
A program that we are big fans of--or country I should say
is Germany. They have really been able to get high value added,
high-tech manufacturing, compete against the Chinese and there
are a number of different reasons. But two of them, they have a
great apprenticeship program. They take workers and they train
them in partnership with colleges, community colleges,
institutes, and companies. And the second is they have a
wonderful system of what are called Fraunhofer Institutes.
These are 59 centers that are cofounded 2/3 by industry and 1/3
by the government located at or near universities that work
with, particularly, middle-sized companies like the kind of
company Mr. Lubrano is with. And those have had success as
well. So I think when you look at all of those factors
together, high-wage countries can be successful.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. Mr. Lubrano, you testify in
support of trade agreements because we carried trade surpluses
with the countries where we have trade agreements in place. Why
do we have a trade surplus in manufactured goods with those
countries?
Mr. Lubrano. Why do we?
Mrs. Bono Mack. Yes.
Mr. Lubrano. We would have those trade surpluses in areas
where were primarily technology-driven. Basically, what has
kept our company surviving and competitive in places is the
intellectual property we have and the technology we have. We
are doing things today with materials, for example, the hard
drive industry that 2 or 3 years ago were considered
impossible. We have gotten completely out of the box, broken
the box, and are doing things with metals, plating technology,
process technologies that 3 years ago people would say you
can't do that, including a lot of products now for storage,
lithium ion, hybrid batteries for automobiles, developed a new
material system that is patented. So intellectual property, as
you have heard before, is a huge driver that gets us to those
surpluses.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. I agree with you on that point.
And now my time is expired so I recognize Mr. Sarbanes for 5
minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. I thank you, Madam Chair.
I was looking at these reports. We got a bunch of these
reports here on the U.S. Manufacturing Competitiveness
Initiative. So there was one from CEOs, there was another one
from labor, there was a third, and I was looking at some of the
recommendations that were included. The one from the CEOs
optimistically says that they conveyed an opinion overall that
U.S. had the resources, capabilities, and will to be the most
competitive manufacturing nation in the world in the 21st
century, given a new approach to setting public policy.
And then what I found interesting is the first
recommendation here or the first principle from the CEOs was
policymakers should strive considerably less to create a
single, specific, concrete industrial policy for the future of
U.S. manufacturing and instead seek to develop achievable
goals, et cetera, et cetera. And then I was looking at the one
from labor and their first recommendation on developing U.S.
manufacturing strategy was to form a council on manufacturing
policy to lead the development of a U.S. manufacturing strategy
to construct a dialogue between management, labor, educators,
and policymakers, and so forth.
So I wondered if anyone who wants to could just comment on
whether there is tension there in terms of whether we should
really set a focused strategy and policy on U.S. manufacturing
and have real structure to that over time, or whether we
should, as this other report said, strive considerably less to
create a single, specific, concrete industrial policy for the
future of U.S. manufacturing? We could go down the line if you
want. Mr. Atkinson?
Mr. Atkinson. I think it is very dangerous to have a policy
here without a real coherent strategy. And the word industrial
policy has largely been given a bad name. Whatever you want to
call it, if we don't have a coherent strategy--and we can't
just rely on sort of expecting companies to do the right thing
just leaving them alone.
One important reason, by the way, there is a skill shortage
right now that everybody talks about and companies complain
about a skill shortage it is because companies themselves are
investing half in training their workers than they did a decade
ago, investing half. So when you are investing half in training
your workers, you are going to end up with a skill shortage. So
I think the real challenge here is we need to form real public-
private partnerships and form a national industrial strategy.
And that will clearly include things, if you will, from both
sides of the aisle. It has to include regulatory issues, it has
to include tax issues, but it has to include real strategy
about technology areas that we think we could be successful in,
about how we are going to reorganize our workforce system and
other things like that.
Mr. Lubrano. Yes, I don't think what you mentioned, any of
those things are mutually exclusive. I think the game has
changed and what is needed is a partnership if you will between
government, labor, and manufacturing and the management of the
manufacturing companies. 2009 was probably the toughest year of
my career and I have been doing this for about 40 years now.
You are supposed to say I don't look it, but in any case, the
cooperation with our labor force, our ability to move people
around, the understanding from all sides about how important it
was that we get through this thing together and the government
help.
I will give you an example. Rhode Island has a work share
program, so we took all the resources we had and all the
cooperation we could get, government, management, employees to
get through that period. And we did. A lot of companies didn't.
But I think that is the kind of thing we are looking for going
forward. So I don't see any of those things you mentioned in
that report as mutually exclusive.
Mr. Giffi. Congressman, I was actually fortunate enough to
do all of those interviews and benefitted from being able to
have those conversations with those CEOs, those labor leaders,
university presidents, and lab leaders. I think they very much
believe that the United States needs to come up with a
comprehensive strategy. Collectively, I think they believe that
industrial policy--because it has a fairly bad reputation and
the notion of picking winners and losers on a regular basis
through government policy actions--is not something that they
believe makes sense. But creating a broad strategy that has
tenets under it that allow American businesses to be most
competitive on the global stage and creates a business climate
that creates jobs, they were very much in agreement on.
Mr. Sarbanes. Maybe we can come back on a second.
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. The Chair now recognizes Ms.
Blackburn for her questions.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Madam Chairman. And thank you to
each of you. As you can hear the bells, we have got votes so we
are going to do this quickly.
I am just going to give each of you a question that I would
like to hear from you on. You can submit it in writing because
I know Mr. Cassidy, we want to get his questions in before we
leave.
But we have talked about competitiveness, we have talked
about information technology, and Mr. Lubrano, you just touched
on that a little bit also. And what I would like to know from
each of you is, number one, when you look at that bottom line--
and as you have said, you have had some tough years and we are
learning to do things differently in our U.S. manufacturing
base. When you look at your efficiencies, what percentage of
your profit are you attributing to the use of new information
technologies?
And then secondly, as we look at spectrum--and of course we
are trying to get more spectrum auctioned so that you can use
more of these technologies--how important is it to you to have
more spectrum available for use of these new technologies in
the marketplace?
And I will yield back my time so that Mr. Cassidy can
answer and you all can respond to me in writing. But thank you
again for your participation with us.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. To clarify, the gentlelady is
only asking for responses in writing.
OK. So I will recognize Dr. Cassidy now for his 5 minutes
and again recognize we are crunched for time.
Mr. Cassidy. You all give me the hook when we got to get
there, OK? I am used to women telling me what to do.
So to whoever feels most qualified, I am struck again as
you heard in my previous questioning how natural gas and
domestic oil and gas has, from everything I have read,
contributed greatly to lowering input cost and otherwise
improving the robustness of our manufacturing, if you will,
directly contributing to tens of thousands of manufacturing
jobs. Now, the President almost demagogues the issues--I hate
to say that--because he continues to suggest that we can
replace that sort of energy with what he calls renewables and
not have a downside.
Now, let me just give some statistics that we pulled up
from the Energy Institute, that the Federal electric subsidies
per unit of production in 2000 $10 per megawatt hour, for
natural gas is 64 cents, for nuclear is $3.14, and for solar is
$776 per megawatt hour. Now, this to me is laughable to think
that if your input cost is based upon something which has to be
subsidized at $776 per megawatt hour that you can have the same
sort of robust expansion of manufacturing in energy-intensive
enterprises that we are currently having now.
Gentlemen, would you all challenge that? Would you agree
with that? What comments would you make?
Mr. Lubrano. I would agree with you. Energy, as you know,
manufacturers use about 1/3 of the energy produced in this
country. In our manufacturing in particular we use natural gas
and electricity to a very large extent because we have to
process metal and then yield the metal and it is critical to
our process. We need a comprehensive energy strategy which
includes oil, gas, coal, and you can throw in some of the
others, solar, wind power. But most of the----
Mr. Cassidy. But unless that solar was subsidized, I
presume you would not be able to afford to use it?
Mr. Lubrano. We would not be able to afford it.
Mr. Cassidy. So unless the taxpayer is willing to throw his
or her money on the table, then frankly, the input cost would
be way too high?
Mr. Lubrano. The input cost would be way too high. If we
had to pay that, we would be less competitive and there would
be less jobs.
Mr. Cassidy. So we are trying to pick ourselves up by the
bootstraps if you will, taxing ourselves to subsidize it so
that you can use it at an affordable cost?
Mr. Lubrano. Well, I think that is a bad idea. I think what
we need to do is develop what we have. I would like to see the
XL pipeline. That is critical. I would like to see more
development of natural gas through----
Mr. Cassidy. Now, let me cut you off just because again I
am about to get the hook. I heard an energy analyst tell me
recently that the direct--in fact, maybe the Pricewaterhouse or
another thing--that the low cost of natural gas may increase
our GDP by 1.1 percent in 2013, which is really quite
remarkable.
Mr. Lubrano. That is an increase of GDP.
Mr. Cassidy. Increase our GDP.
Mr. Lubrano. Yes.
Mr. Cassidy. Do you all agree with that?
Mr. Lubrano. I would agree with that, absolutely.
Mr. Cassidy. Well, I think we need to go. Thank you all
very much. I have more to ask but we are obviously hurried.
Thank you all.
Mr. Lubrano. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman. I apologize that our
time is so short today. I think we have squeezed a lot of
terrific information in between the series of votes. And I
would clearly like to thank our distinguished panel. It has
been a great discussion about the future of manufacturing in
America.
Clearly, more and more companies are beginning to rethink
their strategies and business plans for the coming years, and I
sincerely hope that our subcommittee, working closely together,
can give them a reason to make ``Made in America'' matter
again.
I ask unanimous consent to include in the record of the
hearing four reports published by Mr. Giffi's firm on various
aspects of manufacturing to which he had referred in his
testimony.
[The information is available at http://www.compete.org/
images/uploads/File/PDF%20Files/Ignite_1-
0_FINAL_02.14_.11_.pdf, http://www.compete.org/images/uploads/
File/PDF%20Files/Ignite_2.0_.pdf, http://www.compete.org/
images/uploads/File/PDF%20Files/Ignite_3.0_FINAL_.pdf, and
http://www.themanufacturinginstitute.org//media/
A07730B2A798437D98501E798C2E13AA.ashx]
Mrs. Bono Mack. I remind Members that they have 10 business
days to submit questions for the record, and I ask the
witnesses to please respond promptly to any questions they
receive. And with that, the hearing is now adjourned.
Thank you, gentlemen.
[Whereupon, at 1:05 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81915.095


