- WHERE THE JOBS ARE: THERE'S AN APP FOR THAT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

WHERE THE JOBS ARE: THERE'S AN APP FOR THAT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 12, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-174

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
85-134                    WASHINGTON : 2014
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JIM MATHESON, Utah
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JOHN BARROW, Georgia
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade

MARY BONO MACK, California
Chairman
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       JIM MATHESON, Utah
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio)
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Mary Bono Mack, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     7
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................    12

Witnesses

Peter Farago, Vice President, Marketing, Flurry, Inc.............    13
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Stephanie Hay, Co-Founder, Fast Customer, and Resident Mentor,
500 Startups...................................................    32
Prepared statement...........................................    34
Rey Ramsey, President and Chief Executive Officer, TechNet.......    39
Prepared statement...........................................    41
Morgan Reed, Executive Director, Association for Competitive
Technology.....................................................    48
Prepared statement...........................................    50

WHERE THE JOBS ARE: THERE'S AN APP FOR THAT

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 12, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:50 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bono Mack
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Bono Mack, Blackburn,
Stearns, Bass, Harper, Cassidy, Guthrie, Kinzinger, Upton (ex
officio), Markey, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Paige Anderson, Commerce, Manufacturing, and
Trade Coordinator; Charlotte Baker, Press Secretary; Matt
Bravo, Professional Staff Member; Kirby Howard, Legislative
Clerk; Brian McCullough, Senior Professional Staff Member,
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Gib Mullan, Chief Counsel,
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Andrew Powaleny, Deputy
Press Secretary; Shannon Weinberg Taylor, Counsel, Commerce,
Manufacturing, and Trade; Michelle Ash, Democratic Chief
Counsel; Felipe Mendoza, Democratic Senior Counsel; and Will
Wallace, Democratic Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARY BONO MACK, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mrs. Bono Mack. Good morning.
One of the most promising areas of the U.S. economy
involves the development, marketing and sale of mobile and
online applications, commonly known as apps. Today we are going
to take a close look at how the apps economy is shaping our
future as individuals as well as a nation, and the Chair now
recognizes herself for an opening statement.
When it comes to mobile application software, I'm reminded
of the hit song by country star Loretta Lynn: ``We've come a
long way, baby.'' From the 1970s ``cave age'' concept of
conducting banking or paying your utility bill by telephone,
mobile apps have exploded in number and in sophistication.
Today, there are apps to lose weight, quit smoking, examine
your stock portfolio, review restaurants, watch videos, check
up-to-date scores of your favorite sports team, witness
breaking-news events worldwide, post on Facebook, Tweet to the
world in 140-character bursts, and on and on.
According to a recent New York Times article, there were
nearly 8,000 mobile apps in 2008. Today, there are more than
1.3 million, and they are multiplying rapidly. Consider this:
it is estimated that nearly 100 movies and about 250 books get
released worldwide every week. That compares to nearly 15,000
apps.
The health industry is a good example of this astonishing
growth. The Baltimore Sun recently reported that there are now
more than 40,000 mobile health apps contributing to an $800
million global business. And experts say we are only beginning
to scratch the surface of a brand-new industry.
Apps, of course, are software programs, small in size, that
users load onto their mobile devices or use layered on top of a
platform such as Facebook. But times have changed in a hurry,
thanks to increasingly more powerful mobile devices and higher
quality networks. Today, apps are purchased typically through
an app store associated with a particular platform. The main
platforms in today's app economy are Apple iOS, Google Android,
RIM Blackberry, Microsoft Windows, Amazon Kindle and Facebook.
Approximately one-third of all apps are created by
individuals or businesses with fewer than five employees. But
both blue chip companies and traditional brick-and-mortar
stores now have an app presence as well, developed either in-
house or outsourced to a contractor. App developers range in
size from one-person shops to large developers such as Zynga,
with nearly 3,000 employees.
The revenues generated by apps include the purchase of the
app, in-app purchases like game credits, in-app advertising,
and app-enabled commerce, such as the purchase of goods and
services through an app. As a result, a new term, the ``apps
economy'', encompassing all such commercial activity, has now
become a part of mainstream America.
Apple first launched the iPhone in 2007 and followed with
the introduction of its App Store in 2008, which opened with
500 available apps. Four years later, Apple says its stores
offer an astonishing 600,000 apps. And according to its Web
site, Google's Play store offers a similar number.
Today, an estimated 90 million U.S. consumers spend
approximately 60 minutes per day accessing the Internet on
their smartphones, while another 24 million U.S. consumers
spend 75 minutes a day accessing the Internet on their tablets,
much of this access being gained through the use of mobile
apps.
And if you think all of that sounds pretty impressive,
well, consider this. Last Christmas, on December 24 and
December 25, consumers downloaded a staggering 392 million
apps. So as smartphone and tablet ownership continue to rapidly
expand, current projections indicate the app economy will soon
become a $100-billion-a-year business.
In addition to the explosive growth of the apps economy in
the United States, the outlook for apps as an export looks
bright as well. More than 20 percent of all apps downloaded in
China last year were created by U.S. developers.
Clearly, this tremendous innovation offers high hopes for
our economy. According to a study commissioned by TechNet about
a year ago, there were over 44,000 app-related positions open
in the United States at the time. And here's another
interesting finding of that survey: researchers found that app
jobs, while located in predictable places like New York and
Silicon Valley, are actually dispersed throughout the country
with an estimated two-thirds of all app-related employment
falling outside of New York or California.
So with that as a background, I am very anxious to hear
from today's panel. What have been the keys to the explosive
growth and job creation in the mobile app economy? Are there
Federal policies that present a roadblock to the sector's
growth and ability to create jobs? Are there policies the
Federal Government should consider to foster further growth and
job creation? And what is the outlook for both the immediate
and long-term future?
And while we are on the subject of roadblocks, we should
remember how critically important wireless spectrum is in
driving innovation in the mobile app sector. Mobile is the
fastest area of broadband connectivity, and Congress must
continue to explore ways to free up additional spectrum. I
commend Chairman Walden for the important work he has already
done on this issue, and I look forward to his spectrum hearing
tomorrow.
As for today's hearing, it could not be more appropriately
entitled: ``Where the Jobs Are: There's an App for that.''
Because increasingly through American innovation and ingenuity
we are rapidly becoming a world where there is literally an app
for everything.

[The prepared statement of Mrs. Bono Mack follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.003

Mrs. Bono Mack. And with that, I now recognize my good
friend and my colleague from Los Angeles, Beverly Hills area--
what is your name? Mr. Waxman--just kidding--for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Madam Chair. There is an app to give
you my name and the description of the cities that I represent.
I want to thank you for holding this hearing.
As we in Congress look for ways to accelerate job growth,
it is essential to highlight growth industries and examine what
makes them successful contributors to the national economic
recovery.
Although they barely existed 5 years ago, mobile apps have
emerged as a particularly innovative part of the information
technology sector in the United States and they now play a
major role in American life. More than half of Americans with
cell phones own a smartphone, giving them the advanced
capabilities necessary to download and utilize some of the
several hundred thousand apps that exist for work, education,
organization, e-commerce and entertainment. These apps produce
many benefits, like making us more productive by being able to
edit documents on the run, keeping us in contact with friends
and family through social media, or even allowing us to carry
around a whole library of good books on a single device. Mobile
apps also can have life-saving functions, particularly in the
area of health IT, where there exist apps that help individuals
check their blood pressure and/or their glucose levels.
One notable benefit of the booming mobile apps industry is
its impact on employment. A February study commissioned by
TechNet estimated that mobile app development supported 460,000
jobs nationwide, including computer and mathematical jobs in
tech companies, non-tech jobs in the same companies, and jobs
created outside the tech industry through spillover effects.
These jobs have been critical to our home State of
California, which has over 20 percent of the total jobs
estimated by the TechNet study. I am pleased to see that mobile
apps jobs are quite geographically dispersed, with benefits for
many States and regions.
With smartphone adoption expected to keep rising both here
and abroad, U.S. app developers have the opportunity to
continue to grow, and continued growth in the mobile app sector
should lead to more jobs.
This hearing can help us understand what is needed to
ensure this continued growth. But one step is essential: we
must continue to emphasize technical and foreign-language
education so that existing and future companies in this sector
have the personnel needed to be successful.
A recent study concludes that emerging markets like Brazil,
Russia, India and China will drive demand for the next 10
million apps. Our app developers need to be able to develop
products for these markets. At the same time, it is important
to remember that although the app economy is a bright spot, our
goal as policymakers must be enduring prosperity across all
economic sectors. We must promote growth that restores middle-
class security and improves economic mobility for the poor.
While we in Congress work to control the Federal deficit, we
also must continue to make targeted investments in education,
innovation and infrastructure that can benefit all sectors of
the economy.
On a day when Apple is announcing its new iPhone and
Samsung is getting the benefit of the spillover from its legal
victory and more people are looking to see what is going to be
available for Christmas shopping, it is appropriate that today
is the day we are holding this hearing, and I thank you, Madam
Chair, for convening the hearing. Thank you so much.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Waxman, and I will look for
the ``Where's Waxman'' app later today in the App Store.
The Chair now recognizes----
Mr. Waxman. It is close to ``Where is Waldo.''
Mrs. Bono Mack. I set you up good for that one.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Upton for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you.
You know, there are not a lot of bright spots perhaps in
our overall economy, but one of the brightest is the birth and
the growth of the app marketplace. It is one of the most
exciting areas of technology with tremendous growth in recent
years, growth that experts agree we can continue to see.
It is hard to imagine life before the iPhone appeared 5
years ago, or the iPad which debuted just 2 years ago. Now
these devices and the apps we use are an essential part of our
lives for sure. The Apple store launched with only 500 apps in
2008 but now offers over 600,000, while the Android store
offers over 600,000 apps as well. That is growth of 240,000
percent, and folks continue to buy these apps in staggering
numbers. According to one industry group, there were more than
11 billion downloads of mobile apps in 2010 with projections
that downloads are going to grow to nearly 77 billion worth $35
billion by 2014.
What is more exciting than the explosive proliferation of
these apps are the jobs that are being created. Everyone from
large companies to small businesses, to the stay-at-home mom
are developing these apps and generating income. Furthermore,
the wealth being generated by apps isn't locked into one or two
particular geographic areas. The highest concentrations of app
developers are in California and New York, but there is an app
developer in nearly every town in between with approximately
two-thirds of app-related employment falling outside of those
two regions. So if you have the talent and you have a computer,
you can develop an app and compete in the marketplace.
Without a doubt, this is an area of exceptional promise,
but it is not without fragility. Innovation and job creation
can be as easily stifled by regulations in this field as any
other, if not more so. So it is in that vein that I look
forward to hearing from our witnesses today. Are there any
policies you would like Congress to consider? Are there any
policies currently in place or under consideration that are
stumbling blocks to further growth and innovation? How can we
as policymakers maintain an environment that fosters the
innovation, creativity, growth and economic success that this
sector currently enjoys?
So I look forward to your testimony, and I yield the
balance of my time to Marsha Blackburn.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.005

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. I thank the chairman for that, and Madam
Chairman, I thank you for the hearing today. I think this is
absolutely so timely and is an area where there is agreement,
and I am pleased that we are putting some focus on this.
I think that from what you have heard today, you all know
and we know that the growth of the apps economy, if you will,
is truly dependent on free enterprise, the private sector. It
is looking for that individual initiative for how you solve a
problem, whether it is the Where's Waxman? app or the What's
New for Christmas app that he may want to pull down and see
what he can find for Christmas. The thing is, this entire
economy was not born at the altar of big government. It was
borne out by individuals that have a great idea and are looking
for a way to pull that through to the marketplace.
Now, what we do have to realize that in order to have a
productive apps economy, we have got to have spectrum and be
able to launch these applications whether they are for consumer
shopping or for consumer health or safety, any number of
things. This entire marketplace is young, it is revolutionary,
it is disruptive to traditional business processes, and I think
it is very exciting.
So thank you all for being with us. Madam Chairman, thank
you for turning our attention to the issue. Yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentlelady, and the Chair now
turns our attention to the panel. We have one panel of
witnesses joining us for today's hearing. Included on the panel
are Peter Farago, Vice President of Marketing at Flurry, Inc.;
Stephanie Hay, Co-Founder of Fast Customer, and Resident
Mentor, 500 Startups; Rey Ramsey, President and CEO of TechNet;
and Morgan Reed, Executive Director of the Association for
Competitive Technology.
Each of our witnesses has prepared an opening statement.
They will be placed in the record. Each of them will have 5
minutes to summarize their statement in their remarks.
So good morning, and thank you all very much for coming and
for being here. To help you keep track of time, if you are not
familiar with it already, there should be a timing clock on the
table. When the light turns yellow, you will have 1 minute to
come to a conclusion--or behind us. Thank you for pointing that
out. So all you have to do is make sure that you push the
``on'' button on your microphone before you start to make sure
the audience at home can hear you as well.
So with that, Mr. Farago, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF PETER FARAGO, VICE PRESIDENT, MARKETING, FLURRY,
INC.; STEPHANIE HAY, CO-FOUNDER, FAST CUSTOMER, AND RESIDENT
MENTOR, 500 STARTUPS; REY RAMSEY, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, TECHNET; AND MORGAN REED, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
ASSOCIATION FOR COMPETITIVE TECHNOLOGY

STATEMENT OF PETER FARAGO

Mr. Farago. Thank you, and good morning.
Chairwoman Bono Mack, Ranking Member Butterfield and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you this morning. My name is Peter
Farago and I am the head of marketing for Flurry, a high-tech
startup based in Silicon Valley, specifically San Francisco.
In 2007, when I joined the company, I was its eighth
employee. We now have over 100 employees in multiple offices.
Flurry helps mobile developers build, measure, advertise and
monetize their applications in the new app economy. One way to
think of us is that we don't make the apps that everyone uses;
we help make the apps that everyone uses better.
Flurry has over 75,000 customers, most of which are
entrepreneurs and startups. Because of that broad customer base
and the over 200,000 apps using our services, Flurry has unique
insight into the state of the current app economy as well as
where it is headed.
While my written report provides numerous trends and
insights about the app economy, I would like to highlight three
of them. First, we are moving faster than any industry ever
before; second, there are real opportunities for job growth;
and third, the United States has significant opportunities to
increase exports.
The new app economy represents the greatest, fastest
adoption of any new consumer technology in the history of
mankind. Smart devices are being adopted 10 times faster than
the PC revolution of the 1980s, two times faster than the
Internet boom of the 1990s, and three times faster than the
most recent social network phenomenon. This rate of adoption
outpaces that of all other notable technologies any of us can
think of including electricity, radio, television, VCRs,
microwaves, cell phones, dishwashers and even stoves. And
Flurry estimates that the world is only about a quarter of the
way into the adoption cycle of this new consumer technology.
Our study found that 60 percent of app startups have the
majority of their employees in the United States, and a recent
Kaufman study concluded that the main driver of all new jobs
comes from startups in their first year. There is unprecedented
opportunity for America to capitalize on exploding
international markets. The United States has 315 million active
wireless devices of which 170 million are smart devices.
However, the last year, while the United States has added 30
million smart devices, China has added 100 million. From our
study, 70 percent of all companies surveyed already generate
some revenue outside the United States and 94 percent strongly
agree that the app economy will be increasingly international.
So how do we turn these trends into opportunities? To
capitalize on these trends, Flurry believes the ecosystem needs
robust infrastructure, access to an educated technology
workforce, and maintained low barriers to entry. Of these, I
would like to highlight access to talent.
At Flurry, we literally cannot find the talent we need fast
enough to fill all the open positions we have. While we have
100 employees now, we have 50 open positions. Additionally, our
survey shows that our customers share our pain. Only 24 percent
of respondents believe that their company can recruit enough
skilled software developers. Eighty-four percent of respondents
strongly agree that their company's success is dependent on
software development talent. Unless we solve this problem,
America will not be positioned to fully capitalize on this
unique moment in time.
We in the tech industry as well as policymakers need to
work hard to find creative solutions to fully realize the
potential we have before us. This should include partnering to
ensure better university education, better professional
retraining, continuing education and easing the ability to
bring and keep international talent in the United States. At
Flurry, we look forward to continuing to play our role in
making applications even better, help our customers grow their
businesses, and provide the consumer with the best possible
experience.
I thank you for your time, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Farago follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.022

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much.
Ms. Hay, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEPHANIE HAY

Ms. Hay. Thank you. Thank you for having me here. Good
morning.
My name is Stephanie Hay and I have been an enthusiastic
leader in the tech community since moving to Alexandria from
Ohio nearly 10 years ago. In 2003, while working in
communications at George Mason University, I began building Web
sites and creating templates to simplify how 30 departments
managed their content online. Imagine being able to publish
content on the Internet instantaneously from anywhere. The
speed and flexibility had me hooked. I left Mason for World
Championship Sports Network where I got my first taste of
startup life which included 2 a.m. working sessions from my
couch, coordinating with remote teams in Manhattan and Los
Angeles, changing priorities fast.
In 2010, after several years in project management at
agencies, I started my own consultancy. I also became more
involved locally, taking board positions at the Art Directors
Club, speaking at DC Tech and RefreshDC, and co-organizing the
DC Lean Startup Circle, which today includes 1,200
entrepreneurs.
In short, tech is my livelihood job and I have created jobs
because of it too. For example, in 2010 alone, my first year in
business, I hired five people as subcontractors. I co-launched
Workspace Design Magazine. This monthly online publication is
about the evolution of work and it now employs three people. I
also founded NovaCowork, a group of nearly 150 entrepreneurs
who meet each Wednesday at Iota Cafe in Clarendon where
companies have been launched, jobs created and partnerships are
formed. You are welcome to attend.
In fact, the startup I co-founded in 2011, Fast Customer,
came from one of those meet-ups. Paul Singh, Aaron Dragushan
and I built a mobile app that with a single tap connects you
directly with a human in customer service at more than 3,000
companies. We are using mobile technology to change customer
service calls for the better, and we have hired eight people to
help us.
When we decided to raise money, 500 Startups, an
accelerator and fund in Silicon Valley, led our seed round. I
am now a resident mentor there as well, coaching startups on
everything from positioning to pitching. I mention 500 Startups
because it is deploying smaller sums of cash faster and it is
actively working to involve more women, two characteristics
that are atypical within the traditional venture capital world.
Plus nearly a third of its portfolio includes women-led
startups, three of the six partners at 500 are women, and they
launched a campaign in July to bring more women into the angel
investing community through coaching and educational programs.
These organizations like 500 Startups are committed to
taking on this challenge of supporting female founders with
useful apps and that I can be a part of influencing that future
is invigorating. Plus with more women like Facebook Sheryl
Sandberg and Yahoo's new CEO Marissa Mayer leading the way, I
further my own resolve to catapult other smart women into
decision-making positions within tech.
Of course, I am here today because I believe you can help
too. Earlier this year, I spoke with Jennifer Boss, a tech-
savvy woman whose job with the DC Mayor's office is to identify
new innovations fit for public-sector applications. Fast
Customer is a DC-founded company that already connects callers
to agencies such as the IRS, which generates thousands of calls
annually. Surely we could not only help agencies better connect
with their people but politicians with their constituents.
Again, the possibilities are endless. However, we, like
Instagram, which just sold for $1 billion, operate without a
dedicated enterprise sales staff so after a few promising
conversations about how we could modify Fast Customer for real-
world pilots in the public sector, we were then placed into the
standard procurement process required of any vendor who wants
to do business with the government. This was startling because
they had approached us yet we and they were hampered by
procurement rules that couldn't accommodate new products like
ours. We couldn't demo an out-of-the-box product with clear
public-sector features because it didn't exist so we were
forced to end discussions.
The contrasting reality is that we already were in talks
with telecom giants in the public sector including Verizon,
Comcast and Telstra. These companies recognized that innovation
and agile process in which we mobile startups work, which meant
we could continue building, learning and iterating at the speed
of mobile, the speed of our world today. That we might expand
internationally before we could meet rigid expectations in our
own backyard is discouraging but we believe there are massive
opportunities to be realized if government removes barriers
that hinder our tech companies and brilliant people from
engaging with the public sector.
What can we do together to find compromise and more quickly
bring tech innovations into our government? Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hay follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.027

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much, Ms. Hay.
Mr. Ramsey, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF REY RAMSEY

Mr. Ramsey. Thank you very much. Madam Chairwoman and the
committee, I applaud you for having this session and it is very
important.
My name is Rey Ramsey. I am the CEO of TechNet. I
appreciate you all mentioning the study that we put out last
year. That study has sparked a lot of conversation looking at
the amount of jobs. I mean, the headline from that study is
that almost 500,000 jobs have been created since 2007. And so
what I want to do is, since my testimony has already been
submitted, I just want to talk to you about a few things that I
think are really important and highlight those issues.
We have gotten to this place, which is a pretty good place
for the country to have this number of jobs and growing. We
have gotten here because it has been a wonderful confluence of
several things happening. One, you have the technology itself,
much of which has been proudly invented in the United States.
You also have this consumer demand for ease of transaction
where consumers in so many different ways are saying make this
easy for me and meet me where I am, this sort of mobile
sensitivity. We now have 50 percent of all the phones are
smartphones. That is up from 17 percent just a few years ago,
so explosive growth. And so with this confluence and with
entrepreneurs like Ms. Hay and others that are out there
inventing and looking for economic activity, we have got
several great benefits: jobs at the top of the list, economic
activity. But when you look at all the advantages, you step
back and you say there are two things from a policy perspective
we need to focus on. One is, how do we continue to maximize
what is happening, how do we continue to take advantage of
this, are there things that policymakers can do. And then with
your other set of eyes, take a look at, are there any threats
to this, and you say to yourself, what do we need to do to
mitigate potential threats, and I just want to comment on a few
things.
One is, and I think the way to look at this from my
perspective is from a policy perspective, there are two things.
One would be focus on the necessary infrastructure to keep this
going and then the second issue I would say is an issue of
access. So I just reduce it to that. If I am in an elevator
with you, I would say it is infrastructure and it is access.
Under infrastructure--and you have heard part of it--and it
all revolves around capital. You have human capital, which you
heard earlier, which is the workforce issue. One of the things
that will impede the growth even in the apps economy--because
people tend to think of the apps economy as only the little
guys, the small companies. Well, they have a need for workforce
but so do large companies as well. So we are in a human-capital
crunch being able to get the kind of workforce that we need and
that is a string policies all the way from our school systems
all the way through to college, how many engineers, how many
systems programmers and even some of our targeted training
programs. So I think it creates an opportunity to take a look
at that human-capital ecosystem and say how is it working for
this, how are we utilizing community colleges, are there
training programs that could be targeted. Look at existing
agencies and ask ourselves whether it is the SBA and others,
have they caught up with the apps economy and then ask the
fundamental question: if there is an entrepreneur out there and
she is sitting at home and she is thinking I can get into this
too, and that is one of the beauties of this, where could she
go in our communities or in our society to get in the game, and
that gets to the access issue.
There are segments of the population that could join this
job explosion, create additional income for their homes and for
their families if they knew about what existed or if we had
programs that were targeted to get to them. We still need to
see more women participating in this workforce and in these
opportunities, so that is just a question of outreach.
Back to the issue of infrastructure, without getting into
all the details, Congresswoman Blackburn started off by saying
``spectrum.'' That is crucial. Broadband, crucial. We still
have too many rural areas of the country where people aren't
able to take advantage because they don't have the broadband
connections, the issue of broadband adoption. So there are some
infrastructure issues that from a policy perspective we need to
make sure are in place along with workforce issues. There are
some other issues like previously and other sorts of things.
Just making sure that when we look at any of these policies
that we look at them through the prism of will this continue
this movement toward job creation and economic activity or will
there be unintended consequences.
The last thing I will say is, what is exciting about this
app economy is that it is not only having great benefits in the
commercial sector, it is having terrific benefits from a social
innovation perspective where it is helping with health care,
issues like diabetes and people's drug regimens and other
things like that. So it is a double win for society.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ramsey follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.034

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Ramsey.
And Mr. Reed, welcome back to the subcommittee. It is nice
to have you back. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MORGAN REED

Mr. Reed. Thank you, and I have to say before I even get to
my time which is that don't steal all our people for your big
companies. Us small folks still need employees. We have to be
able to compete.
Chairman Bono Mack, Ranking Member Butterfield,
distinguished members of the committee, my name is Morgan Reed
and I am the Executive Director of the Association for
Competitive Technology, a trade association representing over
5,000 app makers from around the world. Our members are on the
forefront of the most exciting tech sectors to emerge in a
generation. You may have already heard these numbers but they
bear repeating. We are a $20 billion industry today that didn't
exist 4 years ago, and analysts expect us to hit $100 billion
by 2015.
Now, we all know about the rise of smartphones, and I have
already seen several of you checking your email, and we know
about reading maps and looking at sharing photos and managing
everyday activities through wireless devices. But what we are
seeing now is an apps economy that is moving beyond games and
consumer tools to become a critical part of enterprise, health
and financial services.
In order to provide the committee with new insights, we
conducted a study we called Apps Across America in preparation
for the hearing, and I thank several of you for quoting us on
some of the numbers that we have gotten out of here, but to
focus on a couple, we all know that small businesses are the
engine of job creation occupying over 70 percent of the top-
selling apps, and we found this is even more pronounced in
highly innovative activities where large revenue sources are
available. This is a phenomenon happening outside of Silicon
Valley, and with all due respect to California, I love the fact
that we have got developers in Louisiana, in Mississippi, in
Michigan, and I like the fact that we are seeing the spread
move around.
In your briefing folder, you will find a set of baseball
cards that we created to underscore this point. There is one
for every district represented, and I couldn't find any of that
horrible gum we all had as kids, but I tried. You know, Marsha
Blackburn was here, and I want to focus on the way that these
folks are looking at it. You know, from her district, we have a
true MVP. They have had over 30 million downloads on apps that
they have created. This company in her district, Mercury
Intermedia, huge success. This is a MVP, a perennial all-star.
In New Hampshire, we have Police Pad. Zco is building an
enterprise app that puts iPads in police cars and replaces all
of those laptops that you see in cars--better battery life,
more efficient, all sorts of new sensors, great tool. These
guys are definitely an all-star. In Bono Mack's district, we
have got a rookie card, and with Apps 111, this is a company
that I am looking forward to becoming more successful. And just
like any rookie card, I don't just want the card to become
successful, I want the business to become successful. I would
love for members to be able to trade that card. I remember when
they started. Now they are 100,000 people or there are 50,000
people. So when you look at this deck of cards in front of you,
this is your MVPs, this is your starting lineup of your small
business community today.
Now, we all now about Apple's innovation and the ubiquity
of Android but, you know, it is worth mentioning that it is not
just those two. BlackBerry is the go-to platform for security-
focused customers and earns more frankly for our developers per
app than any other platform, and of course, just last week
Microsoft and Nokia kind of upped the game, unveiling the Lumia
920, which featured wireless charging, which I am so happy for,
and of course had near field communications so that you can
actually purchase goods and services directly from your phone
without having to pull out your credit card at all. And of
course, today after this hearing, we will see what Apple does
to up the game again. They have got Passbook on there that
allows mobile payments to pay for coffee at Starbucks, but what
I love is it features an app that allows you to check in at the
airport directly built into a secure feature on the phone.
So what is next? Mobile health care apps are going to
change the way doctors interact with patients. Companies like
AirStrip have built an app that allows doctors to monitor fetal
heart rates in women in labor directly on their iPad.
Enterprise will use phones and tablets at every level. Aegis
Software has built an app that allows them to monitor an entire
factory floor directly from the iPad.
And I brought this. This is July's Fortune magazine cover,
and it has declared the death of cash. Well, you would say, how
is that possible? But PayPal, Intuit and Square have turned a
mobile phone or an iPad into a point of sale and a cash
register. See those little things on the top? Swipe your card
and away you go. That is your cash register.
You know, in the movie Princess Bride, the protagonist
famously responded to the word ``inconceivable'' with the
retort ``You keep using that word. I do not think it means what
you think it means.'' But for the future of the apps economy,
``inconceivable'' is the most appropriate word. Industry and
government cannot yet conceive of the ways that apps will
become part of our lives. From basic consumer uses to health,
travel, education and even talking to one another, our app
economy built by small businesses seeing and meeting a specific
need has endless and inconceivable possibilities. We hope to
keep creating never before conceived of products and we hope
the government can be a partner where needed, take advantage of
products where they help service the public, and take a light-
touch approach everywhere else.
Thank you for your interest, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Reed follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 85134.045

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much to the panel, and the
Chair will now recognize herself for the 5 minutes for
questions, and I will also point out to anybody standing that
there are plenty of seats available. If they say ``reserved''
they were reserved for you, so welcome.
I just wanted to start with something kind of shameless,
and that is showing everybody this amazing photograph of my
grandson, Little Sonny, and the only reason I am doing this is,
I was babysitting him a few nights ago and he decided to have a
crying fit, so I did anything any good grandmother would do is,
I went right to the App Store and downloaded a baby soother. It
didn't really work, but my point was that we are becoming
habituated. You have a problem; you go to the App Store and you
find a solution to any problem you might have.
Now, not unique to babysitting, you know, guys should baby-
sit their grandbabies too, but I am going to start with you,
Ms. Hay. What is the key to getting more women involved in this
area of tech?
Ms. Hay. I think it is outreach. I think most women I have
met have almost always had another woman or a man mentor them,
myself included, bringing them into the tech scene. There are a
lot of women in tech groups in DC I know of. It is a matter of
that sort of grassroots effort on the ground and at the same
time making some programs that help to educate women on the
opportunities that exist out there for them in tech. There is a
general, I think, fear that women have that it is almost a
badge of honor that men wear in Silicon Valley that they are
going to be an entrepreneur, and if they fail, that is OK, and
women generally tend to be more conservative. They take a more
strategic approach to ensuring that they are building a
business that is going to last and it is going to be fruitful.
So I think, you know, balancing the programs that are available
to them so that they can move a little more quickly and
comfortably into the tech space I think would be a great step
in the right direction.
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. Thank you. Others have testified
that apps jobs do not require being located in specific
geographic locations and in fact are being created all across
the United States. This is again to you, Ms. Hay. Do you see
any future risk to the ability of app developers not located in
the major cities producing apps because they are not part of a
technology cluster?
Ms. Hay. I don't, no. In fact, Fast Customer, we have an
entirely distributed team so I have a developer in Reston and
then we have staff in Florida, Arizona, Hawaii and one right
now walking around Cambodia somewhere. So for us to be
successful, I think, in the mobile economy because of its speed
requires a smart team, requires resources, doesn't require a
specific geographic location, and it doesn't mean that we don't
get together as we do in fact every quarter some amount of time
to get together because, you know, getting together in person,
great ideas can happen in a way that is more organic than what
you can accomplish on line but that is also not a prerequisite
to success.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you.
Mr. Farago, a number of observes have compared the growth
of the app field to the tech bubble of the 1990s. Would you
agree with that, and do we face a danger of a burst here, and
if so, are there any steps the industry or policymakers should
take to avoid that?
Mr. Farago. Yes, we talked about this a bit. We don't feel
there is a direct comparison to the Internet era and that we
don't face a bubble for several reasons. I would say first if
you think about the amount of broadband-connected consumers at
that time, there were about, I believe, 30 million. Now there
is over 1 billion, so we have a totally different size market,
to begin with. Secondly, you know, in that era, the real way to
make money was to collect a bunch of eyeballs and then hope
that advertising revenue would follow. In this era, advertising
really hasn't kicked in as a revenue model and we are already
seeing, you know, by our estimations, app developers last year
made about $5 billion worldwide directly to them, 80 percent of
which was made from what we call premium sales selling an app,
you pay $2 before you get it, or in-app purchase or
microtransaction, you buy add-on content afterward. This year
we are forecasting developers directly will make about $10
billion, double that again around 80 percent or plus.
Advertising will take off and add a layer and so that will
certainly help.
Also, if you compare the economic climates, you know,
really, arguably, the app economy was built--you know, flowers
have bloomed on top of the rubble of the largest worldwide
financial collapse any of us can remember, and whereas, you
know, it was pretty much the go-go time in the 1990s where
there was a lot of venture capital flowing. So you have almost
what has been proven to be a really recession-proof business
model to begin with, or economy, really.
And finally, customers are able to pay and not just willing
to pay, they have demonstrated they can. Every one of these
devices has a credit card or gift card associated with it on
average whereas, you know, back in the Internet days, you know,
products, you know, all the services people assumed would be
free and there wasn't that kind of payment-enabled market.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, and my time is expired so the
Chair now recognizes Mr. Harper for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to each
of you folks for taking time out of your busy schedule to be
here, and Mr. Reed, thank you for pointing out the cards,
particularly Mississippi State University athletics. I don't
think you had time in your testimony to say anything about
State beating Auburn 28-10 Saturday, but perhaps we can cover
that. Perhaps we can find some statistics on the game on that
app.
I also want to say, Ms. Hay, thank you for the work you are
doing. I have a 20-year-old daughter. I have made it a point to
make sure that she has opportunities to meet with successful
women. It helps her in that regard and so thank you for that
effort. I think that you may be getting a call from her some
time in the future when she is visiting.
I do want to talk to you if I can for just a second, Mr.
Farago, if I may. You said in your testimony, you mentioned the
recent survey that was done by Flurry which found that 71
percent of the companies polled agreed with the statement that
they needed more employees with technical training, and I
wanted to bring to your attention the work that Mississippi
State University has been doing in the app field. Over the past
several years, Dr. Rodney Pearson, who is a professor at
Mississippi State in the Department of Management and
Information Systems, I know he has worked diligently to develop
courses in programming as well as business and entrepreneurial
classes to prepare students for a job in the app sector or at
least for an interest in the app field. Dr. Pearson and
Mississippi State have been seen by many as a business and app
incubator. So a few questions I have. One, is Mississippi State
a special case or do you see many other universities offering
similar courses at this time?
Mr. Farago. Well, you know, I don't have specific anecdotes
about other universities but those kinds of innovative programs
are exactly what we need. I think it is a supply-and-demand
issue. I think that, you know, mostly when you grow up in the
United States, you think about being a doctor or a lawyer, you
know, maybe go to business but the technology field, growing
the awareness of technology, encouraging those to get involved,
K-12, making sure the foundation of fundamentals is there
enables, I think, you know, great programs like the one Dr.
Pearson is leading at Mississippi State to be possible. By the
time that student comes to that university, they can and will
be able to take advantage of, you know, what is a great,
lucrative job field.
Mr. Harper. How do you see this playing into the future
growth of the app sector, this being offered in this university
and perhaps others? Where do you see that taking the future,
meeting those needs that you see in the app sector?
Mr. Farago. Yes, if I understand your question correctly,
you know, I see it inside the United States as enabling a
concept we call stake shoring. You know, it was mentioned that
California and New York are the two main hubs for technology
innovation and clustering of technology workforce talent. At
the same time, I believe the median house costs about half a
million dollars in each of those markets. You know, much like
you have a match program for folks coming out of medical
universities to go to all kinds of places around the United
States to offer the same level of care, I think that the
concept of stake shoring can really help, and as universities
look to become more competitive in the education market, a lot
of universities like Mississippi State can and should invest in
the kinds of programs to attract that talent, and that will
keep more talent in the local economy and allow that
entrepreneurship to basically spread across the United States.
Mr. Harper. How do we encourage other universities to be
involved in this field and to move in that direction?
Mr. Farago. You know, I think there is probably a couple
ways. I mean, I think education of educators is a good start. I
mean, I think a hearing such as this one, sharing those
statistics, the educational field from my experience is pretty
connected as a cohort, as a group. I think that government
could definitely help with maybe partnering with the private
sector, for example, and there could be matching programs to
create more endowments and, you know, education, you know,
basically paying for a student's education. You could
creatively after the fact help--you know, if you have a company
that is investing in an area local to a university and they
have a partnership with that university, for example, you know,
there could be some sort of increased modest taxation of that
developer's salary to pay back, you know, what was a gift
basically for the cost of education and so on. There are a
number of ways I think those who have skin in the game, private
sector and university, can get together and figure those things
out.
Mr. Harper. I want to thank each of you for being here.
With that, I yield back, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much, and the Chair
recognizes Dr. Cassidy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cassidy. I had a really nice conversation yesterday
with a couple of app developers from my own State, and just a
couple things that I would like your perspective on, not that
there will be necessarily be an answer, but clearly we are
coming to you for your perspective, which is key. One of the
things we have had several hearings on is privacy. They kind of
alerted me to the fact that is really an issue: who owns the
data? If I put a picture up, do I own the picture or does the
app developer or does the server? Who owns the data? So any
thoughts on the privacy? Because, again, when I get a 50-page
document and I click ``I agree'' at the very bottom, I have not
read those 50 pages, I have just clicked ``I agree'' and I
almost think that might be a strategy by the attorneys to get
me to agree; they just overwhelm me. Once I actually read it,
and it was so redundant, some of the pages were literally cut
and pasted multiple times and we are thinking this is just a
strategy to overwhelm me, and it frankly works all the time.
So that said, what are your thoughts as to who should own
that data? How personalized should we allow it be? Because that
is something that we have pursued in this committee, that
discussion.
Mr. Morgan. Well, I think it is kind of two questions in
one. You have a question of who owns what, and that is an
important question. We have always in this country had a kind
of a pretty straightforward attitude towards information that I
willingly provide. If you think of this way, if you had a 13-
year-old daughter and she walks into Forever 21, or I guess I
should say 16-year-old daughter walking into Forever 21 and
they get her information and her email address to send her
information, it had nothing to do with online, it didn't have
anything to do with a mobile app, but Forever 21 now has
information. They have the store that she bought at, what she
purchased, her email address, and Forever 21 considers that
part of their information, and again, she didn't read through a
50-page click memo or anything, she just signed up right there
in the store. So we have had a pretty good tradition in this
country of allowing folks to enter into those kinds of
agreements freely because they benefit from it.
So you have that question of, you know, who owns the data
and how do they collect it, but I think the other side is, what
we are focusing on is, how do we do a good job of being
transparent, which you pointed out wasn't done well in the
example you cited. A 50-page document is not transparent. So
what we are working with developers on, and in fact this
Friday, I will be speaking to an audience of about 500
developers at Mo Def Tablet here on the East Coast and I will
be talking about ways to increase transparency to build better
trust. So on the trust aspect, we need to do a better job. We
are working on it, and in fact, we are participating with the
White House as part of the NTIA multi-stakeholder process to
find best practices and common ground between the entire
stakeholder community to find ways to take a small device and
present a 50-page chunk of information in a way that is
absorbable, understandable and usable by consumers. And I think
once we get there, we will be able to help your person who
commented about 50 pages have a better sense of what is
happening and be more comfortable with it.
Mr. Ramsey. I would like to comment on that. Obviously, it
is a complex issue and, you know, as my colleague here, Mr.
Reed, said, you know, you have got the transparency issue and
you have got the consent issue, and they are interwoven. What
is important while we are trying to sort through how to get to
a common understanding of consent and transparency is to keep a
few things in mind that we need to do along the way. One is, we
need to make sure that everybody understands what the business
models are and how these business models rely on certain data.
They are not mutually exclusive, but we need to understand that
because there are unintended consequences. So all this growth
that we are describing, whether it is small businesses or
larger businesses, are all part of this ecosystem of mobility,
and that is really what the issue is. I mean, we are having
this conversation about apps but it is really all about the
mobile revolution, and apps are a part of the mobile
revolution.
The other issue would be, we have got to do more to have
citizens understand, consumers understand not only what their
rights are but what their responsibilities are and that they
are leaving behind a digital footprint all the way from----
Mr. Cassidy. So you are suggesting that indeed the
developer or the server does own the data. If there is a
digital footprint, you are suggesting that footprint is no
longer mine?
Mr. Ramsey. It is data that exists, and the question is
where that data will reside, so I am not using the word
``ownership.'' It is about where the data resides.
Mr. Cassidy. So that picture that she just showed us, could
that be used by the person where she stores it as a Gerber baby
commercial without her permission? Do you follow what I am
saying? So is that picture of her grandchild--by the way, she
is the best-looking grandmother I have ever seen. With that
said, that picture of her grandchild, could that in turn--do
her daughter and son-in-law or whatever, or does the person on
whom it is stored get to sell it to Gerber as the next image?
Mr. Ramsey. I can't comment on whether or not they are
going to sell her--the Congresswoman owns her picture. The
question is where that resides, and it resides in multiple
places so it is not a question of who owns it, it is more about
what the data is being used for and understanding for the
Congresswoman in this example what does she know, which means,
you know, in favor of her knowing what the basis of the bargain
is, and that is the transparency that I am talking about, what
her rights and responsibilities are. That is what I am trying
to sort out. It is not about that another company would own the
picture.
Mr. Cassidy. I am still not sure that we know that the
company could not use that picture, but I am way out of time,
and I had another question but I will yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. We will do a second round after we go
through everybody the first time, and thank you very much for
the questions, and the Chair recognizes Mr. Kinzinger for 5
minutes.
Mr. Kinzinger. Well, thank you, Madam Chair, and I thank
you all for coming out. I think this is a very important issue
we are discussing.
You know, one of the concerns as we have seen apps develop,
we obviously see and many of you have testified that it is
really going to be generating GDP growth. It is kind of the
next generation of where we are seeing a lot of jobs come in. I
have a lot of cool apps on my phone that I use for a lot of
various things, and you know, if you ever find yourself with
the need for any kind of data or any kind of organizational
tool, you will find it on your phone somewhere. Somebody has
created it. So I think it is an outstanding obviously driver of
the future.
First question to Ms. Hay. What areS the chief barriers as
you look at the environment out there? What would you say is
the chief barrier for somebody who wants to develop an app to
enter or to expand their business and what do you hear from
some of these entrepreneurs as far as what are their
frustrations, where are their concerns, what is their wish list
for the future of this?
Ms. Hay. Well, I think it depends on the scope of the kind
of project they want to work on, so in talking to some app
developers who are prototyping a small idea to really solve a
very niche problem, there are relatively few barriers. Being
able to ask Google the right question to get the answers is
really the barrier. But I think for the larger companies that
are trying to solve more widespread educational, health care
types of problems where there are embedded relationships with
big guys like Google, Microsoft, I think the barrier to entry
is having the skill set in the case I was talking about with
Fast Customer, having the skill set to be able to have the--
build the relationship, be able to survive long enough, a long
enough financial runway to be able to develop those
relationships over time and really be able to influence change.
So I think that that barrier is a much more social, even
economic one than technical for sure.
Mr. Kinzinger. I guess I will ask the rest of you maybe the
same question to see if you are all in agreement or if any of
you have an idea in mind of saying hey, here is how we make it
easier without, you know, I guess the wild West of it. Mr.
Ramsey, do you have any input on that question about any
barriers that exist?
Mr. Ramsey. Yes, Mr. Congressman, I think, you know, as was
mentioned earlier, you think of the barriers sort of fall into
their demographics, geographic demographics, demographics based
on gender, demographics based on race, and so what we have to
do from a policy perspective is make information more available
so that there are women, minorities and others who but for not
knowing what is available to them could be in business. And so
one of the things is just making information available. If
there are programs like the Congressman from Mississippi was
saying at the college, we need from an access perspective to
make sure that women would know about that program. And so what
I find, and I have done work in inner cities and other places
where people just don't know about what is out there. And then
I think the second thing is just making sure the basic
infrastructure is in place so when we look at the broadband
maps, you can't do this if you don't have the right access. You
can't do this if spectrum is an issue, you know, in your area.
So from a broad policy perspective, you have big infrastructure
issues to make sure in place, and then from an access outreach,
a big part of that is comfort and information, having people
feel comfortable.
Mr. Kinzinger. So if you had your wish list, it would be
marrying the ability to get to the Internet with the skill set
to do what is important to present this app of course with the
folks who may have the idea. So somebody that may not have
access to spectrum may have a great idea and they have no idea
how to get that out of their head into action.
Mr. Ramsey. That is exactly right, and this just mirrors
what happens in the offline world when someone is just sort of
living their life, they view an opportunity and they go, oh,
well, there is a need here, I am going to open up a laundromat,
oh, there is a need here, I am going to----
Mr. Kinzinger. And how do I get there.
Mr. Ramsey. And so it is how do you get there, and a lot of
people are still learning that there is not the barrier to
entry that there might have otherwise been and so this access
to information is really important.
Mr. Kinzinger. And I just have 40 seconds left. I want to
ask Mr. Reed and Mr. Farago if you guys have input on that as
well.
Mr. Reed. Well, I want to follow up with what Rey said, and
I think there are some characteristics. I want to look a little
further into the future. Spectrum is a huge part of it. If I
can't get my app into an enterprise--and I want to remind you
that I think the big areas--we are moving away from 99-cent
apps into where we are talking about critical applications for
business, for health, for financial services. So the problem
is, if I don't have the infrastructure, I can't get in there.
The second thing is, if I'm new in mobile health, I need to
make sure that the FDA moves quickly and that they do a fast
approval process. And finally, as I look down the roadmap, I
need to make sure that when I get my app into the marketplace,
that it doesn't get stolen. So we have all those issues, and
those are places where the government can play a role.
Mr. Kinzinger. Mr. Farago, did you have anything to add?
Just a handful of seconds.
Mr. Farago. Yes. I mean, I think the issues we see are
probably more business-oriented. Smaller companies don't have
the resources. That is why I think there is a lot of third-
party service providers like ours who can basically put a small
company on equal footing with a much larger company that has
resources. So many of the services will basically augment the
developer's activity. They can focus on creating great content.
But there is a significant problem on the larger side of
the spectrum with big companies where they don't think mobile
first. They are not as nimble and fast as companies. They are
kind of suffering from what we call the innovator's dilemma,
and they don't, you know, sort of appreciate all the
possibilities. So companies on average that do better in the
mobile ecosystem are doing a better, smarter job of leveraging
what is on the phone. Open Table restaurant reservation uses
location to immediately give you a reservation, for example, in
the area you are now, and it is companies who think like that
who are doing better.
Mr. Kinzinger. Well, thank you, and I am over my time and I
appreciate it and yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Mr. Guthrie
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Thank you for
being here today. I was at another meeting on spectrum, so I am
sorry I missed some of the testimony but something important to
what you guys are talking about today as well. And I know in
the written testimony, Mr. Ramsey, and I will open this to
everybody, you used the term ``freedom to innovate,'' and so I
guess my question would be, what restrictions are--we need to
maintain the freedom to innovate or you are going to have less
innovation is what you are saying, and what is actually--I
mean, what restrictions are you concerned about, particularly?
I think you just said the FDA process and medical apps. What
things could government do intentionally or unintentionally--
and I can start with Mr. Ramsey or any of you--to restrict your
ability to innovate in the app world?
Mr. Ramsey. Again, I think it is more of making sure
barriers are not in place and so as both----
Mr. Guthrie. Such as?
Mr. Ramsey. So if there is no broadband available, if there
is not adoption in your community, if you run into spectrum
where you can't get on, these types of barriers--and then over
time if you can't acquire a workforce, and so it is more about
making sure barriers aren't in place than it is about let us
push something, you know, toward you, and the area of push
would be making sure human capital is available, making sure
there are training programs, making sure people know what is
available at the community college, at the university, and
those sorts of things, but a lot of this is making sure we
remove barriers.
Mr. Guthrie. That is a good question, and I was going to
ask Mr. Farago something along that line since we already got
there. Are most people in the app world, are they engineer
graduates from Stanford or in Silicon Valley? What do you find
talent? Because this is something that, you know, most States
want to have jobs that people can do to make living. Where do
you find talent?
Mr. Farago. Yes, I mean, you know, I think from anywhere.
The bar is pretty high at our company, you know, the core. You
know, it is not--in the startup world, it is also about risk
tolerance. I mean, there is a certain kind of person. I carry
my school debt. You know, I didn't go to certain big companies
because I really wanted to be an entrepreneur so I am eating my
debt still. So, you know, there are enough people who are
passionate in the startup space but probably the population is
more on the business side. The technical side is where we
struggle to fill enough of the open positions we need. They
traditionally come from the best universities in the world. In
the United States, you have MIT, Cal Tech, Cal, Carnegie
Mellon. I am sure I am leaving out some fantastic
universities--Stanford. We have a lot of graduates from a lot
of those places. And on average, I would say we are getting
ours from probably the cream of the crop, the universities of
the world, and a lot of people with advanced degrees. That is
primarily who we end up hiring on average. That is a lot of
where they are coming from.
Mr. Guthrie. So there is not, in your space, the technical
degree? You are looking for degreed engineers from the best
schools in the world?
Mr. Farago. That is true, but I should also say, you know,
Flurry is a little bit of a unique business. We are a business-
to-business company, and we build a lot of very highly scalable
technical infrastructure which requires people who have a lot
of what we call backend experience, infrastructure experience,
and it is very different than someone conceiving of a very
useful entertaining kind of consumer experience who can
leverage all that infrastructure. So I would say, you know, we
are atypical in that we are building a lot more scalable
systems that we have to imagine tens of thousands of other
companies leveraging seamlessly that we provide to them so we
have a little bit of a different nut to crack.
Mr. Guthrie. Ms. Hay?
Ms. Hay. Thank you. I have two comments. Number one, around
your first question, I think one of the fears in a lot of app
developers is that they are going to be sued by the big guys
who have a lot more money, big legal counsel, ready to when
they are innovating just pounce on them immediately and squash
that.
Mr. Guthrie. Are there examples of that? Has that happened?
Ms. Hay. Oh, yes, absolutely. So on anything, somebody
might be on their way up and then someone they don't know
exists comes along with a lot more money and says hey, that is
infringing on this thing that we did 7 years ago and therefore
now you are dead. So that is, I think, an issue that will
continue to get more and should get more attention.
And the second part is, I think, when it comes to finding
people, the computer science major that may have 10 years ago
been all the rage is a dime a dozen. It is not about finding
people, it is about--because most of these people, who are very
talented technically, want to be entrepreneurs because of the
app economy. So they are not trying to go get hired, they are
trying to hire people. So now you have got a scenario where
folks like Living Social are really capitalizing on this here
locally because they were having a hard time finding developers
in the specialized programming that they have so they created a
program, a 3- to 4-month-long program called Hungry Academy and
brought people in, many of whom were women who had no technical
skills, had never actually built anything before and paid them
to learn how to build on their program, and the early results
just a couple weeks ago that they finished was that these
people could walk right into their jobs and work on the program
in a way that people who were hired and had to be onboarded
could not.
Mr. Guthrie. So you are talking about people coming in, are
they coming in with some degree or are they coming in like high
school graduate?
Ms. Hay. Apprenticeship style.
Mr. Guthrie. But they are showing up with just the base
skill?
Ms. Hay. Correct.
Mr. Guthrie. That is great.
Ms. Hay. They don't have a technical skill otherwise.
Mr. Guthrie. That is wonderful. That is absolutely
wonderful. Thanks.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Mr. Bass
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bass. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Apps are intellectual
property. They are patented or copyrighted?
Mr. Reed. Some. It depends. Trademarks, the full panoply of
law applies. Some of their ideas are copyrighted. Some of it is
copyright, some of it is patent, some of it is trademark.
Mr. Bass. So when Ms. Hay talks about getting slammed down,
that is the basis of the problem, basically you're copying
somebody?
Mr. Reed. Well, I think it is actually worth noting that it
is a double-edge sword. She is right. Sometimes the big
companies come in and slam us down. But the other problem we
have is when a big company bigfoots us, which is the reverse
problem, which is, we do something truly innovative and then a
large company essentially copies what the small guy has done
but he has the marketing power and the wherewithal to really
just own that space. And so on one hand we need to watch out
for the guy who comes behind us but we also need to make sure
that we have got covered our ability to go to the big guy and
say hey, don't crowd us out, we want an opportunity to compete.
Mr. Bass. Is there any role for us in dealing with that
issue?
Mr. Reed. Yes, I will start and then I will hand it over to
Rey, but we definitely have needs when it comes to improving
the quality within the patent and trademark system. Patents can
be useful but the quality is from time to time questionable,
and with pendency at 2 years, you know, that was halfway
through the beginning of the app economy and they are still
working on patents.
Mr. Guthrie. Go ahead.
Mr. Ramsey. Mr. Congressman, I would just say, you know, I
don't want to turn this into a discussion of sort of the
patent, you know, laws.
Mr. Bass. Because it is in the jurisdiction.
Mr. Ramsey. Right, and it is also very complex, and I just
want to again urge that we continue to look at the apps economy
as part of a broader ecosystem that builds on mobility, that
includes the entrepreneurs, big, small, codependent ecosystem
where they exist on each other's platforms, each other's
marketing ability, you know, etc. We have got about a dozen app
stores. Those stores reside with so-called large companies who
then work with big carriers. We are all part of this ecosystem
and it is important to remember that. We at TechNet represent
both small companies and entrepreneurs. We have many startups
and we also have large companies, and we focus on policies that
will create an ecosystem where they will both thrive, and that
is important to the U.S. economy.
Mr. Bass. Is the app economy going to go like the economies
of all industrial produces--engines, autos, computers and so
forth--and become consolidated and commoditized?
Mr. Ramsey. Yes, I think what--again, I don't have the
crystal ball, Congressman, but what is happening when we look
at the apps economy right now is we are segregating off a
number of different specific jobs and small businesses but what
is happening is, over time there will be this ubiquity that all
companies will basically be transacting in some mobile
application way. So as this continues, it will be seamless so
big companies that you think of will have apps, little
companies have apps. It is just the way to reach the consumer.
This is being driven by consumers saying meet me where I am and
give me a service in a way that I want that service. So it
creates opportunities for anyone in business. That is the way
this is moving.
Mr. Reed. Congressman Bass, it is worth noting that the
largest app development shop on the East Coast is actually in
your district. Zco is incredibly successful. Now, you haven't
heard of it, but I promise you that apps that are used by
Members of Congress here and that are probably on whatever
smart device you have were actually made by Zco. So on one
level, there is going to be consolidation, but on the other
level, as Peter talked about earlier, the low barrier to entry
means that the apps that you might see branded with a big name
are actually written by a little guy, and I think that is
important to remember as we do this consolidation, that low
barrier means I can build it even while consolidation is
happening.
Mr. Bass. We are going to have a spectrum hearing tomorrow
in another subcommittee. To what extent is access to spectrum
or insufficient spectrum a major factor in this industry?
Mr. Ramsey. We are together. Mr. Reed and I are both going
big. It is a big issue, and it would be one of those things
that would circumvent this growth in this area if we don't
solve that issue.
Mr. Bass. I don't have any further questions, Madam
Chairman.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Bass. The Chair is pleased
to recognize Mr. Markey for 5 minutes.
Mr. Markey. Thank you, Madam Chair, very much.
I will just throw this in because, you know, apps very
commonly access our sensitive information, our location, our
phone books, photos, web browsing history, and apps often do
this without prior notice and even when the app isn't actively
being used, and this morning I introduced legislation, the
Mobile Device Privacy Act, that requires app sellers to
disclose if monitoring software is installed when a consumer
downloads an app. Mr. Cassidy is concerned about this. This is
a bipartisan concern. And the bill also requires consumers to
affirmatively consent before the monitoring software begins
collecting and transmitting information so they should know
what is happening. Otherwise there really are significant
societal issues that have to be discussed, have to be debated
on this committee. We have to understand it. That is something
where you don't need to have a degree in computer science. You
are saying gathering all this information about a 13-year-old
girl, you know, and to be used for what purpose, and what
notice was given. So all of this absolutely has to be
discussed. Those are just the values that are our grandparents
passed down, you know, and keep getting passed down. This is
not anything that is more complicated than that.
Mr. Reed, I worked with Kevin Martin, the Chairman of the
FCC, to make sure that when we were doing the 700 megahertz
auction that we set aside a certain percent of it that could be
bid for but only by a company that had an open architecture so
that any app could get on board, and that wound up being the
Android. So what role did that play in opening up the app
market knowing now that there was no gateway whatsoever, that
you had an aperture through which you sitting at home, you
know, your own little company, your own little idea? Did that
really propel this revolution, in your mind?
Mr. Reed. I think that you have to look at the ecosystem in
its entirety. While there is some interesting things that
happened because of the 700 megahertz auction, I think what
really--if you really look at it, what the change that occurred
that really propelled us was the ability of our product to get
in front of a consumer.
Mr. Markey. No, I know that. What I am saying is, if you
were just a smaller person, you didn't know how to negotiate
with Apple and you just wanted to get your app out there,
didn't that make it simpler for you to do so and increase by
maybe 100,000 the numbers of them that could get out there
almost immediately without having a gateway.
Mr. Reed. I guess the reason that I would touch on that is,
I think that it is worth noting for this committee a really
important part about how the platforms play a role because the
problem you are describing is--we didn't have a problem getting
our app out. There was the Internet. I could put anything out
anywhere. It was finding a way to actually get it in front of
people. So I understand your point but I----
Mr. Markey. Do you understand what I am saying, Ms. Hay?
Mr. Ramsey, could you comment on that?
Mr. Ramsey. Yes, Congressman. I would say unequivocally
that the principles of openness were important and continue to
be important for this sector and moving forward, and that was
one of the key elements. As you well know, there have been
other issues connected to the notion of openness that continue
to be important.
Mr. Markey. And I appreciate that. That is my concept. Open
architecture is important and the iPhone was a closed
architecture. So that is just the bottom line. It gets more
open as they see competition, they see all these apps going
over to the other devices. Do you agree with that, Mr. Farago?
Mr. Farago. I mean, as far as I understand the question,
you know, I agree that it's easier than it has ever been for
small entrepreneur----
Mr. Markey. That was the goal of moving over to 700
megahertz.
Mr. Farago. No, no, it has been great. It has reduced
barrier to entry and I would say if you compare it to the
manufacturing world where you have to pay for manufacturing and
distribution, you have to have a professional sales force that
negotiates with Best Buy or whomever and----
Mr. Markey. How many jobs do you think the 700 megahertz
created? How many jobs, do you think?
Mr. Reed. I think it is too hard to parse that.
Mr. Markey. Is it, like, 25 jobs? Give us a magnitude, an
order of magnitude. What do you think it did? This is a
committee hearing on jobs and you are here testifying saying,
you know, you want to create more jobs. So what did the 700
megahertz do in terms of creating more jobs so we have some
basis for knowing what our goals should be or what the
objective should be.
Mr. Reed. I am happy to take that question back, and we
will sit down with smart people and come up with some numbers.
Mr. Markey. I think that is important. I think we should
answer that question because obviously that was the goal that
was presented to me by your counterparts 5 years ago in terms
of moving over that spectrum and making sure it was open for an
architecture that would invite hundreds of thousands of people
who otherwise might never have been able to get through the
maze of working in corporate America.
Mr. Ramsey?
Mr. Ramsey. Yes, I would say, Congressman, again, there
hasn't been a study of that, which I think it would be
worthwhile looking at, but I would add, in keeping with that,
that every time the FCC does an auction, it has a job
implication connected to it and so it is crucial and so that
was crucial spectrum to get out as well as some of the next in
line spectrum as well.
Mr. Markey. All I am saying is, it might have created 50 or
100,000 jobs because of the openness of that architecture, and
it is scattered in 50 States and 435 Congressional districts
because it is obviously----
Ms. Hay. I can say that people have moved from iOS
development to Android development because of the innovation
that is possible on that open architecture.
Mr. Markey. And I appreciate you telling us that, and that
is really what this is all about. It is about job creation, and
we have always operated in a bipartisan basis here, you know,
in order to accomplish that goal, thinking it through and
trying to be smart as we go forward, and Mr. Cassidy and I and
I think others also have privacy concerns as we get into this
world deeper and deeper as well.
I thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman, and I also look
forward to seeing the text of your bill and working with you,
and remind the gentleman that years ago I introduced an anti-
spyware effort which was very much along the same lines of what
you are talking about.
Mr. Markey. No, I do. I appreciate that.
Mrs. Bono Mack. So I look forward to seeing your bill and
working on it. The Chair recognizes myself for 5 minutes for a
second round of questioning.
But just to follow on Mr. Markey's line of questioning, I
am an Apple person. It took a long time for me to convert from
PC to Apple. I mean, once I got to Apple, I couldn't go back.
But I have chosen to be an Apple person and I have chosen to
use iTunes, and a lot of my friends are Droid people. I mean,
we had that choice. But to sort of counter what Mr. Markey is
saying, I knew that there was sort of a walled garden approach
in the App Store for Apple yet I figured that they knew what
they were doing, that they were protecting both the growth of
their platform, that my apps somehow had the stamp of approval
from Apple and I felt I wasn't shopping in the wild, wild West
of the open source. So I chose that, and that was my choice, my
decision, and like everybody else, I guess we all play Words
with Friends on different platforms but I think it is important
to note that people make a choice and I had that opportunity.
But I just want to turn a little bit to spectrum. Clearly,
that is very important to all of us. I was wondering if anybody
wants to comment on the thinking of whether we need more
licensed or unlicensed spectrum and should it be in big blocks
and what should guide our thinking tomorrow? Do you have some
questions and thoughts you'd like to see tomorrow for our
hearing?
Mr. Ramsey. Madam Chairwoman, just a couple of quick things
and maybe I will stop in now for this hearing tomorrow on
spectrum. But I think it is clear that we need both licensed
and unlicensed. They both play a role in this ecosystem and the
FCC's proposals around incentive auctions, in my opinion, is an
innovative way of taking a look at how we can better aggregate
larger blocks of spectrum and more efficiently get it out there
into the marketplace. Obviously that requires some give and
take with other folks.
And I just want to go back to what Mr. Markey had brought
up because it is too easy to commingle the words ``open'' and I
don't think--I can't speak for the Congressman because he just
walked out, you know, or myself when I was talking about
openness. The principles of openness were not to say that Apple
wasn't open because they are adhering to net neutrality
principles and so I think all these platforms give consumers
choice like the choice that you have exercised. So I don't want
sort of the old fight of net neutrality and openness to be
commingled with the terminology. The principles of openness
have continued to be adhered to by all these platforms we are
describing whether it is Facebook and Google and Apple, so they
have all been doing I think a very good job in that regard.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Mr. Reed, would you care to comment on
spectrum?
Mr. Reed. I will be really short and echo what he said and
say I want more and I want it now, and unlicensed and licensed
are things that we need to work on. Licensed is really
important because, bluntly put, I need guys in hardhats digging
trenches, pulling fiber and putting up towers, and so
ultimately that means that I need companies that are willing to
spend the money to build the infrastructure that I will be on
top of, so get me there and get me there now because that is
what we are going to need.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Would either of you like to comment on
competitiveness with Europe and what Europe is doing, and if we
might lose sort of this race in this area? I guess a number of
European and Asian countries are being substantial amounts of
spectrum to market for commercial use. If we fail to keep pace,
will we lose our leadership role in this area?
Mr. Ramsey. Madam Chairwoman, I would say there are a
couple of things we have to look at. One is obviously
government itself has a lot of spectrum and we have got to look
at how efficiently that is being organized, how much the
government needs so we can get that online. Then we have got
the issue of making sure we can acquire inefficiently used
spectrum that broadcasters are utilizing or not utilizing, and
that is where the auctions come into play, so we have got to
get that back on online. And then lastly, we will not--even
with the most efficient allocation of spectrum from the
government, let us say the government does everything perfect,
with this explosive growth in the use of these devices, which
are all using greater and greater amounts of spectrum,
innovation and technology itself is going to be one of the ways
we are going to get through this. Spectrum sharing, other sorts
of forms of technology like that are going to help us get
through this problem. So we are going to--this is where the
private sector will continue to be important. The very
companies--and this is why I was emphasizing early--that do not
have this distinction between big and small, these so-called
small are going to be relying on some of these other companies
to continue to create innovation around spectrum that is going
to enable them to flourish. So at the end of the day, we are
all in this together. So better allocation from the Federal
Government, the use of technology to get that out, taking
spectrum that is not being used smartly by the broadcasters,
the all-of-the-above approach will keep America competitive
with that.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you.
Dr. Cassidy, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cassidy. Again, Madam Chair just spoke of how I would
choose to use Apple if I choose to use Apple. Another thought I
had though is that clearly Apple can censor what is placed upon
their App Store. There were some social conservatives put
something up there, boom, Apple took it off. It disagreed with
their philosophy. On the flip side, I gather they don't allow
pornography. And so there is a certain censorship that takes
place. Now, you could argue this is a private company but at
some point if their market share becomes so great, then does it
begin to have a responsibility beyond that of a private
company? And so I toss that again because you guys think about
this, and I am just----
Ms. Hay. Apple has very detailed guidelines for what it
accepts in the store. It is a 1- to 2-week-long review process
for most of us developers. So if we find out that something we
have done inadvertently is violating some terms and conditions,
which they consistently update as well, then it is back to the
drawing board, it is changing whatever the offending feature
is. So, you know, doing business in the App Store with Apple is
a more detailed process versus Android where you are able to
sort of explore whatever the operating system is put it up
there and people can then choose to download it in the wild,
wild West.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, do you see a concern, though, because,
again, I forget it was but some social conservative group put
something up and it was struck down. It offended somebody. Now,
they may take everything that is Republican theoretically or
everything that is Democrat. Now, they say of course that
wouldn't happen, but again, there is one group at least that
felt like it happened to them, and do they become a quasi-
public entity?
Mr. Reed. Well, I think it is important to note that
Android in fact is rising to the level of having the largest
market share, and they have a true wild, wild West. In fact,
some of the apps that are on there are problematic for us and
we have talked to other folks about how do we deal with apps
that might be doing something illegal or how do we get apps
that are on the completely wide open atmosphere in a place that
we can deal with them. I think, though, the reverse side is, I
am going to be very coldly logical about this from my own
perspective. My folks make more money on the curated store
model because of what the chairman said, and that is, they find
the trust relationship at the curated store whether it be Apple
or the Xbox platform----
Mr. Cassidy. But that is not really my concern.
Mr. Reed. Right, but I mean, we--so from our own
perspective, I like it. I like the curated store because
small----
Mr. Cassidy. But I am not arguing curated versus non-
curated. What is the obligation in terms of allowing free
speech for something which again has maybe not dominant market
share but 49 percent or something like that, pretty
substantial?
Mr. Reed. Actually, at this point in time, Apple--the
Android has actually a larger market share globally.
Mr. Cassidy. But I am saying, if it is 40 percent, I mean,
it is still substantial.
Mr. Reed. I think we are so far away from Apple being a
public entity that I am not quite sure. I think a private
industry has the right to keep pornography or other material
off their----
Mr. Cassidy. And what about socially conservative views?
Mr. Reed. So far, I think that is something that if there
was a major issue around that, that is something that I am sure
Congress would bring to the attention and I am sure the
Democrats would do likewise if their apps were kept off the
platform as well, and I think let us take that on a case by
case. When it happens, let us address it. But overall, I do
think I want to preserve the right for private industry to make
decisions about what they put in front of my kids and in front
of adults.
Mr. Cassidy. Mr. Farago?
Mr. Farago. Yes, I mean, I don't have a lot to add to what
has already been said. I think the way we view it or I view it
as Apple and Amazon and Google are running stores like a
retailer. This just happens to have a digitally distributed
product on a virtual store shelf. So if I go into Macy's or
Bloomingdale's or Safeway grocery stores on the West Coast, I
expect that there has been a buyer, there has been a review----
Mr. Cassidy. It is only a little bit of a difference, if I
may I interrupt, because it isn't as if you can go to one Apple
Store versus another Apple Store. There is only one Apple
Store. And so the paradigm is a little bit different than
Dillard's versus Macy's versus Sachs.
Mr. Farago. I might respectfully point out, if I use an
Xbox home console, Xbox Live Arcade, which is their digital
platform is run by them, and if I am a Microsoft Xbox user,
that is the only store from which I can purchase goods.
Mr. Cassidy. A little less pervasive. The pervasiveness is
the issue.
Mr. Farago. Well, I think that, you know, a store if it is
successful and has a lot of customers coming into its large
like Walmart sized or even bigger, you know, I still think they
are fundamentally a private entity running a store and they
have a right to decide which goods get on the shelf.
Mr. Cassidy. I am out of time. I agree. Yield back. Thank
you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Doctor.
Mr. Bass, you are recognized. No further questions?
All right. Well, I am just going to ask one brief question
of the panel in lieu of a third round, if I might, and nobody
really touched on cloud technologies and its importance, and I
would just like to open up briefly if we can keep this last
round to 2 minutes or so if anybody wants to talk about--I
think Mr. Farago, you specifically talked about, what you said,
the nearly endless storage cloud technology offers and how it
contributes to the handheld devices now being super devices.
How important is the cloud to the app world and how important
is security of the cloud to ensure consumer confidence. So the
last question of the day.
Mr. Farago. At a high level they are both fundamentally, I
mean, deeply important. They are critical. You know, this
device has limited storage. I mean, they are really
supercomputers in your pocket now, but what makes--one of the
many things that make this kind of experience special for
consumers is that not only is there a lot of data that one--you
know, your picture for example, of your grandchild could
probably be accessed from several different devices. It lives
somewhere for you, and that is a real convenience for
customers. That requires storage. If you can't fit enough
things in your house, then you may go get a public storage
locker somewhere locally. And so it is just a place to hold
more things universally for consumers and then they like to
access those.
The other piece obviously in between the device and the
cloud is the sort of the highway, the bandwidth and spectrum we
have been talking about that is also critically important.
Security of that data is highly important and consumers need to
have trust that Apple with iCloud and many other cloud
services. Box is a very popular company for enterprise now,
Drop Box, places where you can place something and then get it
later or place something for someone else to get, a file or a
picture or whatever. You know, you want to believe that your
property, a picture of your grandchild, is safe and secure, so
it is critically important.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. Anybody care to chime in?
Ms. Hay. Yes. I think the cloud has been monumental to the
app marketplace. The safety that comes from being able to use
Amazon web services versus trying to come up with some sort of
encrypted way of handling credit card numbers as an independent
app developer or business owner, I mean, there is just no
comparison. So now as an independent or small business owner, I
am able to leverage cloud services like this, particularly in
e-commerce, I think, that are safe, that conform to all the
guidelines that are required of protecting that sort of data,
and at the same time costing very little so I am able to
actually launch more products, I am actually able to innovate
more. So I think the cloud has been absolutely monumental in
the economy here.
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right.
Mr. Reed. I think the only part I would add to bring it
back to policy for a moment is, we need your help, and I know
this isn't the committee of jurisdiction that deals with it but
we need all Members of Congress to help us on some of the
antiquated laws that govern our electronic privacy in the cloud
because unfortunately they go back to the era where things
stored in the cloud were less valuable than stuff stored on
your desktop, and the problem that it creates for us from a
business perspective is when I go to a risk-averse company and
I say buy my small-business-created product because you can
trust the cloud storage that we are using at Amazon AWS or
anyone else, their answer is, yes, but what is our legal
responsibilities, is it the 6th Circuit Court, is it ECBA, and
they don't buy our product, not because our product wasn't
awesome, it was because our product--they couldn't have the
legal risk that exists right now around some of our privacy
protection laws. So we ask all Members of Congress to help us
as an industry with ECBA reform and making sure that we have
clear, concise ways to speak to risk-averse lawyers about why
the cloud is a safe, logical place to store their data.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much. That is going to
conclude our hearing for the day, so I want to thank the entire
panel for being with us today. You have been very gracious. We
look forward to working with all of you moving forward.
At this point I am going to remind members that they have
10 business days to submit questions for the record. I ask the
witnesses to please respond promptly to any questions they may
receive.
And with that, thank you again very much and the hearing is
now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:19 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


