- THE CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM STANDARDS PROGRAM: A PROGRESS REPORT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM STANDARDS PROGRAM: A PROGRESS
REPORT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND THE ECONOMY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 11, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-172

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

82-834 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JIM MATHESON, Utah
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JOHN BARROW, Georgia
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy

JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
Chairman
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARY BONO MACK, California           JOHN BARROW, Georgia
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   LOIS CAPPS, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan (ex
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  officio)
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     7
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, prepared statement..............................   102

Witnesses

Rand Beers, Under Secretary, National Protection and Programs
Directorate, Department of Homeland Security \1\
Prepared statement \2\.......................................    12
Answers to submitted questions...............................   104
David Wulf, Director, Infrastructure Security Compliance
Division, Office of Infrastructure Protection, National
Protection and Programs Directorate, Department of Homeland
Security \1\
Prepared statement \2\.......................................    12
Cathleen A. Berrick, Managing Director, Homeland Security and
Justice, Government Accountability Office \1\
Prepared statement...........................................    20
Answers to submitted questions...............................   139
Timothy J. Scott, Chief Security Officer and Corporate Director,
Emergency Services and Security, The Dow Chemical Company......    57
Prepared statement...........................................    59
Matthew J. Leary, Corporate EHS&S Manager, Pilot Chemical Company    65
Prepared statement...........................................    67
Anna Fendley, Health, Safety, and Environment Department, United
Steelworkers...................................................    75
Prepared statement...........................................    77
Paul Orum, Blue Green Chemical Security Coalition, Independent
Counsel to the Center for American Progress....................    80
Prepared statement...........................................    82

Submitted Material

Letter, dated September 10, 2012, from Charles T. Drevna,
President, American Fuel & Petrochemical Manufacturers, to Mr.
Shimkus and Mr. Green, submitted by Mr. Green..................    97

----------
\1\ Mr. Beers, Mr. Wulf, and Ms. Berrick did not present oral
statements.
\2\ Mr. Beers and Mr. Wulf submitted a joint prepared statement.

THE CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM STANDARDS PROGRAM: A PROGRESS
REPORT

----------

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 11, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Shimkus
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Shimkus, Murphy, Latta,
Cassidy, Gardner, Barton, Upton (ex officio), Green,
Butterfield, and Barrow.
Also present: Representative Pompeo.
Staff present: Nick Abraham, Legislative Clerk; Charlotte
Baker, Press Secretary; Sean Bonyun, Communications Director;
Matt Bravo, Professional Staff Member; Jerry Couri, Senior
Environmental Policy Advisor; David McCarthy, Chief Counsel,
Environment and the Economy; Andrew Powaleny, Deputy Press
Secretary; Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator, Environment and
the Economy; Brett Scott, Staff Assistant; Jacqueline Cohen,
Democratic Counsel; Greg Dotson, Democratic Staff Director,
Environment and the Economy; Elizabeth Letter, Democratic
Assistant Press Secretary; Karen Lightfoot, Democratic
Communications Director and Senior Policy Advisor; and Stephen
Salsbury, Democratic Staff Assistant.
Mr. Shimkus. The subcommittee will come to order. And we
would ask our guests to come on in and sit down and close the
doors, and we will welcome our first panel.
I have an opening statement which I will read in part and
hopefully then get unanimous consent to submit for the record.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

I have been thinking about CFATS for a long time, since the
last hearing, and how long it has taken and the past problems,
et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. We all know the story.
You know, the Illinois State flag has a banner underneath
it that says ``State sovereignty, national unity.'' And I think
part of our debate is, here at the national level, are States
still sovereign? And how do we address national unity issues
like homeland security and the like? And I think this is a
perfect program that, if done properly, we can move in a good
direction.
What do we need on security? As many of you know, I have a
military background. I served in West Germany during the old
days. I understand security, I understand perimeters, I
understand threats, not as well as those who are involved more
deeply today.
But we want folks to have perimeter security. We would like
the national government to provide assistance in identifying
insecure facilities or placement of chemicals and operations
and stuff. As I said, assistance, not the threats, not the
mandates.
And then we do need to address the personal assurance
issues about who is involved in working around what type of
materials.
I think that really encompasses my view of CFATS. How can
we work together so that we are all better off? I think we
still have a ways to go. I know we are making progress since
the last hearing, but I think there are still issues to
address.
And I know that there are some issues about why today, and
was this planned, and was there politics behind today. At least
that is what the rumors were from staff. And, first of all, no,
this is the last full week here. We have to get through this.
But the second point I would say, how do you best honor
those on a day like today than to address the threats of today?
I think we do more, if we are really concerned about the
threats posed, to continue to address our issues of safety and
security on today. I think that is how you better honor folks,
by moving forward.
So whatever debates and statements on that are, I don't
really have a dog in that fight, and I could really care less
what people think on that.
After the last hearing on this issue, I know testimony is
going to be that we have implemented--or DHS has implemented 59
of its 95 corrective actions. We will want to ask, where we are
at on the other 36?
I will address questions on the permanent branch chiefs. I
do think having people in positions for a period of time is
probably an important thing for continuity and for process. I
have a national forest in my congressional district. My
relationships with the manager and the forest and all the
stakeholders are much better when the same person is there over
a couple years versus swapping them out every 6 months or every
year. And I think that is true probably at any Federal agency.
My staffers who deal with constituent service are much better
having continued to do that work over years versus having them
doing different things.
We need to also address how do we move forward in a more
transparent and open system and process. I think that is an
issue, also, of the last hearing.
So I look forward to the hearing. I think it is very, very
important.
Just for my colleagues who have shown up, Mr. Beers has
agreed to waive his opening statement so that we can move
questions after we get through ours because of the time
constraints with the ceremony and your early departure. And we
appreciate that.
So, with that, I am going to yield back the balance of my
time and yield to the ranking member, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing today. And I don't know if it is special timing, but I
think the reason we have chemical security is because of 9/11
and the concern we have about our major industrial facilities.
I want to welcome both of our panels.
This important issue--I am glad to see our subcommittee
continue oversight of this critical program. I represent the
Houston Ship Channel area, which is the largest petrochemical
complex in the country. I cannot stress how important the
success of the CFATS program is to my constituents who are the
employees and live in the communities that surround the
facilities. They deserve the best security standards possible
to prevent acts of terrorism on U.S. Soil.
Secretary Beers, you did not testify under the best
circumstances last February, but I hear that you have some
positive things to report this time around. And I appreciate
that things are starting to move, but we cannot ignore that it
has been 6 years since this program was enacted and we are
still not close to being there yet. It is time to get these
plants inspected and approved, and I hope that you have a
deadline for doing so to report to us this morning.
That said, it is Congress' job to make sure you have the
resources to do this. I understand that the House appropriators
significantly cut your budget. With movement finally happening
in the last few months, now is not the time to limit resources.
And I encourage my colleagues not to set us back now.
I want to end by talking about a subject that is of prime
importance to me, and that is personnel surety. Developing and
implementing a personnel surety program that relies on existing
government credential systems, like the TWIC, would reduce a
burden on DHS and the workers at these facilities and the
industry.
Secretary Beers, last year I asked if the Department
intended to integrate TWIC in the personnel security program.
You gave me a positive response, and yet the proposal you sent
to the OMB did not make it clear that TWIC is an acceptable
background check. I am pleased that you rescinded the proposal
in July, but understand that you will resubmit a revised
personnel security program in the coming months. I hope today
that you will definitely commit to allowing the Transport
Worker Identification Card, or TWIC, to be used without caveats
for workers or industries.
We will soon be reissuing thousands and thousands of TWIC
cards because they are expiring, including mine expires in June
of next year. I have spent so much time on plant sites in my
district. At the Port of Houston, we have over 250,000
employees who use a TWIC card every day to get to work--
250,000. Multiply that across the country. There is no reason
to reinvent the wheel. We need to fix TWIC and use it as the
standard card.
I regret Congress has still not passed a CFATS
authorization. I still believe that a lot of problems with the
CFATS program stems directly from not having a permanent
authorization with direction from Congress. Chemical facilities
security is extremely important to the protection of public
health and safety throughout the U.S., particularly in our
congressional district. There is no reason we should not act on
this issue.
And I look forward to the testimony of our witnesses. And
thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The chair recognizes the chairman of the full committee,
Mr. Upton, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to ask
that my full statement be made part of the record.
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection.
Mr. Upton. I just want to say, 6 months ago we authorized
CFATS. We were very conscious that the next terrorism incursion
could come from within a chemical plant instead of on board an
airplane.
And those of us who were here in DC. 11 years ago remember
well every single minute of that day. And I, for one, made a
promise that we should do everything that we can to make sure
that that moment doesn't occur again in this Nation. We have to
honor the victims and their loved ones by working together to
ensure that such an attack can never happen again. And I
support Chairman Shimkus and all that he is doing to make sure
that, in fact, we are better safeguarded as a nation.
And I yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
With that, seeing no other Members here authorized for an
opening statement, the chair now recognizes himself.
First of all, as stated earlier, both Mr. Beers and Ms.
Berrick, both have agreed to waive their opening statements so
we can go right to questions. We appreciate that.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Beers and Mr. Wulf and the
prepared statement of Ms. Berrick follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

QUESTIONING OF RAND BEERS, UNDER SECRETARY, NATIONAL PROTECTION
AND PROGRAMS DIRECTORATE, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY,
ACCOMPANIED BY DAVID WULF, DIRECTOR, INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY
COMPLIANCE DIVISION, OFFICE OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION,
NATIONAL PROTECTION AND PROGRAMS DIRECTORATE, DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY; AND CATHLEEN A. BERRICK, MANAGING DIRECTOR,
HOMELAND SECURITY AND JUSTICE, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Shimkus. And so I will start.
Mr. Beers, it is my understanding from your Web site that
you have one facility that is approved under the program. And
of that one, what is its plan on personnel assurance?
Mr. Beers. Sir, we have now two plans that have been
approved. Those approvals are conditional pending the
completion of the response to Risk-Based Performance Standard
12, which is the personnel surety standard. So we are working
actively now to reintroduce the request to OMB for the
collection program that we need to move forward.
But let me say three things about that.
Mr. Shimkus. Quickly.
Mr. Beers. First, Ranking Member Green, TWIC will be
included in that.
We will also have the opportunity for entire companies and
service providers to be able to submit for their entire
companies. And they will be authorized to go to any plant that
they go to that is covered by this program.
And, thirdly, we are going to work this program heavily
with industry to make sure that we move as quickly as possible,
but recognizing their needs, as well.
Mr. Shimkus. You understand my concern. If we have two that
are approved and we still don't have the personnel assurance
issue, it is hard for me to understand how we say it is
conditionally approved without the whole ball game--a standard
being reached across the board. I know we want to send positive
signals, but we don't want to send false signals, either, that
we are better off and we have a full program.
Do you want to respond, Mr. Beers?
Mr. Beers. Sir, I totally agree with you that we don't want
to leave any security requirement not fulfilled. But it was our
view that the conditional authorization process, because of the
slowness with which we were getting the necessary personnel
surety questions answered, meant that we believe that we ought
to move forward with the conditional authorization and catch up
as quickly as possible with the personnel assurance.
Mr. Shimkus. OK.
Let me move to the--the last hearing, we also had an issue
because all facilities were placed into the same tier. So we
had a big debate about, how do we get risk tiering, and what is
the methodology, and let's make sure we have the proper people
doing that.
And my understanding is, risk tiering is a formula; is that
correct?
Mr. Beers. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. We have a formula to do that. And what
comprises the formula?
Mr. Beers. Sir, there are a series of factors that are
involved in that formula. First of all, we----
Mr. Shimkus. We have to go quickly.
Mr. Beers. The----
Mr. Shimkus. How about if I just help out here? Threat
times vulnerability times consequence is the risk factor,
correct?
Mr. Beers. That is the essential equation, and then each of
those elements has sub-elements within it.
Mr. Shimkus. So let me ask about, how do you--I don't claim
to be a great mathematician,but I understand formulas and I
understand constants and I understand variables. One of our
concerns is that vulnerability you have as a constant versus a
variable, and that concerns us in the formula.
In fact, I would like to go to the GAO. Did you know that,
in this formula, that for that issue of vulnerability, that
vulnerability is listed as a constant and not a variable?
Ms. Berrick. We do know that, Chairman, and we are looking
at that right now.
I think the specifics of this are for official use only.
But to talk about this at an unclassified level, we found a
similar--we look at how DHS calculates risk scores across the
Department as a part of a number of our reviews. We found a
similar problem in how they calculate risk for a major grant
program and, in fact, recommended that they not hold
vulnerability constant. DHS implemented that recommendation in
the last grant cycle and varied it.
So we have cited that as a concern in past work.
Mr. Shimkus. And the point being, two similar facilities--
one in downtown Manhattan; one outside Olney, Illinois--two
very different risk portfolios. And so that is why we would
argue that there should be a variable aspect on that formula.
And from last time, how do you move a facility through the
site security process, approve SSPs, inspect, et cetera, when
there is no personnel surety plan that assures a facility
manager that no one in the plant is on the terrorist watch
list? It is kind of going back to the previous question.
Mr. Beers. Sir, there is more to the site security plan
than simply the individuals involved, which is not to say that
that is not a very significant and important part. So the
question is, what are the other security provisions within the
plan that we and they can record and review and inspect?
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. My time is expired, but I want to
keep this going, and I appreciate that response.
I would just say that, in chemical facilities, probably the
biggest threat would be someone internally being able to get
inside the facility and know the facility. So of all of the
threats, that is probably the biggest one, I would venture to
guess.
So, with that, I would yield to the ranking member, Mr.
Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Beers, as of 2 days ago, the Tier 1 site plans
reviewed or authorized were 73, and 2 that were approved.
What does ``conditionally authorized'' mean? Does that mean
that they can continue to operate? Or is there----
Mr. Beers. That means that they can move forward with
implementation of the site security plan elements that were
approved, and that we come back when we have a personnel surety
program that we have agreed on and implement those.
But let me just make one point with respect to personnel
surety. It is not that this government has been quiet or
inattentive to looking at insider threats within this area.
FBI, which we work in partnership with, has a very robust
program of looking for threats within the country and ensuring
that they are being inspected. This program would be an
additional program to the excellent work that the FBI is doing
on a daily basis.
Mr. Green. How long does it take to get a plan from
conditionally approved to approved?
Mr. Beers. That is going to depend, sir, on when the
personnel surety risk-based performance standards--excuse me--
when we agree on what the standards are that they are supposed
to meet.
So, right now, we are looking at publishing the request for
information in the next 30 days and collecting that information
over a 60-day period, and then going forward with our proposal
to OMB.
Mr. Green. You mentioned that as of July the 16th, in your
statement, ISCD has resumed authorization inspections on Tier 1
facilities. How many inspections, on the average, are you
conducting a month?
Mr. Beers. David, do you want to answer that question?
Mr. Wulf. We have a total of about 10 inspections scheduled
during the month of September. We anticipate continuing to
increase the pace of inspections going forward. So I think, you
know, you will see hundreds of inspections occurring over the
course of the next year.
Mr. Green. OK. At that rate, how long do you think it will
take to get to all those sites that are awaiting inspection? A
year?
Mr. Wulf. Well, the sites that are awaiting inspection are
those that have received their authorization, and right now
those are 73 sites. Several of those have already been
inspected. We have conducted a total of 19 authorization
inspections to this point. The remainder of those 73 and
additional ones that we anticipate authorizing over the next
months will certainly be inspected in the next year.
Mr. Green. And I would hope folks are moving into the
conditional authorization, so that group will be expanding, I
assume.
Mr. Wulf. Yes, the numbers of finally approved SSPs will
certainly be, you know, continuing to grow.
Mr. Green. Given the current status of the SSP tool, has
DHS explored how to better use the authority, use alternative
security plans to help expedite the CFATS approval process?
Mr. Beers. Yes, sir. That is an important element of our
efforts. We have been working with the American Chemistry
Council. We have run a pilot program with an alternative
security plan with them and are hoping to issue some guidance
for the members of that council to be able to use the
alternative security plan. We are also working with
agricultural industries, looking at the same possibility.
Mr. Green. OK. Well, I appreciate you being willing to use
similar credential programs like TWIC. The Federal Government
really doesn't need to reinvent the wheel. TWIC is not perfect,
believe me, as I learned when it was rolled out and we will see
as we do the reissuing of them. But we need to learn from that
and have one ID, whether you are on water side or on land side,
your facility.
The internal DHS memo leaked to the press last year
articulated programmatic breakdowns, serious deficiencies. What
is the timeline for the full implementation of the 91
recommendations for improving the CFATS program?
Mr. Beers. Sir, with respect to all 95 now of those, some
of them are going to go on over a longer period of time, but we
are moving as quickly as possible. We have, since we submitted
the testimony, the written testimony with the September 4
deadline, increased the number of items that have been
completed.
And, David, I don't want to speak to the precise number,
but when would you say we would be up in the 80s?
Mr. Wulf. I would say we will be in the 80s by the end of
the calendar year, most likely.
Mr. Green. OK.
Mr. Chairman, I am out of time, and I have one question on
the site security plan I would like to submit and hear the
answer. And I appreciate you all for getting back to us.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. Without objection.
The chair recognizes the vice chair of the subcommittee,
Mr. Murphy, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to our witnesses today.
I just want to verify. So the number of site security plans
that have been approved is two?
Mr. Wulf. Two, sir.
Mr. Murphy. You got the funding in 2006 to go forward on
this; am I correct?
Mr. Beers. Excuse me?
Mr. Murphy. The funding came forth to start these
inspections in 2006; is that correct? 2007? It was a few years
ago?
Mr. Beers. I don't know whether it came forward in--the
authorization occurred then.
Mr. Murphy. Authorization, OK.
Mr. Beers. But we have not been in a position to actually
finally approve them, really, until this summer, in part
because of the management problems that have been revealed and
in part because as we have gone forward with the program we
have learned a whole lot. And the whole lot that we have
learned has also created the appreciation that it was more
complicated than it was originally thought to be at the
beginning of the program.
Mr. Murphy. So how long have you been getting the money,
and how much money is it you have been receiving to do this,
then?
Mr. Beers. I believe the total amount of money that we have
received is slightly under $500 million.
David?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, I think on the order of $400 million, $450
million.
Mr. Murphy. Wow. And we still have, what, over 4,000 plans
to review?
Mr. Beers. We have about 4,400 plans to review. We have
4,433 facilities that have been designated or have preliminary
designations as being in the high-risk category.
Mr. Murphy. So we hope this goes better because, otherwise,
you are at the rate of approving them all within a few
centuries, and we wanted to help you speed that up.
You have said that the inspectors weren't well-trained and
there was a number of problems. How many inspectors are trained
now?
Mr. Beers. All the inspectors that we have. The number is
over 100. A hundred and fourteen, I believe, is the actual
number. And that training about doing the inspections was
completed during the month of July.
Mr. Murphy. And they are all qualified to do the
inspections?
Mr. Beers. Yes, sir.
Mr. Murphy. How many inspectors are needed to do each plan?
Mr. Beers. We have a planned workforce that is in--David,
about 120-something overall?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, yes, we do. And that will encompass ammonium
nitrate inspections when that program comes on line.
Mr. Murphy. But, I mean, how many people do you need for
doing each one?
Mr. Wulf. It varies depending on the size and scope of the
facility, but, you know, I would say anywhere from two to
three, four, five.
Mr. Murphy. So I am still looking here at--you have about
$2 million per person there to do this, and you need two or
three to do each one. Using those kinds of numbers and those
figures, when do you anticipate you will even reach the halfway
point with these inspections?
Mr. Wulf. We anticipate within the next year that we will
have, you know, authorized, conducted inspections. And if all
goes well with the site security plans, we will have approved
close to 300 plans.
Mr. Murphy. That still leaves us 3,500 or so to do. I know
you are concerned, and we are too. I am trying to find ways we
can help you.
Mr. Shimkus. Would the gentleman yield for 1 second?
Mr. Murphy. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. What I would weigh in is, that is why we need
to properly tier the facilities. And that is why this debate
that is going on about alternative security plans is very, very
important, so that we use the plans that are already
established out there in industry which are trying to do the
same thing, for the most part, and work together versus against
each other.
Mr. Murphy. Precisely. No, no, I want to work together. I
am just trying to find out if there are specific
recommendations of things you need from us to facilitate that
in moving forward. Because we know you want to be accurate, and
we know you want to do this in a way that protects public
safety and works with the things that industry has found.
And so I am wondering, in the process of going through, are
you finding ways in this that, in addition to the people that
you have approved for the inspections, which the chairman was
mentioning, within the industry, can facilitate that and
actually speed up this process in a way that helps too? Is
there something that we can learn from that?
Mr. Beers. Sir, that is in large measure what we are about
right now, which is to ensure that the people are trained, to
ensure that the review process to get the plans to the
authorization stage so that we can send out the inspectors to
do that moves more quickly and more efficiently than it has in
the past.
And I think that the record since the review process to
make the internal reviews go faster has shown an increase. I
think that the inspection plan training has increased the
number of inspections. So I think we are moving at a rate that
is going to be increasing.
But I have to say here, sir, it will not help us if the
House Appropriations Committee appropriation level for this
program, which cut $40 million----
Mr. Murphy. If I might add, I know oftentimes when I am
visiting businesses, they are very concerned that government
seems to come in, work against them, doesn't ask them for their
assistance. And I would like to echo what the chairman said,
that, I mean, these are people who also care about their
communities, their families, their workers. And I hope that you
do talk with them and see what you can learn from so many of
these companies because they do want to facilitate and move
this forward.
And I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
It is tough to argue dollars and cents when we have a track
record of millions of dollars per individual. So I wouldn't go
down that route, Mr. Beers.
The chair would now recognize my colleague from North
Carolina, Mr. Butterfield, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. Let me thank you very much, Mr. Chairman,
and certainly thank the three witnesses for coming forward
today with your testimony.
I am going to not take up the entire 5 minutes, but I do
want to ask Secretary Beers and possibly Mr. Wulf a very short
question.
I am told that the Department has a hotline for
whistleblowers. That is what my staff tells me, that there is
now in place a hotline for whistleblowers and that anyone can
call that hotline with security concerns.
Department employees have whistleblower protections, but
what protections, if any, cover facility employees and even the
general public? Mr. Beers, can you help me with that?
Mr. Beers. I am going to turn to David to answer the
question about the hotline.
But it is certainly our view that we solicit both from
within the Department of Homeland Security and from the private
sector and from citizens any indication of issues that we ought
to pay attention to.
The protection involved there will be that we will provide
anonymity if anonymity is requested. That is a basic policy of
hotlines, if that is what the person wants. So if it is from an
employee of the company, we will keep that----
Mr. Butterfield. What about downstream at the facilities?
Mr. Beers. Yes.
Mr. Butterfield. The same thing with the facilities?
Mr. Beers. Yes. I mean, insofar as they tell us. We are not
going to reveal the names of the individuals who gave us that
information if they want their identity protected.
Mr. Butterfield. And the same with the general public?
Mr. Beers. And the same for the general public, yes, sir.
Mr. Butterfield. All right.
Mr. Wulf. And we do maintain, as the Under Secretary noted,
a tip line, a CFATS-focused tip line, so members of the public,
facility personnel can call in and report concerns, can report
information about facilities that may, you know, benefit from
being part of the CFATS program.
Mr. Butterfield. All right.
More than 2,700 facilities have eliminated or reduced
holdings of dangerouschemicals, so they are no longer
considered high-risk facilities. How does DHS ensure those
facilities do not increase the amount of those chemicals in
their inventory at a later date?
Mr. Beers. David?
Mr. Wulf. Well, those facilities--and, you know, if I can
mention, you know, that is one of the many successes that we
view in the CFATS program to this point. And there is a pretty
significant list of things that America has received for its
investment in CFATS.
But with regard to those facilities, having been part of
the program, having gone through the initial Top-Screen, they
are made aware of their obligation when they bring into the
facility chemicals above the screening threshold quantity that
are on the list of 322 chemicals of interest, their obligation
to report that to us. So they are fully aware of that and, you
know, meet those obligations. So facilities come back into the
program, as well.
Mr. Butterfield. OK.
And now to the managing director: The Department of
Homeland Security Infrastructure Security Compliance Division
completed 21 of 94 items from its action plan between June and
September of this year. And prior to that, the Department had
only completed 38 items.
Is DHS now completing the 94-item action plan at a faster
rate than the GAO anticipated?
Ms. Berrick. I think they are making good process on the
action plan. They demonstrated their commitment. They are
actively tracking it. We had some suggestions to provide some
additional details on the plan, which they have incorporated.
The one thing I would mention about the action plan, I
think it is a very good first step. However, you know, to
address these issues that were highlighted in the management
memo is going to take leadership, sustained leadership, support
over the long term.
Some of these action plans are designed to develop plans
to, you know, implement a program--for example, a framework to
create a quality division. While that is very important, the
actual execution of this quality division, how they oversee
this process, is really what is going to be critical.
So we think it is a very good first step, but it is going
to require long-term and sustained leadership support to refine
these actions, update them as needed, and make sure that they
execute on the plans that they have put in place.
Mr. Butterfield. All right.
And I will end where I began, with Mr. Beers or Mr. Wulf.
You mentioned that 73 facilities have authorized or have
conditionally authorized Tier 1 security plans. Are there any
additional steps those facilities must complete before
inspection and approval?
Mr. Beers. No, sir. That means that they are ready for
inspection. The ones that haven't been authorized or
conditionally authorized either need to provide more data or we
need to have a better understanding of the data that they did
provide.
Mr. Butterfield. Do the steps vary across facilities?
Mr. Beers. Excuse me?
Mr. Butterfield. Do the final steps vary across the
different facilities?
Mr. Beers. Well, no facility is necessarily the same, so
what they need to do in order to meet the Risk-Based
Performance Standards may be different for each facility, which
means that there is no automatic template, when you look at a
response, that either it is ``yes'' or ``no.'' You have to look
at what they actually said with respect to that particular
performance standard and make sure that it matches what the
performance standard lays out.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Colorado, Mr. Gardner, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the witnesses for joining us today.
Mr. Beers, I want to ask a couple of questions to follow up
on a committee hearing we had February 3rd, 2012. I want to
read the transcript from about 30 seconds' worth of our
conversation.
I started the conversation by asking about the Anderson
Wulf memorandum and said, ``So the inspector general has looked
into this?''
And your response was, ``The inspector general has access
to these reports, yes, sir, but this was not done by--"
And I stated, ``Have you had conversations with the
inspector general?''
Mr. Beers: ``With respect to this report?''
``Yes.''
Mr. Beers: ``I can't speak to that. I have not personally
had that conversation.''
And I followed up with, ``But he has this memorandum?''
Your response to that was, ``As with all these kinds of
reports, yes, they are available.''
``They are available, or he has them? I mean, you have sent
it to him?''
Your response was, ``I will have to confirm that, sir.''
And so, Mr. Beers, to follow up with that, you never did
get back to me or to the committee to confirm that you had
given the Anderson memo to the inspector general, did you?
Mr. Beers. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gardner. You got back to us?
Mr. Beers. I am sorry, I am not certain that we got back to
you. But, yes, they have it.
Mr. Gardner. OK. But I don't think you got back to me. I
certainly never received the information. You didn't get back
to this committee.
But it was after this committee hearing, it was after the
February 3rd committee hearing, when the inspector general had
watched the broadcast of our interaction, and it was more than
a month after it was all over the national news and 2 months
after you received the memorandum that the IG called you to
obtain the memorandum.Is that correct?
Mr. Beers. We had a conversation immediately after this
hearing, yes, sir.
Mr. Gardner. And when did he get the report then?
Mr. Beers. I can't say the specific day on which he got it.
Mr. Gardner. It was 2 month after the conversation.
And, again, you didn't give it to him right away after the
committee hearing. After that conversation, did you give it to
him right away? Surely you remember that.
Mr. Beers. I did not personally give it to him. I asked my
staff that it be given to him immediately, per the conversation
that he and I had.
Mr. Gardner. And staff was directed to immediately give it
to him?
Mr. Beers. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gardner. And the memorandum, though, didn't go out
until May. Is that correct?
Mr. Beers. Sir, I don't have that information.
Mr. Gardner. Do you have staff here that could answer that?
Mr. Beers. David?
Mr. Wulf. I don't believe I can answer that, sir.
Mr. Gardner. And so, here is the problem that I have. And
that is why I would ask you for the full story here.
How many times have you ever communicated with either
Richard Skinner or Charles Edwards, in their respective
positions as inspector general at DHS or the acting inspector
general, or anyone else from the DHS Inspector General Office
about the CFATS program?
Mr. Beers. I have talked to Mr. Edwards on at least, I want
to say--I am positive that I have spoken to him on at least
three occasions. And I could have had other conversations with
him beyond that, but I don't recall.
Mr. Gardner. And were those conversations started by you,
or were they initiated by--who initiated those conversations?
Mr. Beers. In one case, it was him. In the other cases, it
was me.
Mr. Gardner. And so, you know, have you discussed the
conduct of an audit inspection or investigation of the CFATS
program? Was that the purpose of the conversation?
Mr. Beers. We had a conversation about that, yes.
Mr. Gardner. And that was a conversation that you started
or that they started?
Mr. Beers. I believe that was one that I started.
Mr. Gardner. And have you or anyone in NPPD, IP, or ISCD
ever suggested that the Homeland Security inspector general
come in and look at the problems being encountered by CFATS?
Mr. Beers. Sir, as a result of that round of hearings, a
Member of Congress requested the IG to come in and look at it.
When----
Mr. Gardner. But you never?
Mr. Beers. When he and I had the conversation about the
management report, I did not request that he come in and look
at it, but I certainly said we are open to anything that you
believe is appropriate to looking at this program.
Mr. Gardner. And so the recommendations by--so nobody,
again, nobody in NPPD, IP, or ISCD ever suggested that?
Mr. Beers. To?
Mr. Gardner. To come in and look at the problems being
encountered by CFATS. That was all a Member of Congress that
suggested that.
Mr. Beers. There was a discussion in the fall of 2010 as to
whether or not the inspector general should be invited to
conduct a management review, which would have required us to
pay them to hire an outside consultant to conduct that review.
When we looked at----
Mr. Gardner. And that was a suggestion that they had made?
Mr. Beers. Excuse me?
Mr. Gardner. That was a suggestion that somebody in one of
the----
Mr. Beers. That was a suggestion that Assistant Secretary
Todd Keil made in a memo----
Mr. Gardner. And so what did you do with that
recommendation?
Mr. Beers. Excuse me?
Mr. Gardner. What did you do with that recommendation?
Mr. Beers. We sat down in senior leadership, including
Assistant Secretary Keil, and decided that we could perform
that particular review within Office of Compliance and
Security, which exists within NPPD but not within IP, and that
we could do it more quickly and we could do it without an
additional cost to the program.
And that report was done and delivered in September of 2011
and became part of the management review that Penny Anderson
and David Wulf undertook. The results are in that effort.
Mr. Gardner. So just to follow up, with this most recent
February 3rd hearing, the revelations in the Anderson-Wulf
memo, did anyone--I will follow up again--did anyone in NPPD,
IP, or ISCD ever suggest to you that DHS IG come in and look at
the problems being encountered?
Mr. Beers. After that hearing, no.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Barrow, do you seek recognition?
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you very much for coming in today to testify
again before the committee.
Mr. Beers, let me ask, could you inform us of the misuse of
government-owned vehicles by the Washington-based headquarters
personnel?
Mr. Beers. I am sorry, sir? Could you repeat----
Mr. Latta. Could you inform us about any misuse of
government-owned vehicles by Washington-based headquarters
personnel?
Mr. Beers. Sir, I do not have an indication of that kind of
misuse. We did look at that issue.
David, do you want to add to that?
Mr. Wulf. There were, before Ms. Anderson and I came into
the division, vehicles that were housed at our headquarters
location. Before we arrived, those vehicles had been removed.
So I don't have--we don't have--we didn't have any indication
that the vehicles had been misused. But, you know, we believed
their presence at headquarters was not necessary for the----
Mr. Latta. OK. When you say ``removed,'' could you explain?
When you say ``removed,'' were they removed to another
government agency? What happened to them?
Mr. Wulf. I believe--and I wasn't there at the time--that
they were pushed out to our field force.
Mr. Latta. OK. But were the records kept on those vehicles
prior to that time as to where they were going, like mileage
records, odometer statements, gas records, et cetera?
Mr. Wulf. I don't know that.
Mr. Latta. Is there a way to get those records?
Mr. Beers. Sir, I want to acknowledge, that is one of the
management problems that we discovered, that there was
inadequate recordkeeping. And that is one of the deficiencies
that we have corrected.
Mr. Latta. OK. But I think what we need to have in the
committee, though, is we should have the--if we could request
that information. And if you have to go back and find those
records--because, again, it would seem to me that if it is a
government vehicle, and when you have those government vehicles
out there, that you have the odometer statements. And, also,
there would be gas records and things like that. They would
have to be filled up; they would have to have some service.
There would have to be different records out there.
So I think it is very important for the committee to get
that information from you all so we can start with that point,
as to know exactly where those vehicles were and if they were
misused. So that is one of the things we would like to do.
And let me ask, just to follow up again--maybe you just
mentioned it--when did you all become aware of that problem
with those vehicles? When you said you came in and those
vehicles were removed, when were you all aware of it?
Mr. Beers. David, fill in if I am not precise on this.
But my understanding is that that came out in the
management review that was done by our Office of Compliance and
Security. So the detail about the lack of records and oversight
was finally reported in September of 2011, made available to
David and Penny Anderson for incorporation in their report.
Mr. Latta. Let me ask, was any of this turned over to the
IG for investigation?
Mr. Beers. No, sir, that was not turned over to the IG. The
report itself said that there was a lack of recordkeeping but
that there was not an indication of waste, fraud, and abuse
associated with that. ``Not an indication''--not saying that it
wasn't, but it was not indicated.
Mr. Latta. OK. And, again, how many vehicles are we talking
about in total?
Mr. Wulf. I would have to get that back to you.
Mr. Latta. Could we get that back from you, then? We would
appreciate that information.
Mr. Wulf. A relatively small number, I believe.
Four to six vehicles?
Mr. Beers. That is what my staff is telling me, four to six
vehicles.
Mr. Latta. OK.
And, Under Secretary, you were aware of the unsatisfactory
condition of the SSP process before you testified back in March
of last year and in 2012. Is that correct, that you were aware
of that?
Mr. Beers. I was aware that we were not moving at a pace
that we had previously told you we should be moving at, yes,
sir. And I indicated that I was disappointed in that and that I
had hoped that we would move more rapidly on that.
Mr. Latta. OK. And I am sorry, did you say that you brought
those problems and that information to the committee at that
time?
Mr. Beers. Sir, which hearing are we talking about now?
Mr. Latta. The March 2011 or the February 2012 hearing?
Mr. Beers. So, at the March 2011 hearing, I believe I
acknowledged that we had not achieved the objectives of getting
the site security plans authorized at the rate that I had
previously been told we would complete those plans, and that I
had hoped--and I am now talking 2011--that we would be in a
position to move forward on that. That was, unfortunately, not
an accurate statement at that time either.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Latta. My time has expired, and I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. I would encourage my colleagues who want to go
to the memorial service to head on down to the rotunda. We are
going to finish with Butch Cassidy for 5 minutes, and then we
will tell how we are going to operate after that.
So the gentleman from Louisiana is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Cassidy. Hello, gentlemen.
I have a lot of petrochemical plants in my State, and my
workers and my communities are at risk. And I have to say that
when I speak of dysfunction in Washington, you all are case
number one. I say that not to be mean but just to kind of
observe.
In the report that was the internal report that kind of
broke this open, there are statements such as, ``Legacy
employees are doing a tremendous amount of work, while I see
others sitting at their desk not contributing.''
Those folks who are not contributing, are they still with
the agency or have they been released?
Mr. Beers. David, would you answer that?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, we have made a concerted effort to ensure
that all members of our team are contributing to the program.
And part of what we have done, as we have moved forward, kind
of, toward a realignment of the organization, is to ensure that
we can achieve a greater fit between the individual employees
and the position in which----
Mr. Cassidy. Has anybody been released? Because the
document suggested that some that were hired were totally
inappropriately--had skill sets and attitudes that were totally
inappropriate to their job description, making it sound more as
not something that required some adjustment, but required,
frankly, rehiring.
Has anybody been released?
Mr. Wulf. No one has been released, but, you know----
Mr. Cassidy. Can I just keep on going then?
They also, in that same report, said that not only had you
not done any inspections, you had not developed a process to
inspect. An incredible indictment.
Are we to believe that you now have a process to inspect?
Mr. Beers. Yes, sir. We have retrained all of the
inspectors that are currently on board. We completed that
process in July----
Mr. Cassidy. Now--I am sorry, just because we have limited
time. I apologize to interrupt.
It also said that because of your union contracts and your
necessity to bargain even on minutia, even on things to bring
into compliance with government policy, that it was anticipated
that this could take weeks, months, it implied years, in order
to actually implement the policy changes necessary to do an
effective inspection.
What has happened with that?
Mr. Beers. Sir, we have worked with the union, and I think
we have a productive and expedited process to have those items
that are required to be reviewed by the union so that they move
swiftly.
But I want to turn to David, who has been managing this on
a day-to-day.
Mr. Wulf. And if I can just add, sir, that the point that
we are trying to make in the ``challenges'' memo was that, at
the early stage in which this program found itself, the
presence of a union added an additional layer of complexity.
But, you know, I am glad to report that we have developed a
very strong relationship with our bargaining unit and that----
Mr. Cassidy. But no one has been released, and it is so
clear throughout here that there was a problem with--it was a
problem not just of form but also of who was hired. That tells
me, you guys, your credibility, frankly, is a little weak. I
apologize.
But here, for example--again, I am reading from your
internal document--a large number of inspectors, quote, ``were
hired who have unrealistic expectations and the wrong skill set
or mindset to do the work of a regulatory inspector; who are
located in geographic areas that do not make sense or aligned
to the mission; who, for example, seek law enforcement
authority as opposed to work, using the uniform as a symbol of
identity and authority rather than a tool to be used.''
I mean, that suggests to me that it wasn't just a tweaking,
a little improvement of the bonding with the union, but there
were people hired who were inappropriate to the position to
which they were hired. I can give further examples of that. The
fact that you tell me that, no, we haven't really released
anybody, we have just reassigned them, tells me you haven't
been serious about what you are doing.
Mr. Wulf. I think we have come a long way in building the
culture of the organization and building the regulatory
compliance organization. And we have, you know, some very
professional, extraordinarily talented folks throughout our
team. They come from a variety of backgrounds----
Mr. Cassidy. OK. So, ``some''--this is plural--``some are
simply unsuited for supervision, treating employees in an
unfair, unprofessional, or disrespectful manner. Others are
uninformed about their responsibilities as a supervisor to
manage employee issues.''
This is your internal document. And yet what I am hearing
from you is, no, we haven't really released anybody, but we are
working on it. Frankly, that doesn't help your credibility.
Mr. Beers. Sir, some of the thoughts behind that statement
were that individuals were hired into positions that they
weren't adequately trained and, from a baseline resume review,
didn't have the background for.
Mr. Cassidy. I am out of time----
Mr. Beers. What we have done is go through the process of
training, go through the process of moving those individuals to
more appropriate positions that are cast against their
qualifications.
Mr. Cassidy. Has anybody had a reduction in pay? Because
another thing was, ``An excess number of highly graded
personnel are serving in positions that do not contribute to
the mission at a level commensurate with their pay grades.''
Has anybody taken a decrease in pay?
Mr. Beers. That is where I say we are moving people to more
appropriate positions.
But let me ask David to clarify.
Mr. Wulf. And we have made a lot of process over the past
year. I mean, that report was put together about a year ago,
and we have put into place a variety of things, including
training for supervisors. We have----
Mr. Cassidy. If I am a taxpayer and if I see something that
smacks of cronyism, per your report, the obvious question is,
am I getting more bang for my taxpayer buck?
Has anybody taken a cut in pay?
Mr. Wulf. We have people in positions for which they are
more suited. And we have put into place, you know, an open and
transparent process.
Mr. Cassidy. I will take that as a ``no.'' We are out of
time. I apologize.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman is yielding back his time.
I guess the big point is, if you can't do the small things,
how can the country, the localities, the taxpayers, the public
interest groups, expect us to do the big things? And that line
of questioning, I think, just highlights that.
The chair wants to announce that he wishes to recess this
hearing so Members and interested persons can go to the 9/11
service at the Capitol.
With no objection, Mr. Beers is excused from the first
panel.
Mr. Beers, will you commit to provide full and accurate
responses to written questions within 10 days of their
submission?
Mr. Beers. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. And that is a request from both sides.
When we return, we will have Mr. Wulf and Ms. Berrick
continue answering some questions, if that is OK with you all.
The committee stands in recess until 11:45.
[Recess.]
Mr. Shimkus. I would like to call the hearing back to
order.
Again, we want to thank you for your patience and for
giving us an opportunity to join our colleagues out on the east
steps of the Capitol. It is always a memorable time and usually
very short because on September 11th, that it was a short event
in which we gathered. So I think those of us who were here
remember that with a lot of emotions, as Americans do. And that
is why I think what we are doing here today is still important
and relevant.
So, with that, I would like to recognize myself, which
would be a second round of questions, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Berrick, CBS originally reported on problems with the
CFATS program. The report showed a video clip of the Under
Secretary of the National Protection and Programs Directorate,
during which he called the CFATS program a ``tremendous success
to date.''
Would GAO characterize the program the same way?
Ms. Berrick. No, Mr. Chairman, not based on the work we
have done to date.
And I think what is going to dictate whether or not it is
successful is whether it is able to execute its mission. And I
think they are still in the early phases of positioning
themselves to be able to do that.
Mr. Shimkus. And, following up on your response, should
they still be in the early stages?
Ms. Berrick. You know, comparing them to other regulatory
programs across DHS, I think it is certainly taking them longer
to get CFATS up and running. For example, comparing them to the
Coast Guard, who also had to set up a regulatory regime at the
ports when the Maritime and Transportation Security Act was
passed, the Coast Guard got it up and running probably in a
year and a half, although the Coast Guard did have personnel in
place and an infrastructure, so they were better equipped to
get up to speed earlier.
TSA may be a better comparison since that was a new
organization and they were setting up a new regulatory regime.
It took TSA, I think, several years, looking across both their
regulatory and voluntary programs, and they also had some
challenges but not to the degree that CFATS has had.
I think part of this could also be contributed to the
standards that inspectors are assessing against. And CFATS is
performance-based, which are broader, whereas at TSA the
standards tended to be more specific, and that could be, in
some respects, easier to establish a framework to assess
against those specific standards.
So some differences, but looking across the Department, it
has taken CFATS longer to get up and running.
Mr. Shimkus. Well, I think it was last year when I had an
inspector just come visit and kind of do an open-office-hour
type of thing. And he was well-intentioned, wanted to do the
right thing, but really was really lacking any guidance. So I
think they were going around visiting facilities but really
having no idea what they were checking for and why they were
checking for it. And it kind of saddened me just because he
really wanted to do the right thing but there was really a lack
of guidance. And this was last year, last August, so not this
past August.
I understand that GAO has placed DHS on its high-risk list
due to management challenges facing the Department. And we are
talking about the whole Department of Homeland Security. To
what extent have these management challenges had an impact on
the NPPD's ability to manage the CFATS program?
Ms. Berrick. You know, I think CFATS is an example of those
management challenges that we talk about in the high-risk area.
We placed DHS on the high-risk list in 2003 after it was
created because we found that they didn't have the rigor and
procedures and oversight over their core management functions,
and this is acquisition management, financial management,
information technology, and human capital management.
And what we were finding is, because of not having the
discipline in these management areas, it was having a negative
effect on DHS's ability to implement its mission. So there were
a number of programs that weren't meeting performance
expectations, cost more than what they were supposed to cost,
were taking longer to field, because of these management
challenges.
I think CFATS is an example of this. For example, in the
human capital area, we have talked throughout the Department
about DHS's challenges and bringing people with the needed
skills and abilities on board to fill critical positions. They
have had challenges in doing that.
In the information technology area, you know, CFATS has an
information technology tool to solicit input from the
facilities to look at their site security plans and
vulnerability assessments. The tool has some challenges, which
were identified in the internal memo, mainly that it provides a
lot of data but not in a real user-friendly format to read. So
that is an example of an IT challenge.
I think the Department as a whole has recognized these
management problems. They have some good strategies in place to
address them, but they are in the relatively early stages of
doing that.
Mr. Shimkus. So DHS is in the high-risk; CFATS is probably
their number-one problem of concern. I think it goes back to
the issue of, if you can't get the small things right, how do
people trust you to do the big things in this issue? So we
appreciate your analysis.
And my final question: Given the seriousness and multitude
of problems CFATS is facing, particularly with respect to
conducting its mission, would it be viable to consider, quote/
unquote, ``standing down'' the program for some period of time
so that these issues can be addressed before attempting to move
forward with this regulatory mission?
And to put it in another way, it is like trying to build a
car while you are racing the car.
Ms. Berrick. Right.
Mr. Shimkus. Could we get a better return on investment and
a more timely process getting it right before it deployed? Do
you understand the question?
Ms. Berrick. Yes, I do. Thank you Mr. Chairman.
You know, I think that is something DHS would have to
consider, weighing that against the need to field a program to
address existing security vulnerabilities.
You know, there is an example in DHS's history where they
did just that. They were working to field a program called
Secure Flight, which was a high-priority program within the
Department that compared the matching of passenger information
against terrorist watch lists for airline passengers. Air
carriers used to have that function. The 9/11 Commission
recommended that DHS take over that function from carriers.
Well, DHS tried to field this program for several years.
Five years into it, they weren't able to field a successful
program, and so they did just what you mentioned. They actually
stood down the program. They went back and instilled some rigor
in the acquisition that wasn't there before. They were making
sure that they were preparing appropriate documentation. And
they did that for a year. And then when they turned the switch
on and moved forward, they ended up fielding a successful
program.
So even though there was a delay when they did stand down
the program, ultimately they probably saved time, in that they
were able to address those problems they had, finish that, and
then focus on implementing the program. So I think it is
something worth thinking about.
Mr. Shimkus. Time, effort, energy, frustration, all of the
above. And I would agree, I think I am going through the secure
TSA thing now. It just popped up; I wasn't given much warning.
And all of a sudden, I can go in a different lane. So it is
pretty nice.
The chair now recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Green, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In June of this year, the House passed an appropriations
bill for the Department of Homeland Security that cut funding
for CFATS in half.
Mr. Wulf, what impact would cutting your budget in half, on
the CFATS program, what impact would it have?
Mr. Wulf. That proposed cut would have a pretty major
impact on our ability to move the program forward at, you know,
what is really a critical time for the program.
You know, we have made a great deal of progress in our
action plan. You know, we have, in essence, taken a bit of an
operational pause over the past several months. We are now at
the point where we have conducted the training. We have
developed a streamlined site security plan review process. We
have our inspectors out, having recommenced authorization
inspections. We have turned an important corner in the program.
And a cut, as the House Appropriations Committee has proposed,
would force some very, very difficult choices.
We would have a limited ability to pursue needed
improvements to the site security plan tool and the Top-Screen
and SVA tool, something we are moving forward with in
partnership with our industry stakeholders. We would have
limited ability to continue implementing the action plan. We
have made a considerable amount of progress in that
implementation process, having completed 67 of the 95 action
items.
It would essentially cut the legs out from under us when we
have turned an important corner, when we do expect and
anticipate and have already begun to see a heightened pace of
site security plan authorizations, approvals, and facility
inspections.
Mr. Green. Well, and I am sure you understand the
frustration after 6 years and funding and funding and that
frustration. But we are seeing some improvement now, and to cut
the funding and still expect results is just not going to
happen. And so I don't know what the continuing resolution we
will vote on this week has for the 6 months, but I would hope
it would be something that would give you the resources to do
your job.
Mr. Wulf, the site security plan process is a key link to
your ability to effectively review and approve plans. Have you
made progress with improving this vital tool so that the
covered facilities have clear instruction on information DHS
needs?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, we have, in fact. We, over the past several
months, having learned many lessons ourselves as we went
through the site security plan reviews at our headquarters,
have been out kind of piggybacking on events that industry
associations have been holding across the country, to get the
word out to facilities about how they can provide the detail
that will enable us to get more efficiently and effectively
through the review of the site security plans and get to
authorization and approval in a more streamlined fashion.
You know, at the same time, we are kicking off the SSP tool
focus groups, working groups, with industry to continue to try
to improve that tool to make it more user-friendly, both to the
facilities and to our reviewers, and also continuing to work
with industry on the alternative security program templates.
Mr. Green. Well, I am glad you are bringing in the
regulated community because, again, I have huge numbers of
those in our district. And we have a particular group that I
work with a lot, the East Harris County Manufacturers, made up
of oil refiners, chemical plants, service companies. And that
is one of the issues, when I talk to them, that they want to be
part of the solution instead of just being told what to do. And
sometimes the Federal Government is known for giving
instructions that don't work on the ground.
Mr. Wulf. Yes.
Mr. Green. And so I am glad you are bringing them in.
Ms. Berrick, the GAO has done extensive work on the need
for strong security at chemical facilities going back as far as
2003. Can you describe the risk posed by these facilities?
Ms. Berrick. There is a risk posed by these facilities, the
details of which are classified. We will be happy to come up
and brief you and your staff separately on that. But there is a
risk, according to DHS's threat assessment.
Mr. Green. I have no doubt that there is a risk. In fact, I
have companies that produce ammonia, that we ship ammonia, all
sorts of volatile chemicals. That is just the nature of our
district. It is important to have an effective government
program, though, that ensures chemical facilities are protected
from a terrorist attack. Is that correct?
Ms. Berrick. According to DHS's threat assessments, they
have identified a need for such a program.
Mr. Green. And, you know, there are things that are
happening in the last 6 years, even though the oversight may
not be there, or what we need. Because I know, both through the
FBI working with local law enforcement and our plant security,
I have seen them there, our local special agent in charge has
told me they have been on every plant site, in fact, probably,
by now, a number of times, to be able to work with the folks
who actually work there and produce these products that our
country needs.
Mr. Chairman, I know I am over time, so thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Cassidy, 5 minutes.
Mr. Cassidy. Mr. Wulf, again, I am a physician. I know if
you continue to have the same inputs, you should expect the
same output. So all my questions go back to that initial report
as to the inputs of your process, which obviously have been
lacking.
And, by the way, when you haven't laid off anybody and yet
we have an internal report showing that some of the people are
sitting at their desk are doing nothing, but you continue to
maintain you need the same amount of money, I am wondering why
we are giving you any because, frankly, the public trust is not
being met by your actions. That is just my perspective and as a
counterpoint to what Mr. Green said.
Ms. Berrick, in the internal report, it said that the
database CHEMS was the wrong database. ``It does appear the
database can be modified to meet needs but requires a
substantial amount of redefining requirements, reworking
protocols, codes, et cetera, calling into question the funding
spent to date,'' going back to funding.
Is the database now adequate?
Ms. Berrick. It is not, according to the office and based
on the work we have done to date.
It does provide some value because it is a tool to collect
the needed information for CFATS to assess. However, it is not
very user-friendly. Outputs are oftentimes data dumps that are
difficult to sift through, especially when you are looking at
something as complex as what CFATS is looking at.
So there are identified challenges that CFATS has
identified themselves and are working to try to address, but it
is going to take time and money to, I think, make those
revisions to the system.
Mr. Cassidy. OK. Time and money to make that revision, and
yet somehow we are going to be back on track certifying plants.
And I don't want this to be mean, but I am supposed to be
providing oversight for the American taxpayer, who, if she knew
what was going on, would just be furious.
Ms. Berrick, it said in the internal report that ISCD does
not have an established records management system to document,
development, and maintenance of necessary historical
documentation related to programs owned by the division. Has
that now been corrected?
Ms. Berrick. I don't know if that has been a closed action
item or not. I believe it is in progress. Maybe Mr. Wulf has
the current status.
Mr. Wulf. Yes, it is in progress. And we are keeping
records very, very extensively and thoroughly. It is a high
priority and something we take very seriously, as the remainder
of the action items, as well, on which we have made a
significant amount of progress on.
Mr. Cassidy. So, yes or no, do you have an established
records management system now?
Mr. Wulf. We do.
Ms. Berrick. If I could mention, Mr. Cassidy, GAO has
ongoing work looking in more detail at CFATS' ability to meet
its mission. We will be reporting on those results early next
year, including looking at the records retention issue.
Mr. Cassidy. OK. That would be great.
Budget: Our lack of focus and vision has resulted in
problems, how we spend our money, how we are managing these
funds--for example, buying first responder equipment such as
hazmat suits when, as a regulatory entity, we do not have a
first-responder role.
Ms. Berrick, has that been corrected?
Ms. Berrick. I do not know, Mr. Cassidy.
Mr. Cassidy. Mr. Wulf?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, it absolutely has. In the early days of the
program, there were course corrections. There was some
thought--and this was before my time--that the chemical
security inspectors would have a response role. As the program
evolved and as it became clear that they would not, that
equipment was repurposed within the Department.
Mr. Cassidy. Are we still paying more than $20,000 per year
for professional memberships in ASIS that are unnecessary, et
cetera?
Mr. Wulf. We are not paying for those memberships anymore.
Mr. Cassidy. And now, it says, ISCD lacks--again, internal
document--lacks a system for tracking the usage of consumable
supplies, which creates an environment for fraud, waste, and
abuse to exist.
Has that, Ms. Berrick, now been established?
Ms. Berrick. I am sorry, I don't know the current status of
that item.
Mr. Cassidy. Mr. Wulf?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, we are track tracking those supplies.
Mr. Cassidy. OK.
Now, I could go on, but I think we are making the point.
There seems to be substantial amounts of really critical things
which have to be addressed. And in an ongoing basis, we are
keeping people employed who, again, your internal documentation
suggests are the inappropriate person for their roles.
Build a case why we should give you more money.
Mr. Wulf. Well, as I have said, we have made a significance
amount of progress. I think with regard to----
Mr. Cassidy. Now, I am a physician, and I teach. So when a
medical student--and I say this not to be abusive, and I
apologize if I come across this way. But if somebody tells me
``significant''--``significant'' is one of those loosey-goosey
words that may or may not have significance.
It certainly would move the ball from here to there, but if
this is threshold at which you can actually accomplish a
mission--where are you relative to getting to the threshold
where you can actually accomplish your mission? Sure, you may
have made significant progress, but you may have this
incredible gap between where you are now and the threshold at
which you can actually accomplish your mission.
Actually, Ms. Berrick, where would you guess they are?
Ms. Berrick. I think they are in their early stages. They
are still setting up a framework to position themselves----
Mr. Cassidy. Are we 10 percent of the way there? A hundred
percent? Fifty percent? Sixty percent?
Ms. Berrick. If I had to put a guess, an educated guess
percentage, you know, maybe 25 percent.
Mr. Cassidy. Can you give us a timeframe in terms of years
at which they will reach the threshold of being able to
accomplish their mission?
Ms. Berrick. You know, all the actions under way have
different timelines. We have been told that it--CFATS is
estimating it could up take up to 3 years to complete
compliance inspections once they review the site security
plans.
Mr. Cassidy. But we don't even have a database yet which
can be easily used in order to support that initial site--so
the 3 years was after the threshold is met?
Ms. Berrick. Three years from today is the estimate that
they provided us. And, again, we are going to continue to
review this as a part of our ongoing work. And I think early
next year we will be positioned to provide you details on where
we think they are in terms of this continuum of progress.
Mr. Cassidy. OK. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Wulf, do you want to respond?
Mr. Wulf. Yes, I mean, I would love to.
We are, I believe, accomplishing our mission. The CFATS
program has accomplished a great deal over the course of its
existence. You know, the 2,700 facilities that have removed or
reduced their chemicals of interest; you know, the 7,800
security vulnerability assessments that have been completed and
reviewed by our staff; the more than 3,000 compliance
assistance visits and other outreach visits that our inspectors
have conducted have laid important groundwork.
We are at the point where we are seeing a heightened pace
of reviews of site security plans. Within the last week, we
have authorized, myself along with Assistant Secretary
Durkovich, have authorized 10 additional plans and approved our
first 2 site security plans.
We are going to be moving this program forward. And, you
know, I am very pleased to say that, you know, I have had, as
have the rest of our team in ISCD, a tremendous amount of
support within the organization. There is a tremendous amount
of commitment for getting this job done.
We are accomplishing the mission. In terms of percentages,
we put into place that corrective action plan last fall; we are
70 percent done with that. You know, not that we are ever going
to be completely done. We are going to continue forward--I am
sorry, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. I appreciate your passion in defending the
program. You can understand why my colleague, his frustration.
Mr. Wulf. Sure.
Mr. Shimkus. And we all want to move this together.
In talking with my ranking member, two things: He wants to
make sure we put on record that, obviously, our oversight is
not going to end, so we will just keep monitoring this. And I
think for both of us, for the defense of the program, and for
the giving due preference and diligence to our taxpayers, I
think it is the right course of action, to make sure that we
finish this and we have a program that we can defend publicly.
Also, without objection, I would like to pose one other
question, just because we were talking about budgets. The
President is supposed to lay out, hopefully, sequestration
issues Friday. Sequestration, 50 percent of that comes out of
defense and homeland security, national defense issues.
Have you all heard--and I know that you have a small
program within Homeland Security. But I would venture to say
that whatever budget that the House has proposed that might
address funding, sequestration might do even more.
Have you guys even talked about what effect sequestration
might have to the CFATS program?
Mr. Wulf. I have not been part of those discussions.
Mr. Shimkus. And we await the President's disclosing what
he may or may not do.
Seeing no other Members asking for time, we would like to
thank you for coming back, making sure that we could get the
second round. It was very important for all of us. And we would
like to dismiss you and empanel the second panel. So, with
that, thank you very much.
Mr. Wulf. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. We also want to thank you all for coming.
The way I operate is I am going to introduce you all, like,
right off the bat, and then we will go for 5-minute opening
statements.
We also ask unanimous consent that all members of the
subcommittee have 5 days to forward questions to you all, too.
And, without objection, so ordered.
On the second panel, we have Mr. Timothy Scott, chief
security officer of Dow Chemical Company. We also have Mr.
Matthew Leary, corporate EHS&S manager, Pilot Chemical Company.
We have Ms. Anna Fendley, United Steelworkers, Health, Safety,
and Environment Department; and Mr. Paul Orum on his own
behalf.
So, with that, we appreciate you attending. You all have 5
minutes for an opening statement. Your full statement will be
submitted for the record. I did review them, scanned them, all
last night. And so I appreciate the efforts you made on that
behalf.
And, with that, we will begin with Mr. Scott for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF TIMOTHY J. SCOTT, CHIEF SECURITY OFFICER AND
CORPORATE DIRECTOR, EMERGENCY SERVICES AND SECURITY, THE DOW
CHEMICAL COMPANY; MATTHEW J. LEARY, CORPORATE EHS&S MANAGER,
PILOT CHEMICAL COMPANY; ANNA FENDLEY, HEALTH, SAFETY, AND
ENVIRONMENT DEPARTMENT, UNITED STEELWORKERS; AND PAUL ORUM,
BLUE GREEN CHEMICAL SECURITY COALITION, INDEPENDENT CONSULTANT
TO THE CENTER FOR AMERICAN PROGRESS

STATEMENT OF TIMOTHY J. SCOTT

Mr. Scott. Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member Green, and
members of the subcommittee, my name is Tim Scott, and I am the
chief security officer for The Dow Chemical Company. I am
speaking today on behalf of Dow and the American Chemical
Council, and I will focus on four points.
First, the chemical industry and DHS have a common goal of
improving the security profile of the chemical sector, reducing
the risk of attack or the use of chemicals as a weapon, and
minimizing the impact of the potential threats on our country.
Second, the chemical industry and DHS have made some
progress using both voluntary industry initiatives and
collaborative efforts to clarify and meet performance
standards.
Third, the concerns associated with the implementation of
the Chemical Facilities Anti-Terrorism Standards and internal
DHS management issues are real. It is promising to hear that
improvements are being made in both areas. In spite of these
distractions, industry has made progress.
And, lastly, we need to build on this progress to achieve
an efficient, integrated, and sustainable security plan for the
chemical industry and our country. It is time to move on and,
in fact, accelerate our efforts.
The CFATS concept is fundamentally sound. DHS established
Risk-Based Performance Standards, flexibility for the regulated
companies to apply customized security solutions for each
unique site and situation, and DHS final approval and review
for compliance. That is the goal: to set expectations, meet
those standards, and, by doing so, reduce the vulnerability and
risk of our chemical sector.
Too often, we fixate on the methods used to achieve the
goal instead of the goal itself. No one method addresses every
site or every situation, but we are making progress.
The concept of alternative security plans offer an
excellent opportunity for a thorough but expeditious review and
approval process of the site security plans at many CFATS-
regulated facilities, especially those in the lower-tiered
sites and companies that have multiple regulated sites.
DHS recently completed a pilot test of an ACC-developed
alternative security plan, and it proved to be a worthwhile
exercise for both industry and DHS--an excellent example of an
open and collaborative effort to improve and expedite the
process. Members of the ACC implemented the Responsible Care
Security Code in 2002. And over the past decade, ACC members
have spent nearly $10 billion on security enhancements.
The code is a requirement for membership and is included in
independent, third-party audits of the Responsible Care
Management System. Recognition of the value of such voluntary
industry initiatives is being considered as another possible
means of fast-tracking reviews of site security plans.
The next generation of the DHS site security plan tool is
being developed and will be both easier and more efficient for
industry and a more valuable and usable source of information
for DHS. Progress has been made, but there are still some
hurdles to overcome.
Personnel surety is critical to any security program, and
most companies had background checks and programs in place well
before the creation of DHS. Screening against the terrorist
database is a welcome addition to the performance standards and
is, as it should be, a government responsibility.
CFATS is closing this gap, but this is an area where we can
use your help. By design, CFATS allows the flexibility to
address each performance standard using the method best suited
to each particular site and situation. The personnel surety
program and performance standards should be no exception.
There are many readily available government-approved
options that would fully comply with this standard, and there
is no valid reason to limit the options. In the case of the
personnel surety standard, however, DHS management has not
demonstrated the flexibility that is integral to and authorized
by CFATS.
Also in the area of the terrorist database screening, there
is one concept in which all security managers agree: We should
know that a person can pass this screening before we issue an
entry card and let a potential threat in the gate. And we
should keep any potential threat out of the site. That is a
pretty basic security concept, but it is not clear that DHS
management is in agreement with this important point, and that
is a cause for significant concern.
There is definitely room for improvement in the
implementation of the Chemical Facilities Anti-Terrorism
Standards, but the necessary corrections can be made and
success can be achieved. Success demands constancy of purpose,
commitment, and collaboration. ACC member companies are
committed. We should not return to square one with DHS or
change course in midstream. We should strengthen collaboration
and increase the pace to build an efficient, integrated, and
sustainable chemical security process for our country.
Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Scott follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. I would now like to recognize Mr. Leary for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW J. LEARY

Mr. Leary. Good afternoon, Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member
Green, and members of the subcommittee. My name is Matt Leary,
and I am both corporate security officer as well as the
environment, health, and safety manager for Pilot Chemical
Company in Cincinnati, Ohio.
I am pleased to provide this testimony on behalf of the
Society of Chemical Manufacturers and Affiliates regarding how
the Department of Homeland Security has been implementing the
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards and what that has
meant for Pilot's two covered facilities.
Pilot Chemical is a small, privately held company
celebrating its 60th anniversary on the 19th of this month. We
specialize in alkylation, sulfonation, and sulfation, which are
used to manufacture detergents. We have only 200 employees. We
have four facilities, two of which are subject to CFATS.
Maintaining the security of our facilities has always been
a priority for SOCMA members like Pilot. After the tragic
events of 9/11, which occurred 11 years ago today, SOCMA
members did not wait for new government regulations before
researching, investing in, and implementing additional and far-
reaching facilities security measures to address these new
threats. However, there were no uniform Federal standards for
measuring and implementing these security improvements across
industry. CFATS standardized that process.
Definitively, DHS's Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism
Standards work. DHS listened to the private sector in
developing a regulatory framework that is risk-based and
preserves the ability for security professionals to make
investments in measures that suit their specific facilities but
that also provides robust performance standards and imposes
strict penalties for noncompliance.
But that does not mean that the CFATS experience has been
easy for regulated companies, especially small ones like Pilot.
In several respects, the manner in which DHS has
implemented the regulations has imposed substantial
uncertainties and costs on companies. I recognize that DHS has
been building out the program at the very same time it has been
implementing it. Nonetheless, I am confident that DHS could
have substantially reduced these uncertainties and costs if
they had implemented the program more quickly and confidently.
They still could.
An ongoing challenge for Pilot has been the unwillingness
of DHS to give us useful guidance on how to comply with the
risk-based performance standards that are at the heart of
CFATS. DHS staff said they cannot give us clear guidance
because the CFATS statute prohibits DHS from requiring
facilities to implement specific security measures.
That is ridiculous, however. The statute's prohibition on
requiring particular security measures doesn't prevent DHS
staff from saying security measure X is one way to meet RBPS Y
at tier level Z. It is not the only way, and we are certainly
open to discussing other ways.
If DHS staff were willing to offer nonexclusive safe
harbors to those seeking feedback, companies like Pilot that
are looking for clear compliance guidelines would be able to
obtain it.
The other reason we believe DHS has been unwilling to give
clear guidance is described on page 10 of the Anderson-Wulf
memo, which says, ``There exists within the cadre of SSP
reviewers a reluctance to recommend good enough SSPs for
authorization or conditional authorization out of fear that the
leadership has a zero-tolerance philosophy toward mistakes and
out of a lack of clarity regarding expectations.''
DHS needs to make clear to staff that they are expected to
use their judgment to make decisions and that management will
not punish them for doing so.
Another issue of concern to Pilot has been DHS's misguided
personnel surety proposal. Last year, DHS announced its intent
to establish a Web-based application that would require
facility owners and operators to submit personally identifying
information about current and prospective employees, as well as
contractor and visitor personnel seeking access to a plant.
Our industry has expressed serious reservations about the
logistical nightmares that this proposal could lead to, given
the heavy presence of contractors at chemical sites, especially
during plant-wide maintenance turnarounds. DHS has been open to
discussing alternative approaches, and the industry has
proposed both interim and long-term alternatives that could
involve reliance on existing Federal vetting programs,
mechanisms by which contractor and visitor employees could
submit information regarding their own employees, and
ultimately a universal Federal security credential that would
supersede all others.
Many smaller companies like Pilot would benefit from
leveraging existing processes for vetting individuals that we
feel meet the intent of the standards. DHS's prior proposal
would unnecessarily limit the number of options open to
regulated facilities for complying with RBPS 12. Resolving this
challenge expeditiously would free up ISCD resources to focus
on the more pressing task of approving SSPs and initiating
compliance inspections.
As I have testified today, the CFATS framework is sound,
but DHS's implementation has been flawed. We have seen progress
made by the Department under the recent management of Deputy
Under Secretary Suzanne Spaulding and ISCD Director David Wulf.
To help ensure further progress is made, however, DHS must not
drift away from the spirit of the public-private partnership on
chemical security that it has so often hailed as the keystone
of the CFATS program.
I appreciate this opportunity to testify before you today
and look forward to your questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Leary follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. The chair now recognizes Ms. Fendley for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANNA FENDLEY

Ms. Fendley. Thank you. Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member
Green, and members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to be here today.
I represent the Health, Safety, and Environment Department
for the United Steel, Paper and Forestry, Rubber,
Manufacturing, Energy, Allied Industrial, and Service Workers
International Union--``USW'' for short. We represent 850,000
workers in the sectors I just mentioned and many others,
including the majority of unionized workers in the chemical
industry and hundreds of thousands of men and women whose
workplaces use and store large quantities of industrial
chemicals.
I am here today on the 11th anniversary of the September
11th attacks to talk about the critical and unfulfilled need
for comprehensive chemical security protections for workers and
citizens.
There were promises and hopes that CFATS would protect
American citizens when it was enacted as a temporary measure
before a more comprehensive program could be passed. And some
security measures have been implemented under CFATS. But CFATS
is not and never will be the comprehensive program that we need
to protect against an unforeseen terrorist attack.
Most notable for our members are several gaps in CFATS
jurisdiction that leave millions of Americans and American
infrastructure at risk. CFATS exempts thousands of water-
treatment facilities containing poisonous chlorine gas and
other chemicals. It also exempts port facilities on navigable
waters which are covered by the Maritime Transportation
Security Act.
Many of those port facilities are oil refineries, where our
USW members work in the vicinity of small towns and major U.S.
cities like Houston, Philadelphia, Los Angeles, and San
Francisco. Other facilities that fall outside of CFATS are
those under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Coast Guard, the
Department of Energy, the Department of Defense, and the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
CFATS also does not cover chemicals shipped or stored
outside the fence line in nearby rail yards or elsewhere that
may have little or no security measures. It does not prohibit
the shifting of these risks from one location to another. I
have seen pictures and gotten accounts from our members of
railcars full of hazardous chemicals parked for days outside
the fence line, within yards of a busy road, near homes and
other businesses.
Employers may engage in this form of risk-shifting to be
taken off the list of high-risk facilities, or risk-shifting
could be an established practice, occurring for years, because
workers and management simply do not recognize the hazard and
the potential for a criminal act. Under CFATS, there is no way
of knowing if and how these risks are being shifted.
Additionally, CFATS explicitly prohibits the requirement of
any particular security measures, such as safer chemical
processes. My colleagues and I work with employers every day.
Many take safety measures that go above and beyond, but there
are always some that will only do the minimum required by law
and, as we all know, some who won't even do that.
Some companies have shifted to safer processes or reduced
their inventory of hazardous chemicals. These facilities
include where our USW members make paper, aluminum, glass, and
other products. But many companies will never even look at
innovating without a legal requirement to do so.
Another important deficiency of CFATS is the lack of a
meaningful role for workers in chemical security. Workers who
operate and maintain facilities know the most about what needs
to be done to reduce vulnerability and protect against a
terrorist attack. However, under CFATS, background checks done
by employers or third parties may be used against workers or be
full of inaccuracies due to errors in reporting. CFATS also is
lacking in its provisions for an appropriate appeal process
when errors made in background checks improperly exclude
workers.
Employer background checks allow for a risk of releasing
personal information and may also result in duplication of
effort when many workers at high-risk sites already must
acquire a Transportation Worker Identification Credential, a
TWIC, issued by the TSA, which is part of DHS but separate from
the CFATS office. TWIC requires background checks, and TSA
safeguards personal information.
Workers across this country, those who would be hurt first
and worst during an attack, need stronger comprehensive
chemical security legislation that is effectively implemented.
Congress can no longer simply oversee implementation of a
measure that was intended as temporary. Action is needed to
legislate a comprehensive chemical security program that
addresses the gaps in CFATS that leave millions of American
workers and their families at risk. You, Mr. Chairman, and your
committee could take action to make these improvements.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Fendley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. And, Mr. Orum, you are recognized for 5
minutes. Thanks for joining us.

STATEMENT OF PAUL ORUM

Mr. Orum. Good afternoon. I am Paul Orum. I am pleased to
represent the views today important to the Blue Green Chemical
Security Coalition, as well as findings from research conducted
for the Center for American Progress and others.
I plan to make three main points: one, the chemical
security problem is well-known; two, the current program,
CFATS, won't, in my view, fix the problem; and, three, Congress
should pass comprehensive chemical security legislation.
The chemical security problem is well-known. More than two
dozen government agencies and others have warned that
industrial chemicals could be intentionally or inadvertently
released to cause harm. Many of these resources are listed in
my testimony, and for brevity I won't repeat them.
Two, the current temporary Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism
Standards won't fix the problem. The standards lack basic
elements of an effective program. CFATS exempts drinking-water
facilities, exempts wastewater facilities, exempts many major
refineries and terminals and chemical manufacturers that happen
to be on navigable waters.
It excludes knowledgeable employees and their
representatives from security planning. It doesn't allow DHS to
require companies to fix specific security problems on the
ground. It lacks clear deadlines for completion and approval of
assessments and plans. It lacks basic government accountability
measures, such as regular progress reports.
It doesn't secure chemical supply chains. In my view, it
perpetuates uncertainty. And, very importantly, it neglects
technological changes that can make chemical facilities less
attractive targets.
These flaws are in the law. They are all found in the
appropriations rider that created CFATS as a temporary program.
Congress should authorize a comprehensive chemical security
program. The last Congress, about 3 years ago, did so after--
the House passed after a lengthy consultation with stakeholders
in four congressional committees. This bill would have closed
the greatest loopholes while seamlessly incorporating CFATS. It
is the responsibility of Congress to authorize a comprehensive
program.
In addition, Congress should support, not hinder, existing
authority of the U.S. EPA to promote safer technologies under
the general duty clause of the Clear Air Act and, likewise, the
authority of DHS to promote intrinsically more secure
technologies as a security measure under CFATS.
While Congress should close all the chemical security
loopholes, I would like to elaborate on two current
deficiencies.
First, government accountability. If we spent $500 million
on chemical security, it is important for the public to know
what the effort is producing.
The comprehensive program passed in 2009 included
government accountability provisions, namely, regular public
progress reports to Congress. The reports were to summarize how
facilities were complying and lay out the basic scope of the
program--how many facilities, how many plants, how many
approved, and so forth. Had these provisions been included in
CFATS, the first report to Congress would have been due some 5
years ago, and many challenges would have come to light
systematically rather than as a result of leaked internal
memoranda.
In my opinion, the program will inevitably lack public
credibility if it doesn't require a complete public accounting
of facilities and scope and progress.
An effective program should also help companies identify
and remove avoidable chemical hazards. Under CFATS, DHS has not
developed the removal of unnecessary chemical targets as a
security measure.
We know that some 1,600 or more facilities have reportedly
removed chemicals of concern and others have dropped below
reporting thresholds. While we lack basic public information
about these changes, the numbers do suggest that much more than
this could be done with a structured program.
Each facility that tiers out of the program is a facility
that DHS does not have to oversee. Removing unnecessary targets
should be one of the tools in the chemical security toolbox.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify. Please let
me know of any questions or ways that I or my colleagues can be
helpful to the committee.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Orum follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. I am going to ask unanimous consent that Mr.
Pompeo can sit in. I know there may be another from your side
joining us. And then, as per tradition, if members of the
subcommittee are done asking their questions, then we will go
to other members from the full committee who are joining us.
So, with that, I recognize myself for 5 minutes, and my
questions will start with Mr. Scott.
It is my view that CFATS officials are trying to operate a
regulatory program like a police program. This brings me to
concerns with the personnel surety program, which has been
addressed a couple times today already.
As I understand it, the terrorist screening database is
operated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, not DHS. Under
another DHS program, the Maritime Transportation Security Act--
we do a lot of acronyms, so I like to read these out--if
someone with a TWIC card gets a hit on the terrorist screening
database, the TWIC is automatically deactivated and the
facility notified. Minimum DHS interference in that process.
Under CFATS, the program seems to insist that all
information be passed through them to the FBI but that the
Infrastructure Security Compliance Division cannot let a
facility know if a terrorist is working in their plant.
Do you agree with me that DHS is not trying to operate
CFATS like it was intended by Congress but more like a policing
and response program?
Mr. Scott. Yes, sir. They seem to be gathering information
and holding information within DHS instead of sharing in a
partnership, as we started out.
So the TWIC program and the background check program,
personnel surety is one example of that, where we would be
required to submit information to DHS and really never get an
answer back. Especially concerning is we don't get an answer
back if they do have somebody that is a hit in the terrorist
database. We are going to have them--if they don't tell us, we
still have a potential terrorist working in our plant, and that
is absolutely crazy.
Mr. Shimkus. And the first panel, as I was talking to Under
Secretary Beers and I--how can you give approval or the wink
and nod that a facility has been approved when they really
haven't established the personnel surety program in an
operation? I would think that would be the number-one concern.
If DHS has no response function, is there a reason why the
facility cannot communicate directly with the FBI?
Mr. Scott. No, there is absolutely no reason. In fact, most
facilities are going to communicate with their local Joint
Terrorism Task Force and the FBI and the local law enforcement.
I mean, that is the response agencies for a situation that does
occur at your site.
Mr. Shimkus. Has your experience under the MTSA, which is
the Maritime Transportation Security Act, led you to believe
that it is doable to prevent known terrorists from wandering
around a land-based plant?
Mr. Scott. Several of our larger sites are covered under
the Maritime Transportation Security Act. And we have a very
good relationship, and the Coast Guard is a very strong
organization, both on the response side and the enforcement
side, and have worked with us very closely because our MTSA
sites have the same security upgrades and same security
programs as all of our CFATS-covered sites.
Mr. Shimkus. Why do you believe strongly, as some of the
panelists do not, that EPA should not be the chemical security
agency for the Federal Government?
Mr. Scott. Well, the general duty clause was--it came to us
under the Clean Air Act. It is specifically designed for
environmental protection and does a very good job--EPA does a
very good job in that respect. They do not have a lot of
expertise in site-security types of programs, and we don't
really need to start over with a new agency, to go back to
square one and try to do this again.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Let me turn to Mr. Leary now, because Dow--monstrous, big;
Mr. Leary--small, hopefully profitable.
You testified that you have limited capital to invest in
needs across your plants, not just CFATS-related ones. So what
percentage of your capital is being tied up by the poor
implementation of the CFATS program?
Mr. Leary. Chairman, I can't really speak to the
corporation, but I can, as an example, talk to you about my
department's budgetary concerns. And at least in what I have
just submitted--our fiscal year runs September--and I think
security accounted for over 100 percent of the budget, as
compared to everything else that we are tasked to do.
Mr. Shimkus. How do we assure that the real financial needs
of your security professionals are taken seriously within the
context of CFATS implementation?
Mr. Leary. Chairman, I can only speak for Pilot in this
respect. And I am very proud to report to the subcommittee that
I have been given more than enough support to do so. And at
least from a Pilot perspective, there have been no issues
whatsoever in terms of getting support to go ahead and do what
we have to do under the standard.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
I have 13 seconds left. I will yield back my time and turn
to my ranking member, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Again, thank you for being here and patient
today.
Were you here during the first panel?
Mr. Leary. Uh-huh.
Mr. Green. The question for all of you, including the U.S.
Steelworkers, is that the CFATS personnel surety program
proposal was recently rescinded and received much criticism
from industry and unions. Can you explain what the criticism
was? And how did DHS respond to your concerns?
Mr. Scott. I will be glad to address that a little bit.
The concern is the burden on industry. You have many sites
that, mentioned earlier, have a contractor base that travels
along the gulf coast, for example, during all the shutdowns,
and you may have thousands of new employees coming in on a
daily basis for a shutdown. And they may show up at The Dow
Chemical Company today, and we would have to submit a thousand
names. And they may show up tomorrow at one of our neighboring
companies, and they will have to submit the same thousand
names.
It is a very burdensome process. And they don't recognize
any easy solutions that are out there, like a TWIC card from
MTSA.
Mr. Green. And I have a Dow facility in my district, not
your largest, obviously, not Freeport, but I assume the
contractors have their TWIC cards.
Mr. Scott. Most contractors on the gulf coast have a TWIC
card and they travel between sites.
Mr. Green. Yes. OK.
Any other response to that?
Were the steelworkers brought in? I am glad, you know, the
industry--was the small chemical--I have to admit, I don't have
many small plants in our area; we have big plants. But were the
small plant owners also brought in, along with steelworkers?
Mr. Leary. Yes, I will--at the recent security summit, put
on by SOCMA and I believe cosponsored by DHS, actually Pilot
had an opportunity to sit in on a roundtable with DHS regarding
just this topic. And I was surprisingly pleased that we were
actually asked our opinion. And so I do believe at least they
are concerned about our opinions.
Mr. Green. Ms. Fendley?
Ms. Fendley. To my knowledge, we were not brought in. But
we are very concerned about the deference to industry, as well,
and the lack of an appeals process if there is an error.
Mr. Green. You know, it seems like the testimony from our
previous panel said that they were working with the employee
groups. Did I mishear that from the earlier panel? That is what
I am concerned about. And believe me, we want everybody at the
table, you know, about whether it be the industry, small or
large, but also the employees involved there.
Maybe that opening went because they announced that they
were going to deal with using the TWIC-type application, which
I know--I have lots of steelworkers, I have four of my five
refineries and a number of my chemical plants are organized by
the steelworkers. And a few years ago, we had problem-solving,
because some of my constituents were denied their TWIC card,
but then we would find out it was a mistake, and we would work
with them on that. And I know, with our renewal coming up now,
it is going to be a problem.
But we understand the problem we have. We don't want to
reinvent it with another type of surety. And that is what
worries me. They ought to base it on whether you are--and Dow
has, at least in my area, they are all waterside, both Freeport
and the one on the Houston Ship Channel. But I know you have
plants that are not.
And is Pilot covered by it in Cincinnati----
Mr. Leary. No, sir.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. The TWIC card?
Mr. Leary. No, sir. It is not. Actually, our knowledge of
the TWIC beyond these proceedings and our involvement with
SOCMA is somewhat minimal.
Mr. Green. OK. All right. Well, we will continue to
encourage them to bring everybody at the table.
And a question for anyone else on the panel: What would you
like to see DHS do to help achieve a more smooth implementation
of the CFATS program?
One of the things we have all recognized, there has to be
some continuity and real reauthorization. And we haven't seen
that, and I don't think we will see that this Congress. But the
year-to-year is an issue.
But we also need to make sure--because my complaint is that
the year-to-year, a lot of industries don't want to spend--they
want to make sure what they are doing is going to be compliant
with whatever DHS comes out with.
Is that an issue that you all dealt with within your
companies?
Mr. Leary. From a Pilot perspective, that is one of the
biggest issues, actually. I could easily recount, for much
longer than allowed, discussions with our finance director
regarding the difficulties in budgeting for securing our
facilities. We are very much afraid that we will be looking at
an SSP approval and immediately have to expend thousands of
dollars.
Mr. Green. Mr. Scott, one of the concerns I have, because,
literally, Dow's facility is back-to-back in my area, along
with a lot of other ones, in the testimony that I have read
shows that, is there an issue with industry taking chemicals
that are produced in our plants and leaving it at unsecured
facilities off-plant-site?
You know, that bothers me because, again, I would see, in
our district--and I haven't had any complaints, but I know that
is what Ms. Fendley's testimony that is submitted included. And
that is a security issue, whether it is made at ABC or Dow or
ExxonMobil or anybody else, that some volatile chemicals are
not in a secure facility, including a rail yard that has
protections off-site.
Mr. Scott. Sir, we have put the same restrictions, the same
requirements on our shippers and on the people that--and I am
talking about Dow Chemical now--but, in general, the ACC member
companies. As part of the Responsible Care Code, security is
from the production site to the delivery to the customer. So we
have a strong security program in place.
And Dow, in particular, we have submitted our site security
plans to the DHS Safety Act Office and had the site security
plans approved. And our transportation distribution security
plans also have certification under the DHS Safety Act Office,
which is kind of the Good Housekeeping seal of approval.
So that whole chain of events takes a significant amount of
security. So I think ACC member companies certainly take that
into consideration under the Responsible Care Code.
Mr. Green. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from the State of
Kansas, Mr. Pompeo, for 5 minutes. Welcome to the subcommittee.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank you, Mr. Green,
for allowing me to participate today. I appreciate it.
Look, Mr. Scott, I have two questions for you that I wanted
to come here today and speak about. The first is, in your
written testimony, you talked about some of the problems in
DHS's program, but you were very clear that the program is
fundamentally sound, it is risk-based, it is focused on the
right set of priorities, so DHS, in large measure, has it
right. And there are things that we can improve on and tweak,
but it has largely got it right.
There are some folks who disagree with that. Former EPA
Administrator Christie Whitman said that EPA should be the
primary agency in charge of chemical security. Greenpeace has
said that EPA already has the power under the general duty
clause, in their view. There have been folks at EPA who have
suggested that, as well.
As someone who has watched EPA in other places do real harm
to potentially tens and tens of thousands of jobs across
America, that causes great concern to me.
I have introduced legislation that clarifies what I think
is already pretty clear regarding the general duty clause. It
would require EPA to complete a rulemaking process before
finding any facilities in violation of the general duty clause.
And it would clarify EPA's jurisdiction by prohibiting it from
regulating chemical security through section 112(r)(1), the
general duty clause.
What is your view, Mr. Scott, on the recent calls by the
environmental community to try and use the Clean Air Act to
regulate chemical security when we already have this enormous
apparatus in place?
Mr. Scott. Well, first, we think your legislation is a step
in the right direction to clarify roles and responsibilities.
As I mentioned earlier, EPA and the general duty clause
came under the Clean Air Act, and EPA is very strong on
environmental protection and not as strong in site security,
physical security, transportation security--all the things that
come into the supply chain around the chemical industry. So
that is not their area of expertise, and that is exactly the
reason why chemical security was put under the Department of
Homeland Security, the focus on security and all things in
addition to chemical security.
So the expertise and the foundation for the CFATS program
lies with DHS, not with EPA. So I don't think we should muddy
the waters, change in midstream, or even take one step back. We
need to move forward with DHS.
Mr. Pompeo. Right. Do you think there is also some risk
that, when you have two agencies in, it is contradictory, they
present competing demands on entities, and all of a sudden we
are in a worse place than we are even today with the challenges
DHS is facing? Do you think there is some risk of that, as
well?
Mr. Scott. I think if we are going to put an effort in to
combine some things, it certainly shouldn't be with DHS and
EPA. I would look to continue the harmonization with MTSA and
CFATS, Coast Guard and DHS. A lot of the facilities are very
similar. A lot of the facilities are already covered by one or
the other or sometimes both, and I think they can be harmonized
extremely well.
Dow has built our security programs--whether it is a CFATS
site or an MTSA site, we put security in place at the same
level. And I think that is the direction we should go if we are
going to harmonize.
Mr. Pompeo. Well, thank you. I appreciate that.
Your testimony also strongly supported the use of
alternative security programs in CFATS by DHS. How broadly do
you think the ASBs should be applied under CFATS? Is it by
facility? Or by sector? Do you have a view, does Dow have a
view on that?
Mr. Scott. Well, again, it depends on the site. But you
could certainly expand an alternative security plan to
companies that puts similar security programs in place
throughout all of their regulated sites.
So the alternative security plan, the only intent is to
give DHS all the information they need to make a decision,
improve the security of the site, and make it easier on the
submission of the information to DHS. That is the goal of an
alternative security plan.
Mr. Pompeo. I appreciate that.
Last question: Do you think that the ASP provides any less
protection for a facility than if the facility were to go
through the entire CFATS compliance regime? Or do you think it
achieves the same objective?
Mr. Scott. It is the same objective. It is just a different
way to submit the site's plan, and it is a more expeditious way
to submit the site's plan. So there is no difference in the end
result. It is either approved or it is not approved, and the
security upgrades are the same.
Mr. Pompeo. Great. Thank you.
Thank you, gentlemen.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The ranking member has asked unanimous consent to ask one
additional question. Mr. Pompeo, you may want to stay around
and listen to the answer.
And, without objection, the gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Green. I would just like the panel, if you would give
us an opinion. We are having a hearing on Mr. Pompeo's bill. I
have some concern, but would you all have any opinion on it? I
know it is not on the list.
Mr. Orum. Yes, I do.
Mr. Green. We will go right to left this time.
Mr. Orum. Recall that EPA is the lead agency for security
at water and wastewater facilities, which are CFATS-exempt. But
also, more generally, for chemical facilities, people in
communities don't necessarily make much of a distinction
whether it was inadvertent or deliberate if a gas cloud comes
to where they are.
When EPA acts to reduce catastrophic hazard potentials
under its authorities, it has the secondary benefit of removing
terrorist targets. So it is not necessarily so that EPA is
acting as a security agency, but it may yet have security
benefits.
Mr. Green. Ms. Fendley?
Ms. Fendley. I would agree with Mr. Orum. For workers at
these sites, the potential for a terrorist attack and the
potential for an accidental release, you know, they would have
the same effect. And if EPA can also work to reduce the
presence and the quantities of hazardous chemicals on these
sites, we are incredibly supportive of that.
Mr. Leary. SOCMA most certainly supports the bill as
intended. And I really can't--I think Mr. Scott said it all in
regards to our feelings, as well.
Mr. Scott. I have no disagreement as far as the routine
operation of the plant. We don't want an accidental release. We
don't want an attack that causes a release.
EPA takes care of the first part. And we do run our plants
safely and securely and within EPA guidelines for routine
operations. I think we need the focus on security to really
improve the overall security of the sector coming from DHS.
Mr. Green. I have to admit, I have some concern about two
Federal agencies dealings with it because we have enough
trouble now with DHS doing their job. But, you know, EPA does
have statutory authority already on certain things. But I would
hope our Federal agencies would work together, instead of you
having to jump through two hoops. You at least know that these
agencies are on the same page.
Mr. Shimkus. With that--and I would just weigh in in
saying, obviously I don't think the general duty clause has
relevance in plant security issues.
So, with that, we appreciate the testimony and the second
panel coming.
All members of the subcommittee have 5 days to submit
opening statements, have 10 days to submit written questions.
One letter from the American Fuels and Petrochemical
Manufacturers is inserted into the record. Without objection,
so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. The hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:53 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


