- EXPANDING HEALTH CARE OPTIONS: ALLOWING AMERICANS TO PURCHASE AFFORDABLE COVERAGE ACROSS STATE LINES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXPANDING HEALTH CARE OPTIONS: ALLOWING AMERICANS TO PURCHASE
AFFORDABLE COVERAGE ACROSS STATE LINES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 25, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-50

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-946 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                       HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                       Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                    Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois                  EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania           EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California              FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                     BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                     ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                   ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina      GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma                 LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania                MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas               JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee             CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California            JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire          TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                   MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana                ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                   JIM MATHESON, Utah
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington      G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi               JOHN BARROW, Georgia
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey               DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                 DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky                     Islands
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

(ii)
Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  officio)
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     4
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     8
Hon. Leonard Lance, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New Jersey, prepared statement..............................    94
Hon. John D. Dingell, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Michigan, prepared statement................................    94

Witnesses

Steve Larsen, Director, Center for Consumer Information and
Insurance Oversight, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services, Department of Health and Human Services..............    10
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Stephen Parente, Ph.D., Professor of Health Finance, University
of Minnesota...................................................    20
Prepared statement...........................................    22
Christie Herrera, Director, Health and Human Services Task Force,
American Legislative Exchange Council..........................    27
Prepared statement...........................................    29
Stephen Finan, Senior Director of Policy, American Cancer
Society, Cancer Action Network.................................    42
Prepared statement...........................................    45
Paul Howard, Ph.D., Senior Fellow, Manhattan Institute...........    59
Prepared statement...........................................    61

Submitted Material

Letter of April 28, 2011, from Janice K. Brewer, Governor of
Arizona, submitted by Mr. Pallone..............................    96
Article entitled, ``Consumer Response to a National Marketplace
for Individual Health Insurance,'' The Journal of Risk and
Insurance, 2010, submitted by Stephen Parente..................    97

EXPANDING HEALTH CARE OPTIONS: ALLOWING AMERICANS TO PURCHASE
AFFORDABLE COVERAGE ACROSS STATE LINES

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 25, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R. Pitts,
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Pitts, Whitfield, Shimkus, Myrick,
Murphy, Blackburn, Gingrey, Latta, McMorris Rodgers, Cassidy,
Guthrie, Barton, Upton (ex officio), Pallone, Dingell, Engel,
Capps, Schakowsky, Gonzalez, Weiner, Waxman (ex officio), and
Green.
Staff Present: Clay Alspach, Counsel, Health; Andy
Duberstein, Special Assistant to Chairman Upton; Debbee Keller,
Press Secretary; Ryan Long, Chief Counsel, Health; Katie
Novaria, Legislative Clerk; John O'Shea, Professional Staff
Member, Health; Heidi Stirrup, Health Policy Coordinator; Phil
Barnett, Minority Staff Director; Alli Corr, Minority Policy
Analyst; Tim Gronniger, Minority Senior Professional Staff
Member; Purvee Kempf, Minority Senior Counsel; Karen Lightfoot,
Minority Communications Director and Senior Policy Advisor;
Karen Nelson, Minority Deputy Committee Staff Director for
Health; and Landsay Vidal, Minority Press Secretary.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The chair
recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
The topic of today's hearing is the purchase of health
insurance across state lines. Across state line purchasing of
health insurance allows health plans to be portable, to move
with an individual from job to job and state to state and gives
Americans a wider range of plans from which to choose the one
that suits them and their families best. Every state has health
insurance mandates; from Idaho with the fewest, 13 mandates, to
Rhode Island, topping the list with 69 separate mandates. My
home State of Pennsylvania has 57.
Altogether, the Council for Affordable Health Insurance has
identified a total of 2,156 mandates across the 50 states and
the District of Columbia in 2010. These range from benefit
mandates to provider mandates to groups of people who must
recover. Each mandate makes the policies sold in that state
more comprehensive. However, each mandate also increases the
cost of those policies. Most mandates increase the cost of
policies by less than 1 percent, which doesn't sound like much,
but when a state has 30, 40, or 50 mandates, and some mandates
can add 5 percent or even 10 percent more to a policy, you are
quickly pricing many people out of the market completely. By
some estimates, an average of 30 to 40 mandates can increase a
total cost of a policy between 20 and 45 percent.
States have begun to realize that, while well-intentioned,
mandating important health benefits provider coverage for their
citizens has backfired. At least 12 states now allow mandate-
free or mandate-like policies so that people can buy a plan
that is more suited to their needs with fewer costly mandates.
Additionally, nearly 30 states now require a cost estimate
of a potential mandate before it can be enacted. This should be
about consumer choice, not a one-size-fits-all state mandate
package that may or may not address a particular individual's
needs.
This is about empowering people to make decisions for
themselves, not assuming they need the government to protect
them for themselves.
If a Pennsylvania policy contained mandated benefits I
determined that I did not need or want, why shouldn't I be able
to by a policy from New Jersey or New Mexico? Why shouldn't I
be able to shop among different states and buy the policy that
is at the best price for me, and is the best tailored to my
health needs and my situation. Furthermore, why shouldn't I
expect that when states and plans have to compete for my
business and not take it for granted, that costs will go down
and quality will go up.
So with those introductory remarks, I want to thank our
witnesses, and I would like to yield the remaining time to the
gentlelady from Tennessee, Ms. Blackburn.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

The Subcommittee will come to order.
The Chair will recognize himself for an opening statement.
The topic of today's hearing is the purchase of health
insurance across state lines.
Across state line purchasing of health insurance allows
health plans to be portable--to move with an individual from
job to job and state to state--and gives Americans a wider
range of plans, from which to choose the one that suits them
and their families best.
Every state has health insurance mandates, from Idaho with
the fewest--13 mandates--to Rhode Island, topping the list with
69 separate mandates.
My home State of Pennsylvania has 57.
Altogether, the Council for Affordable Health Insurance has
identified a total of 2,156 mandates across the 50 states and
the District of Columbia in 2010. These range from benefit
mandates, to provider mandates, to groups of people who must be
covered.
Each mandate makes the policies sold in that state more
comprehensive; however, each mandate also increases the cost of
those policies.
Most mandates increase the cost of policies by less than
1%, which doesn't sound like much. But, when a state has 30,
40, or 50 mandates--and some mandates can add 5% or even 10%
more to a policy--you are quickly pricing many people out of
the market completely.
By some estimates, an average of 30 to 40 mandates can
increase the total cost of a policy between 20% and 45%.
States have begun to realize that, while well-intentioned,
mandating important health benefits and provider coverage for
their citizens has backfired.
At least 12 states now allow ``mandate-free'' or ``mandate-
lite'' policies, so that people can buy a plan that is more
suited to their needs, with fewer costly mandates.
Additionally, nearly 30 states now require a cost estimate
of a potential mandate before it can be enacted.
This should be about consumer choice, not a one-size-fits-
all state mandate package that may or may not address a
particular individual's needs. This is about empowering people
to make decisions for themselves, not assuming they need the
government to protect them for themselves.
If a Pennsylvania policy contained mandated benefits that I
determined I did not need or want, why shouldn't I be able to
buy a policy from New Jersey or New Mexico? Why shouldn't I be
able to shop among different states and buy the policy that is
at the best price for me and is the best tailored to my health
needs and my situation? Furthermore, why shouldn't I expect
that when states and plans have to compete for my business--and
not take it for granted--that costs will go down and quality
will go up?
Thank you to our witnesses, and I yield the remaining time
to Representative Blackburn.

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank you
and Chairman Upton for holding the hearing today to discuss
what I think is an innovative approach, and of course I believe
this is important legislation for us to take up. Thank you to
our witnesses for your preparation and your presence here
today.
You know, nearly 51 million Americans are lacking health
insurance. Eighty-five percent of the uninsured workers cite
unaffordability as the top reason for why they are uninsured.
There is something we can do about this. The Health Care Choice
Act, which is only 31 pages long, will harness market forces to
lower the cost of health insurance and reduce the number of
uninsured Americans by 12 million without any cost at all to
the Federal Government. It is the right-type step.
In 1965 there were only seven state benefit mandates. Today
there are over 2,100 mandates on health insurance coverage.
These mandates have increased health insurance premiums between
10 and 50 percent for American families. For example, in a high
mandate state like New York and Massachusetts, the average
family premium is just over $13,000. Right across the river in
a lower mandate state like Pennsylvania, the average is just
about $6,000, which is about the same price as in my home State
of Tennessee.
This bill would give consumers the option of buying health
insurance that meets their needs and is right for them and
their family, even if that means buying a policy that is
qualified in another state. And while I may prefer a plan that
includes a chiropractor, that choice isn't going to be right
for everyone. So let's give consumers the choice. As Speaker
Hastert used to say, We shouldn't be forcing people to buy a
Cadillac when all they need is a Chevy.
This bill will lower health insurance costs across the
country by cutting red tape. Insurance plans won't have to go
through 50 different state certification process. The result
will be significant savings, significant savings in the cost.
And it is important to note that this bill will not
decrease consumer protection or act as a race to the bottom. As
I told President Obama when we did the health care forum at the
Blair House, this bill will let the people out of their states
and allow them to choose a product that is good for them.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
And I now recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee,
Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Allowing Americans to purchase insurance coverage across
state lines is not a new idea. In fact, it is an idea that has
been promoted by Republicans for many years and one that was
extensively debated by this committee in 2005. And I think many
who sit here today remember those proceedings, so you all know
very well that I am strongly opposed to such proposals. But
what I am even more opposed to is the way Republicans purport
this idea as a proposal that would give consumers choices and
access to more affordable health insurance, because the truth
is, it does nothing of the sort.
The only choices offered by this proposal are for insurance
companies. They are the only ones who gain. It gives the
insurance industry the choice to do business in the states that
have the most favorable business climate and weakest consumer
protections. The result is a complete circumvention and it
would end state legislation as we know it.
Now, state regulation and patient protections are vital to
protect those who reside in that state from unscrupulous
actors. Regulation is needed to protect those who would
otherwise have no protection. If H.R. 371, a bill introduced by
Representative Blackburn, entitled the ``Health Care Choice
Act'' or any other bill that attempts to allow an insurance
company to license their product in one state and sell
insurance in another state, if any of those bills were to
become law, it would quickly result in a race to the bottom
among health insurance plans, a race that would drag down
patients in its wake.
H.R. 371 allows insurance companies to choose to operate
under laws of states with weaker consumer protection and risk
pooling standards. By doing so, plans will be allowed to
cherry-pick the best risk, leaving older, sicker individuals
isolated in pools without healthier individuals to offset their
medical costs. And the result would be insurance markets in
disarray, without any real pooling of risk.
Furthermore, state regulators would be unable to provide
assistance to individuals in their own states who opt to
purchase coverage from a carrier selling under a second state's
law. In my home State of New Jersey, we have enacted extensive
reforms that go beyond what many other states offer. And thanks
to these consumer protections, New Jersey is able to ensure
that its residents have access to quality individual insurance
products. But in order for New Jersey to guarantee access to
this kind of insurance, it must be able to spread risk
throughout the market and that means pooling low and high risk
together.
If H.R. 371 were enacted, it would completely dismantle New
Jersey's existing risk pool. Younger and healthier consumers
would flee New Jersey's market in order to obtain cheaper
policies that provide less coverage, leaving only high-risk
consumers in the market.
Now I don't think we can move back to a system with zero
patient protections, putting insurance companies back in
charge. This is the very thing that Democrats were trying to
reverse when we passed the Affordable Care Act. We don't want
to empower insurance companies. So I can't conclude without
pointing out that H.R. 371 also reveals the very popular and
critical patient bill of rights provisions of the Affordable
Care Act. That is no surprise. The insurance companies didn't
like those things either because they want to discriminate.
So the protections that would be repealed include, among
others, prohibiting gender rating, prohibiting the denial of
people and children with preexisting conditions insurance,
outlawing rescissions and prohibiting annual and lifetime
limits on insurance. These are the antidiscriminatory practices
that are already in effect under the health care reform and
which my constituents say they very much like. These are all
gone, all for the purpose of helping out the insurance
companies because the Republicans simply want to be with the
big insurance company.
The Affordable Care Act also created state-based health
insurance exchanges which would allow other insurance carriers
to come into states, thereby increasing competition and
lowering premiums. But the stark difference, of course, from
the Republicans is that the insurance companies would have to
comply with Federal and State mandates for coverage under the
Affordable Care Act.
I will also point out that the Affordable Care Act includes
a provision known as health care choice compacts that allows
insurers to sell insurance across state lines and only be
subject to laws in the issuing state, but it includes
protections for states and consumers. And, again, the
difference: The Affordable Care Act put a decision to allow the
insurer to sell across the line in the hands of the state where
their product will be sold, not in the hands of insurance
companies.
My whole point here is, look, I understand you are talking
about selling insurance across state lines; that can be done,
but it can't be done in a way that simply gets rid of the state
protections, eliminates the risk pools and puts all the choices
in the hands of the insurance companies.
That is what you are doing with Ms. Blackburn's bill and
others that might be like it. And that is exactly what we don't
need. It is not a problem to be able to sell across state
lines, it is the patient protections that need to be in place.
Again, I guess this is one case, Mr. Chairman, where the
Republicans actually do have a replace plan, but I think that
this replace plan is not one that is good for American
consumers, and I think it puts the country's health system in a
lot of trouble. So thank you for giving me a replace plan, but
it is not one that I think we should enact into law.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the full committee chairman, Mr. Upton, for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Thank you, Chairman Pitts, for holding this
hearing. Two weeks ago the committee reported out legislation
that will help lower health care costs by enacting real medical
liability reform. Today we will continue to examine ways that
we can replace last year's health care law with commonsense
solutions that actually do lower costs.
You heard our side talk about repeal and replace, and I do
believe that this is one of those replacement planks and
commend my colleague, Mrs. Blackburn, for leading the charge on
this issue.
Allowing Americans to purchase coverage across state lines
is an idea that has been gaining momentum for good reason.
Individuals do use and shop for products every day that are
made in other states. Yet, in health care individuals are
prohibited from purchasing coverage across state lines.
This policy has major implications for families across the
country looking for affordable health care plans. states have
imposed over 2,100 benefit mandates on health coverage.
Estimates show that these requirements increase premiums
anywhere from 10 to 50 percent. Consumers are forced to buy a
Cadillac health care plan. They are not even given the option
of something that might better fit their needs. As a result,
many individuals choose to go without any health care coverage
because of the costly mandates. states are realizing benefit
mandates are a problem that have to be dealt with. Fifteen
states are now considering legislation to allow individuals to
purchase coverage across state lines.
Two states with very different political backgrounds,
Georgia and Maine, have already recently enacted laws to
promote interstate purchase. Even our Democratic colleagues
demonstrated that they understood the problem at some level.
Section 1311(d)(3) of PPACA requires states to assume the
cost of mandates to make payments to individuals or health care
plans to defray the costs of added premiums. I may disagree
that this is the best solution, but at least they admitted that
we have a problem.
This hearing is about promoting flexibility and reducing
cost. It is a stark contrast with PPACA which doubles down on
Washington control of health care.
HHS will design the health plan that every American must
buy under the threat of a fine from the IRS. Empowering
consumers is the key to controlling costs. American families
know the value of their dollar. If given the chance, they will
demand health plans that provide better quality, lower cost,
something the Federal Government has consistently failed to do.
The question is: Will Congress and the President give the
people the freedom?
I look forward to hearing testimony from today's witnesses
and would yield to my friend the chairman emeritus of the full
committee, Mr. Barton.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Chairman Pitts, thank you for holding this hearing. Two
weeks ago, the committee reported out legislation that will
help lower health care costs by enacting real medical liability
reform. Today, we will continue to examine ways we can replace
last year's health care law with common-sense solutions that
actually lower costs. Allowing Americans to purchase coverage
across state lines is an idea that has been gaining momentum
for good reason. Individuals use and shop for products every
day that are made in other states.
Yet in health care, individuals are prohibited from
purchasing coverage across state lines. This policy has major
implications for families across the country looking for
affordable health plans. states have imposed over 2,100 benefit
mandates on health coverage. Estimates show that these
requirements increase premiums anywhere from 10 to 50 percent.
Consumers are forced to buy a Cadillac health plan; they
aren't even given the option of something that better fits
their needs. As a result, many individuals choose to go without
any health coverage because of these costly mandates.
States are realizing benefit mandates are a problem that
must be dealt with. Fifteen states are now considering
legislation to allow individuals to purchase coverage across
state lines. Two states with very different political
backgrounds, Georgia and Maine, have recently enacted laws to
promote interstate purchase.
Even my Democrat colleagues demonstrated they understood
this problem at some level. Section 1311(d)(3) of PPACA
requires states to assume the cost of mandates and make
payments to individuals or health plans to defray the cost of
added premiums. I may disagree that this is the best solution,
but at least they admitted we have a problem.
This hearing is about promoting flexibility and reducing
costs. It is a stark contrast with PPACA, which doubles down on
Washington control of health care. HHS will design the health
plan that every American must buy under the threat of a fine
from the IRS.
Empowering consumers is the key to controlling costs.
American families know the value of their dollar. If given the
chance, they will demand health plans that provide better
quality at lower costs--something the federal government has
consistently failed to do. The question is, will Congress and
the President give the people that freedom? I look forward to
hearing testimony from today's witnesses.

Mr. Barton. Thank you, Chairman Upton.
In a prior Congress we passed a bill very similar to this
bill out of committee. It was a priority of then-Speaker Denny
Hastert and our former member John Shadegg. There are over
2,000 state mandates in the various states, and the premiums
vary from about 5,000 to about 13,000. So it is obvious if you
allow plans that are covered in one state, that are approved in
one state, to be offered across the state line, it is going to
promote competition and should lower costs.
So I am very happy that Chairman Upton and subcommittee
Chairman Pitts are holding this hearing, and I would yield the
balance of Chairman Upton's time to Mr. Shimkus.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would just want to add that insurance products aren't
bad. In the era of multiple natural disasters, we will see that
many people get recovery because of insurance product. They
will get recovery for their automobile, they will get recovery
of their home. And this attack on a sector that really helps
people recover from disasters is always a little frustrating.
All we are trying to say in this debate is those types of
policies can be used in the health care industry; it is just
some state mandates get in the way of really having a
competitive product. I will give you one example. state Senator
in my State of Illinois said that the largest increase in a
health insurance policy was when the state mandated
contraceptive coverage.
Now, should you be forced to buy an individual package that
has contraceptive coverage and raise your rate? Many of us
would argue, no, you should not. Should there be minimum
coverage for things that an insurance commissioner would want
to get involved and engaged in and help resolve disputes? Yes.
So I think there is a middle ground here that we could
reach, and I will end on saying I do think this is one of many
steps that we will have to address the replace aspects of
ObamaCare as we move forward.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Waxman, for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Mr. Chairman, up until today this committee
only acted to repeal provisions of the Affordable Care Act.
Today for the first time we see what the replacement is.
However, this replacement clearly fails to keep the promises
made in the Republican resolution to replace the Affordable
Care Act, and it would be a step backward for the American
people.
The Republicans promised to increase the number of insured
Americans and to lower health care premiums. For people who are
sick, where insurance is a lifeline, this proposal of allowing
insurance companies to sell their product across state lines
does just the opposite.
The Congressional Budget Office analyzed the legislation
introduced by Representative Blackburn in 2005 when it was
supported by Mr. Shadegg. In its letter, CBO said there would
be very little effect on the rate of uninsurance; that this
proposal would cause families to lose employer-sponsored
insurance; and those needing health care, to lose insurance in
the individual market. That is a far cry from the Republican
claims that this bill will cover millions of the uninsured. CBO
also noted that the bill would increase the price of coverage
for those expected to have relatively high health care costs.
How is increasing premiums for the sick, who already spent
dollars on health care at the expense of rent and food, a step
forward in providing quality health care? This bill basically
asked someone with diabetes or breast cancer to pay more or go
without health insurance so that someone else can pay less. In
other words, they are supposed to buy a lower-priced car. Well,
I don't think they are going to be able to buy anything,
because they still can be excluded for preexisting conditions.
The goal of the Affordable Care Act is to make affordable
coverage available to everyone, sick and healthy alike, not to
help one group of people at the expense of another. Let's be
clear: states have long had the ability to allow sales of
insurance across state lines, but they could control how it
happens and when it happens, and the Affordable Care Act
affirmed that policy.
Today Maine, Georgia, and Wyoming have passed laws to allow
purchasing across state lines. Maine and Wyoming decided to
allow this with a limited number of states, but the Federal
preemption of their laws by the Blackburn bill would require
they open their borders up to every state in the country.
Numerous other states are debating pending bills and any
legislation is merely preempting the states' prerogative to do
it their way. That is an amazing thing for the Republicans, who
say that states ought to be able to act on their own. All
wisdom is not here in Washington. Instead, here in Washington
we would tell the states you can't do it your way, you have got
to do it our way.
Well, Governor Jan Brewer of Arizona last month vetoed a
bill that allowed selling insurance across state lines, saying
that this, ``provision would change Arizona's benefit
requirements based on legislative decisions in other states.''
She also said she is concerned about other risks to our
citizens who may be subject to other states' regulatory
procedures that can leave them with little recourse in the
event of mistreatment.
The proposal before us today would not allow states to
permit the selling of insurance across state lines; it would
require it to be done the way the Federal Government insists.
This bill is unlike the Affordable Care Act, which
regulates insurance to set a Federal minimum standard but
permits states to go further to protect their state's
residents.
Republicans claim to support the authority of states to
govern themselves as they see fit, but this is not what they
stand for when it comes to legislation. The people with breast
cancer, diabetes, and newborns, have been guaranteed coverage
for their services by most but not all states. So when the
Federal Government comes in and preempts those state laws,
patients with breast cancer and diabetes may not be able to
find insurance that covers their treatments and testing. If it
is covered in another state doesn't mean the insurance company
is offering a bare-bones package and is going to offer it in
every state. We don't mandate the insurance companies to do
anything. We only mandate that states allow those insurance
companies who think they can make a buck come in and sell it if
they are allowed to sell it anywhere else.
Critics claim the state benefit requirement adds as much as
50 percent to health insurance premiums, according--if I might,
Mr. Chairman, according to a more impartial source, the
National Association of Insurance Commissioners, it was less
than 5 percent. This proposal was a bad idea on its own terms
as a replacement for the Affordable Care Act. It is disastrous.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I would like again to thank the witnesses for agreeing to
appear before the committee this morning. Your willingness to
take time out of your busy schedules underscores just how
important this issue is to all of you, as it is to all of us.
Our first witness, Mr. Steve Larsen, is the director of the
Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight at the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Our next witness is Dr. Stephen Parente who is the
Minnesota insurance industry professor of health finance and
insurance in the Department of Finance in the Carlson School of
Management at the University of Minnesota.
Christie Herrera is the director of the American
Legislative Exchange Council's Health and Human Services Task
Force.
Stephen Finan is the senior director of policy for the
American Cancer Society's Cancer Action Network.
And lastly, Dr. Paul Howard is a senior fellow at the
Manhattan Institute.
Your written testimony will be entered into the record. We
ask you to summarize in 5 minutes, each of you.

STATEMENTS OF STEVE LARSEN, DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR CONSUMER
INFORMATION AND INSURANCE OVERSIGHT, CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND
MEDICAID SERVICES; STEPHEN PARENTE, PH.D., PROFESSOR OF HEALTH
FINANCE, UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA; CHRISTIE HERRERA, DIRECTOR,
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES TASK FORCE, AMERICAN LEGISLATIVE
EXCHANGE COUNCIL; STEPHEN FINAN, SENIOR DIRECTOR OF POLICY,
AMERICAN CANCER SOCIETY, CANCER ACTION NETWORK; AND PAUL
HOWARD, PH.D., SENIOR FELLOW, MANHATTAN INSTITUTE

Mr. Pitts. Mr. Larsen, you may begin your statement.

STATEMENT OF STEVE LARSEN

Mr. Larsen. Good morning, Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member
Pallone, members of the subcommittee.
Mr. Pitts. Is the mic on?
Mr. Larsen. Can you hear? OK.
Thanks for the opportunity to appear here today. I have
submitted my full testimony for the record. I am pleased to be
here and have the opportunity to comment on the issues related
to the sale of insurance across state lines.
I know we all share the same goal, of assuring affordable
and comprehensive insurance options for individuals and
families. And I believe we also agree that healthy competition
among private insurers can help drive costs down and provide
more consumer choice. But in our view, the Affordable Care Act
accomplishes these goals in the best possible way.
First, in 2014, state exchanges will foster competition
among insurers by having insurers compete on the basis of price
and quality rather than on their ability to underwrite those
who need insurance the most: people with preexisting health
conditions.
The Affordable Care Act also creates transparency, a key
component of a healthy competitive market. state health
insurance exchanges provide transparency to consumers who can
make apples-to-apples comparisons of coverage options and allow
people to understand in plain English what they are buying and
how it will protect their families.
The Affordable Care Act ensures that consumers get the
benefit of a core set of consumer protections, protections that
are critical to a well-functioning market. In 2014 insurers
will be barred from denying coverage on the basis of health
status and consumers will have high-quality coverage.
The Affordable Care Act also provides key protections and
benefits that have already taken effect, such as the
prohibition on rescissions and bans on lifetime limits on
insurance coverage. We also expanded access to care for young
people by providing coverage for dependents up to age 26 on
their parents' policies, a benefit to over 600,000 young adults
already.
In addition to the provisions of the Affordable Care Act,
many states also have basic consumer protections, including
reasonable rating bands or corridors, and restrictions on
underwriting. These ensure that people with medical conditions
are not excluded from insurance coverage.
Many states also have laws to ensure consumers have access
to an adequate network of specialists and other health care
providers, and many have mechanisms to deal with complaints
consumers might have in dealing with their insurance company.
The Affordable Care Act allows consumers to continue utilizing
the staff of these state insurance commissioners when they have
issues, concerns, or questions.
Speaking from my firsthand experience as a state insurance
commissioner for 6 years and also director of CCIIO, the
proposition of allowing interstate sales of insurance in a way
that eliminates or overrides a state's own authority to protect
or assist insurance consumers in their market is, while well-
intentioned, a step backward in the effort to provide
accessible, affordable, and fair health insurance coverage to
all citizens.
Allowing insurers to pick the state they want to be
regulated in provides the insurers the choice of which state
laws they have to comply with. Insurers can then issue policies
with fewer benefits or protections in other states that
otherwise would not allow such policies. The laws of the
issuing state become a ceiling or a cap for other states. This
will likely lead to cherry-picking of healthy groups and
individuals. And we know from experience that when we segregate
risk pools by selectively selling policies with thinner or
fewer benefits, we drive premiums up for the rest of the
population. state insurance regulators, legislators, and
governors would be powerless to try and fix this, because they
would have no jurisdiction over these policies.
In addition, proposals that preempt state insurance laws in
one state with those of another leave consumers at a
disadvantage. state insurance regulators often provide key
consumer assistance to residents of their states. The state
regulators were no longer able to provide these services to
purchasers of interstate policies. Consumers in one part of the
country would be dependent on the time and resources of a state
regulator thousands of miles away. It is likely many consumer
complaints or problems would be unaddressed.
Insurers can already sell insurance across state lines so
long as they comply with state laws. Many companies today
operate and provide insurance in multiple states.
In summary, the Affordable Care Act has increased consumer
protections and will lead to more affordable comprehensive
insurance options. Interstate sales where the laws of one state
preempt those of another would leave many consumers with less
affordable coverage and no one to turn to if any needed help
navigating the market. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Larsen follows:]

Mr. Pitts. Dr. Parente, you are recognized for 5 minutes
for your statement.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN PARENTE

Mr. Parente. Thank you, Congressman Pitts and members of
the committee, for this opportunity to speak to you today. My
name is Steve Parente. I hold the Minnesota Insurance Industry
Chair in health finance at the University of Minnesota. I am
there to serve as a professor in the finance department as well
as running a medical industry MBA program.
My areas of expertise are health economics, health
insurance, and medical technology evaluation. Most recently I
and my colleagues Roger Feldman, Jean Abraham, and Wendy Xu at
Minnesota completed a study on the impact of allowing consumers
to purchase health insurance across state lines. This peer-
reviewed study was accepted for publication last winter and is
forthcoming in the Journal of Risk and Insurance.
And on a side note, I must say that the deliberations of
this committee 5 years ago were the inspiration for that
publication. I have provided a copy of that publication with my
remarks for your consideration.
In this study we find evidence of a significant opportunity
to reduce the number of uninsured under a proposal to allow the
purchase of individual health insurance across state lines,
using three different policy scenarios.
First, the best scenario to reduce the uninsured
numerically is competition among all 50 states where one or
more states emerge as dominant players. This scenario would
yield a reduction in the uninsured by 8.1 million people.
With all due respect to Congressman Waxman, insurers don't
like this because it puts them at civil war with each other.
That is one reason this has not moved forwa rd. This idea is
not without precedent outside health care delivery, where
Delaware has become the most favored state for incorporating a
firm.
Second, the most pragmatic scenario with a good impact is
one state dominating each regional market. In this case the
uninsured will be reduced by 7.4 million. This is a compromise,
since the U.S. health insurance industry is only at halfway
national, through national employers contracting with insurers
through ERISA. This could provide a practical more politically
palatable approach to getting coverage.
Third, the five largest states scenario is the least
effective policy for increasing the number of insured people.
This is likely due to the fact that only one state of the five,
Texas, has a combined regulatory burden that is less than the
50 percentile of all states. The estimated reduction from the
five large state scenario is 4.4 million individuals.
It is important to note that these reductions in the
uninsured could be achieved without the premium subsidies or
Medicaid expansion policies prescribed in ACA. In the paper we
did model the impact of combining interstate purchase of
insurance with subsidies for private insurance, and found
additional reductions in the uninsured were possible, in many
cases doubling the reductions, albeit this could happen at
considerable cost, though.
The changes we found also took into consideration the
different market prices between communities for medical care.
For example, cost of living for nurses in Manhattan are higher
than those living in Missouri. These differences were factored
out.
As a result, the impact is almost entirely due to the
differences in the regulatory burden and mandates between the
states. In one of the most telling illustrations, we found
premium quotes for the same family, from the same insurance
company, for the same insurance benefit, to be twice as
expensive in a Jersey town, Lambertville, compared to New Hope,
Pennsylvania. These two towns are separated by a quarter mile
of Delaware River, but their citizens are likely to use many of
the same doctors and hospitals.
It is understood that policy simulation simplify many
political barriers, but the opportunity costs of not allowing
interstate sales might motivate the development of legislative
contractual agreements to provide regulatory powers between
primary and secondary states. This could be consistent with the
exchange policy as well. Of course adequate disclosure to
consumers of the primary and secondary states' obligations
would be paramount for this to work.
One possible outcome is that consumers who buy insurance in
one state but live in another could have two insurance
regulators looking out for them rather than just one. This
would address a substantial concern that de-mandating the
market could leave consumers without adequate consumer
protection. At the same time, with the effect of mandates on
premiums substantially reduces the probability that someone
would buy insurance. One must ask, which is the worst outcome;
lack of coverage for a given service, or no coverage at all due
to higher premiums from mandates?
Although we modeled the personal level impact of a national
market on coverage, we are unable to assess the impact of such
a migration on provider access as well as quality.
Nevertheless, a national market could lead to substantially
more health insurance, even those with chronic conditions and
preexisting conditions. In addition, the development of a
national market requires no additional Federal resources, other
than the support for the legislation, to permit the development
of such a change.
In closing I hope these new findings will be considered by
the Congressional Budget Office if and when this topic is
considered formally. CBO frequently uses peer-reviewed studies
as a basis for policy impact. I hope this new study will be
considered and that any opportunity with such potential to
reduce the uninsured gets serious consideration amidst the
fiscal constraints that can handicap so many of the other
coming health reforms to be implemented under the Affordable
Care Act in 2014. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Parente follows:]

Mr. Pitts. I recognize Ms. Herrera for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTIE HERRERA

Ms. Herrera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is a pleasure to
be before the subcommittee today, I am Christie Herrera. I am
director of the Health and Human Services Task Force at the
American Legislative Exchange Council, or ALEC. ALEC is a
nationwide nonpartisan organization of state lawmakers. We have
nearly 2,000 legislator members across the country, about a
third of all legislators nationwide.
Today I will briefly address how an interstate market could
bring about affordability, innovation, and choice. And I will
also discuss some nascent state proposals that have already
been mentioned here: Wyoming, Georgia, Maine, Arizona, and
Oklahoma.
Simply put, our Nation faces a crisis of the uninsured. One
in six Americans lacks health coverage and increasing numbers
either can't afford it or choose not to purchase it at all.
Many states are considering legislation to allow the purchase
of health insurance across state lines. ALEC believes that
these are promising proposals that could bring about
affordability, innovation, and choice.
First, affordability. Many Americans live in states where
high-cost health insurance is the only option and where more
affordable plans can be found just across the state line.
Innovation. When we open up these coverage options,
individuals could benefit from innovative plans in other
states, and state lawmakers could benefit from new ideas in
other states while maintaining core consumer protections in
their own state.
Choice,, people could choose more customized health plans
that meet their health needs. As has been mentioned, each state
imposes mandates that require individuals to purchase coverage
for specific benefits, procedures, or providers in order to
purchase health insurance coverage at all.
While mandates may make more coverage more comprehensive,
they also make it more expensive, and it can price people out
of the market altogether. An interstate market could allow
people to purchase out-of-state coverage with fewer mandates or
allow people to top-up for richer coverage in another state.
ALEC is generally supportive of any proposal to allow the
purchase of health insurance across state lines. However, ALEC
believes that it is the states that are best equipped to
develop and implement this kind of targeted health reform
solution. First, the states are both constitutionally and
statutorily authorized to have primary regulatory authority
over health insurance; but more importantly, we believe that
states can develop their own policies that reflect their own
unique circumstances and this kind of pluralistic state
approach can yield best practices with implementation.
We began tracking state-level legislative activity in 2007
when our legislators adopted Model Health Care Choice Act for
states. This is state-based model legislation that vests
authority in the state's insurance commissioner to allow the
sale of health insurance across state lines. In 2011, 15 states
considered this legislation.
Last year Wyoming became the first state to enact this kind
of legislation. Wyoming's law would establish a multistate
consortium that would establish reciprocity agreements for the
approval, sale, offer and structure of health insurance plans.
This month Georgia and Maine became the second and third states
to allow cross-border purchasing of health insurance. In both
states, individuals who apply for an out-of-state policy will
receive a disclaimer noting which state's laws govern benefits
in underwriting. Georgia's law gives wide latitude to a state's
insurance commissioner to qualify the sale of out-of-state
plans. And it also allows Georgia's own insurers to sell
products that are similar to those out-of-state plans.
Maine's law establishes what are called regional insurers,
headquartered in Connecticut, Massachusetts, New Hampshire or
Rhode Island, and it allows these regional insurers to sell
insurance policies in Maine. These out-of-state plans must
comply with the individual health insurance laws of its home
state and also comply with Maine's consumer protections.
Also of note are the Arizona and Oklahoma approaches that
would respectively open Arizona to a 50-state market for health
insurance and allow Oklahoma's Governor to negotiate interstate
compacts in this area.
In conclusion, ALEC believes in the promise of these state-
based initiatives because they can help many Americans choose
affordable, innovative, and customized health insurance
coverage across state lines. These state-level reforms have
only just begun, and now is the time for the states to develop
these proposals, to glean best practices for implementation,
and hopefully to demonstrate success. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Herrera follows:]

Mr. Pitt. I now recognize the gentleman Mr. Finan for 5
minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN FINAN

Mr. Finan. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Pallone, and distinguished members of the committee. I am
Stephen Finan, Senior Director of Policy at the American Cancer
Society, Cancer Action Network, which is the advocacy affiliate
of the American Cancer Society.
ACS CAN is grateful for the committee's invitation to speak
to the issue of interstate sales of health insurance and its
potential impact on consumers. Insurance issues are inherently
complex and often dense, so I would like to explain the issue
through the cancer lens: how the concept might ultimately
affect cancer patients and survivors.
Cancer death rates have decreased by 21 percent among men
and 12 percent among women since the early 1990s. Despite the
significant progress, the American Cancer Society concluded
that its long-term goals of significantly reducing the
incidence and mortality of cancer cannot be achieved unless the
significant coverage gaps that exist within the current health
care system are addressed.
Although major advances have been achieved through research
in the fight against cancer, too many advances are not being
realized by actual patients because of major shortcomings in
our Nation's health delivery system. For example, we know that
the lack of insurance coverage means later diagnosis, worse
outcomes, and thus often higher costs among cancer patients.
Even among those with private insurance, many cancer patients
are underinsured, meaning their coverage did not provide for
all the necessary and appropriate medical treatment.
Many underinsured are left with the extraordinary dilemma
of either incurring serious and potentially ruinous out-of-
pocket financial expenses to obtain necessary treatment or
curtailing essential treatment, thereby putting their health
and possibly their lives in jeopardy. The problem of paying
costly medical bills directly affects middle-class families,
particularly those with chronic diseases.
The overriding purpose of any insurance reform must be--the
overriding purpose of any reform must be to improve the
Nation's health for all its citizens. From a consumer
perspective, interstate sales offer the theoretical potential
of greater choice and lower prices. In fact, this potential
will be real under the Affordable Care Act if states choose to
participate in multistate exchanges or interstate compacts.
However, the work-in-practice interstate sales must be built on
a foundation that prevents predatory practices and unfair
predatory practices, with strong consumer rights and
enforcement protections firmly in place.
The ACA fundamentally alters the rules of the health
insurance market to work for consumers and, by extension, the
Nation's health and well-being. Moreover, the Affordable Care
Act changes the insurance market rules in a manner that
significantly enhances its competition by creating a level
playing field. Among the most important changes, all insurers
must provide access to coverage regardless of health status.
All plans must include benefits to help cover adequately a
serious medical condition like cancer. Evidence-based
prevention services must be included in all health plans.
Financial assistance to purchase health insurance is essential
for many Americans because without it, directly or indirectly,
the taxpayer winds up paying the remaining costs.
The administrative process of insurance needs to be
simplified and standardized. To have a truly consumer-driven,
competitive market, people must have easy and essentially free
access to comprehensible information so that they can make
informed decisions. These conditions exist today for virtually
every consumer product, but they don't exist for one of the
most important products in our lives: health insurance.
Risk adjustment must be an inherent part of any private
health insurance. A great good risk adjustment system will
reward insurers for finding efficient ways to provide quality
care to all health risks, rather than trying to avoid risk.
This is the proper way to harness competition to the benefit of
the consumers and our Nation.
And finally, last but not least, interstate sales, that are
currently built on a state-based system, you must change the
foundations. The consumer protections do exist across state
lines and there is adequate means of enforcement and redress.
The general concept of interstate sales of health insurance
is consistent with the overall trending consumer products in
recent years, especially with the growth of the Internet.
Competition across state lines in many consumer product areas
often benefit the consumers through greater choice and lower
prices.
So the question is, why wouldn't the same be true for
health insurance? Unlike other health consumer products, many
insurers don't always want to sell their product to any
consumer. Their business model is built around not selling to
all applicants. The strategy is very simple and clear.
Health claims highly skewed. Roughly 20 percent of the
people pay for 80 percent of cost. If an insurer can avoid that
20 percent they would still have a huge market, but they
avoided virtually all the costs. This in turn would allow them
to provide the opportunity to sell insurance relatively cheaply
to a large market of healthy people. The side effect would be
that high-risk people like cancer patients are left out, are
left in pools with extraordinarily high costs. The competitive
pressures of unregulated interstate sales would almost
certainly force insurers to embrace the highly discriminatory
tactics of cherry-picking. If some insurers cherry-pick the
lower costs of the market, the remaining insurers are left with
pools that are at a disproportionately high risk compared to
competitors.
Let me just conclude by saying it is imperative that we not
jump to the conclusion that the high cost of health insurance
today is simply a function of too little competition or too
much regulation. Interstate sales of health insurance could
nominally increase competition at lower price. However, a
highly competitive market without good, uniform rules will
simply become a faster race to the bottom. The relatively young
and healthy pool benefit, but the consequence would be
foreclosure of access to or affordability of coverage for those
with serious medical conditions like cancer. We do not believe
that this is the intent of the law or the idea, but it could
happen and that clearly would be an unacceptable outcome.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Finan follows:]

Mr. Pitts. The chair recognizes Dr. Howard for 5 minutes
for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF PAUL HOWARD

Mr. Howard. First I would like to thank Chairman Pitts and
Ranking Member Pallone for holding the hearing today on the
important topic of interstate insurance competition. I am
speaking today in my capacity as director and senior fellow at
the Manhattan Institute's Center for Medical Progress, from my
experience writing and researching on health care policy
issues, and from speaking to health insurance stakeholders,
including large and small employers, insurers, and consumers
about the challenges facing the market today.
There is no doubt that the single most important issue
facing American health care is the high and rapidly rising cost
of that care; and, directly related to it, the high cost of
health insurance. The high cost of care is the primary reason
why many Americans lack health insurance since they cannot find
affordable coverage that meets their needs, and why more
employers are dropping coverage in the face of unsustainable
cost increases.
The forces driving health care inflation are not the
villains we hear of on the campaign trail. Bad incentives, not
greedy corporations, are primarily to blame; namely, the
unlimited tax deduction for employer-provided health insurance;
the dominance of fee-for-service reimbursement system; and,
most importantly for our discussion this morning, government
regulations of insurance around health care markets that
actively deter competition that might offer lower cost but
still high-quality products to consumers.
State insurance regulations often mimic the coverage of
provider services or insurance benefits in the name of consumer
protection, when in reality what such mandates provide is
provider protection, or, I should say, provider income
protection.
Legislators often justify additional mandates by pointing
to anecdotes for coverage of a particular service or provider
that appear, at least after the fact, to be critical to the
health and well-being of a particular policyholder. But
legislation via anecdote is not a justification for adding
additional costs to standard insurance packages, particularly
when increasing the cost of those packages inevitably prices
some consumers out of the market because they can not afford to
buy the Cadillac coverage that legislators or the providers who
argue for such coverage believe we must offer.
Different consumers will have different preferences for
insurance coverage and terms. A 25-year-old male may opt for
very different insurance than a 38-year old father of two.
Telling a younger man that he must opt for the older man's
coverage is likely to price him out of the market entirely.
Creating a viable interstate insurance market will begin
the vital process of making the marginal cost of regulation
transparent to uninsured individuals who are in the most need
of more affordable insurance options. It may also spur
innovation in insurance products as states compete to offer the
best combination of cost and coverage terms. This is exactly
the type of competition that we should be encouraging in health
care and health insurance markets.
Objections to the interstate sale of health insurance rest
on a purported race to the bottom that would supposedly ensue
if consumers could purchase across state lines. However, under
legislation like the Health Care Choice Act, products sold in a
secondary state would also have to be sold within their primary
state. Policymakers and insurance regulators in the primary
state would have powerful incentive to ensure that such
coverage sold to their own residents was not deceptive and of
high quality.
Also insurance departments in the secondary state could
still collect premium taxes at high-risk pool assessments from
plans sold across state borders, ensuring the financing
necessary to maintain important consumer protections and
support state high-risk pools.
Also, although under McCarran-Ferguson, states have the
primary responsibility for regulating insurance sold to their
residents, employers that sell fund health insurance coverage
under ERISA are not subject to state regulation. More Americans
receive coverage that is exempt from state regulation, about 90
million lives, than receive regulation that is subject to both
Federal and state regulations, about 70 million.
Insurance regulation under ERISA has been generally light;
indeed, employers have nearly complete freedom under ERISA to
design their own insurance coverage, and employees are
overwhelming happy with the quality of employer-provided
coverage. Since there has been no race to the bottom in the
ERISA-protected market, it is unlikely to occur in a national
market for health insurance.
Policymakers should also not forget rising health care
costs are the single greatest barrier to accessing health
insurance for uninsured individuals regardless of health
status, and that reducing unsustainable health care cost
increases is the single most important thing we can do to
ensure that coverage remains affordable.
Mandating Cadillac coverage is the only option for
individuals locked into expensive state markets is the surest
way to continue the vicious cycle of cost increases, dropped
coverage, and large and expensive increases in public coverage
in programs like Medicaid.
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this important
issue, and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Howard follows:]

Mr. Pitts. Thanks to the panel for your opening statements.
I will now begin the questioning. I recognize myself for 5
minutes. Dr. Howard, we will start with you.
Some of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle have
argued that imposing individual mandates will lower premiums
for everyone by promoting larger risk pools and discouraging
emergency room utilization. Have we seen any evidence of lower
premiums or decreased our utilization in Massachusetts?
Mr. Howard. No. What you have seen in Massachusetts is that
ER use has actually gone up, despite the expansion of coverage
there to nearly the entire population, and costs have not gone
down. Massachusetts insurance costs have continued to go up and
it continues to lead the Nation in health insurance premiums.
So it is both a highly regulated state and a high-cost state,
and individuals have not been able to find more affordable
coverage outside of Massachusetts Commonwealth Care Program,
which is extraordinarily heavily subsidized insurance. So the
market has remained very expensive. It is extraordinarily
costly for both the state and individuals.
Mr. Pitts. Dr. Parente, do the regulations of guarantee
issue and community rating penalize people that have been
responsible and purchased insurance before they were sick?
Mr. Parente. Absolutely. In our models and from the
literature that has come out before our study, the biggest
thing the community rating and guarantee issue do is push up
the premium cost. It is just automatically what an insurance
actuary does when they factor in the price. And if someone had
been on the insurance policy and suddenly they had that mandate
that comes on and says now they are a community-rated state,
they are likely to be seeing a premium increase, by no fault of
their own, of 20 to 25 percent, sometimes as much as 30
percent, just to in effect spread that risk by the imposition
of that policy component. If you want to see that illustration,
go to New York where the individual insurance market has been
decimated by the combination of community rating and guarantee
issue over the last 10 years.
Mr. Pitts. If you would continue, Dr. Parente, would the
optimum policy goal be to have a system where consumers have
more choice, are encouraged to buy insurance when they are
healthy, and provide a safety net with those with preexisting
conditions, be able to purchase affordable coverage through
functioning high-risk pools? Would that be a lot cheaper to
accomplish than PPACA?
Mr. Parente. That would be the ideal. The logistical
challenge is to make sure that the folks that are vulnerable
and don't buy coverage, that lose coverage because of
preexisting conditions, have that high-risk pool that is
available to them.
Minnesota actually has that in place. They have had a high-
risk pool designed very successfully since 1978. It is probably
associated with about half of what would otherwise be folks who
are uninsured because of that design. If that type of design
was available more commonly across the U.S., it could actually
be quite effective.
What is nice about the interstate policy is what it does is
it levels the playing field in terms of letting people shop
freely across states, potentially electronically;
ehealthinsurance.com has shown that that can be done quite
easily. And then for those who may be in a vulnerable
situation, as long as they are identified, they can essentially
apply for premium subsidy support and essentially get it either
through a state high-risk pool design or some other type of
system.
Mr. Pitts. Ms. Herrera, you mentioned Georgia. Georgia
recently enacted a law to allow the purchase of health coverage
across state lines. Can you give us an idea of how many states
Georgia residents can now buy more affordable coverage from?
Ms. Herrera. Absolutely. In the case of Georgia, it shares
a border with Alabama, which has a relatively low number of
mandates and a relatively lightly regulated health insurance
market. Premiums are lower. So for folks in Georgia who are
uninsured, allowing them to go over to Alabama to buy a more
affordable policy would be good.
However, Georgia also shares a border with Florida, which
has mandate-rich coverage and many consumer protections. Folks
in Georgia looking for those options could buy from Florida as
well.
Mr. Pitts. Could you elaborate on the effects on coverage
in New York after PPACA-like reforms such as guaranteed issue
and community rating were adopted?
Ms. Herrera. I am not familiar with the New York market.
Mr. Pitts. Dr. Parente, can you elaborate on that?
Mr. Parente. Actually, Dr. Howard and I did a study that
came out last year that more or less showed that when that
legislation was changed in the mid-1990s it pretty much took a
functioning individual insurance market with a several hundred
thousand individuals and reduced it now to I think close to
less than 100,000 people, 50,000 people in the private
insurance market. There was additional state subsidy components
that came in place, but the cost to New York to put that
subsidy program in place ended up being net expensive and
potentially putting many New Yorkers in a much more vulnerable
position.
When we have done simulation models using the same models
in the study showing what would happen if New Yorkers could buy
from Pennsylvania and Connecticut, it potentially could reduce
the uninsured for that population affected by half.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. My time has expired.
The chair recognizes the ranking member for 5 minutes for
questions, Mr. Pallone.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I ask unanimous consent to have Mr. Green participate in
the questions and answers, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Pallone. I wanted to start with Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen, I would like to discuss with you some of the
effects that H.R. 371 or a similar proposal might have on state
governance in the insurance market. You probably know that
Arizona Governor Jan Brewer recently vetoed legislation that
would allow out-of-state carriers to sell policies in Arizona.
Mr. Chairman, I would ask unanimous consent to enter the
veto message of Governor Brewer into the record. I don't know
if you have it.
Mr. Pitts. We have it. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pallone. Is it your understanding that the proposal
like H.R. 371 would vacate the state of Arizona's decision and
in essence overturn the Governor's decision?
Mr. Larsen. That is my understanding, yes.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Governor Brewer, when she vetoed the bill
last month allowing selling insurance across state lines, she
said in the message--and that was what I just entered into the
record--she said she ``is concerned about risk to our citizens
who may be subject to other states' regulatory procedures that
could leave them with little recourse in the event of
mistreatment.''
Recalling your days when you were the insurance
commissioner for Maryland, did you, for example, have enough
money in your budget to assist consumers in other states if a
plan licensed in your state was causing problems for them
elsewhere?
Mr. Larsen. It was always a challenge to get funding for
our department, so it would have been difficult to handle the
complaints from any number of other states.
Mr. Pallone. But wouldn't we end up with more sham plans on
the marketplace and more consumers in trouble, essentially?
Mr. Larsen. I think it certainly creates that possibility.
It is very likely, yes.
Mr. Pallone. Is there anything in your experience at HHS
that leads you to believe that it would be a good idea for the
Federal Government to preempt all state insurance laws subject
to the whims of insurance companies?
Mr. Larsen. For states or the Federal Government?
Mr. Pallone. For the Federal Government to preempt all the
state insurance laws?
Mr. Larsen. No.
Mr. Pallone. I will ask you and also Mr. Finan, if I could.
I am concerned under this legislation, Ms. Blackburn's
legislation, or something similar, the incentive would be for
insurance companies to choose to locate in the state with the
least amount of protections and the least amount of oversight
of the industry.
So let me ask Mr. Larsen first, do you believe that
insurers would rush to sell products from the single state with
least possible consumer protections and other requirements?
Mr. Larsen. I do.
Mr. Pallone. And then, Mr. Finan, how would this affect the
individual health insurance market in most states? Because you
know a number of states require insurance companies to offer
coverage to everyone in their state, the guaranteed issue, and
some states require insurance companies to offer that coverage
at one rate, community rating. What effect do you think that
Ms. Blackburn's bill would have on those in most need of health
care services in these states, for example, people with cancer?
Mr. Finan. There is no question that without a level
playing field, without standardized rules across the market, it
will be a race to the bottom. states will--excuse me, insurance
companies will migrate to the least regulated states. And, as I
said in my testimony, without a guaranteed issue, they will
cherry-pick, and therefore they will be looking to pick off
from other states the best risk. They will offer minimal
benefit packages. The cost will be very low.
We know today that the consumers, most consumers, the
consumer literacy about health insurance is extremely low. They
buy in price. So they see a product across state lines with a
low price and they say, yes, that is great. But the reality is,
particularly for cancer patients, is they are not going to be
able to buy across state lines. Insurers won't accept them.
They don't have to. And they are going to be left behind in
their states with smaller risk pools with much higher risks.
And the costs will be extraordinarily high, where you are going
to end up with a bifurcated system where the young and healthy
can do very, very well, but those, once they become sick, wind
up in high-risk pools where the access to insurance is either
not available because it is denied or it is beyond their reach.
But let me just end by saying the reality is that most of
us sooner or later will get sick. One in two men and one in
three women will ultimately have cancer. And that means there
is a good chance, particularly for those in the individual
market, someday, when they most need it, they are going to be
without it.
Mr. Pallone. Let me just ask one more thing. You know, I am
worried that legislation like Ms. Blackburn's would have a
disproportionately negative impact on older Americans or near
elderly. How would this bill affect the near elderly? What do
you think it would mean?
Mr. Finan. Again, it benefits the young and healthy. But,
as you get older, the costs do correlate with age. As we get
older, the costs rise.
And in the case of cancer, cancer is a disease of the aged.
So, therefore, your chances of getting cancer increases as you
get older. And for people say in their 50s and 60s, pre-
Medicare, this becomes highly problematic, because at that
point they have no choice, and they don't have the means or
access to find alternatives. And we see too often many people
in their 50s and 60s struggling to get through until they can
get Medicare coverage.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman; and the chair
recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate you all being here today. It is really good to
sit and listen, because, obviously, there are differing views.
I would just take issue, Mr. Finan, by saying that what is
more critical to the individual who has cancer is when they
have no insurance.
This whole debate is having quality, accessible, low-cost
insurance; and the debate is really the mandates on issues that
may not deal with the catastrophic issues of health care
delivery. In my opening statement I deal with contraceptive
coverage. That prices people--if it is 1 percent per mandate
and you have 30 mandates, you have a 30 percent increase on
private health insurance.
I love ALEC, and I appreciate their position. I have got in
your testimony individual health policies as low as $110.05 in
Iowa, compared to New York which is $339.60. That is a huge
difference. Are we saying that the folks in Iowa have sham
plans? Ms. Herrera, is that a sham plan?
Ms. Herrera. Absolutely not.
Mr. Shimkus. You mean the folks in Iowa are not supporting
sham plans that their constituents--it is not just a payoff to
the insurance industry? These are quality health insurance
plans that cover catastrophic issues.
Ms. Herrera. That is a great point. I think that is the
beauty of this kind of proposal. As Dr. Parente mentioned in
his testimony, you not only have your insurance regulator,
commissioner, looking out for you, but you also have the
insurance commissioner of the insurer's home state. So we are
adding up these layers of protection as we open up the market.
Mr. Shimkus. And Iowa borders my state of Illinois.
Illinois' individual policy averages about--and this is in your
testimony--$161.16. This is a monthly. So you multiply that by
12.
So the issue is affordable, accessible, quality
catastrophic coverage, unencumbered by things that you may not
want to have covered. That is kind of this debate, from my
perspective. Obviously, other people have different
perspectives.
Let me move to----
Mr. Finan. Congressman, may I----
Mr. Shimkus. No, I have got 2 minutes and 30 seconds left,
and I need to get to this. I want to go to Mr. Larsen.
The Secretary of HHS with your counsel will be charged with
determining what benefits must be in a health plan purchased by
my constituents, is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. There is a requirement in the Affordable Care
Act that we will define what are called essential health
benefits.
Mr. Shimkus. So you will be in this mandate debate, too.
Mr. Larsen. I am not sure if we call it a mandate debate,
but----
Mr. Shimkus. Well, it will be if you determine what is in
the essential package. That was part of our debate on this
whole--why a lot of us opposed it. Because if you get into now
a national standard that adds mandates that the individual
consumer may now be forced to purchase because of the new
health care law, we are in the same boat as this entire debate.
Mr. Larsen. I would say it is different in this respect.
First, to focus on the terminology, these are essential health
benefits.
Mr. Shimkus. Well, I think the state of Illinois has
decided that contraceptive coverage is an essential health
benefit, and I would argue that a lot of my constituents do not
think so, nor do they want to pay for that. So I would be very,
very careful as you all move forward to make sure that it is
essential--I would say catastrophic coverage would be
essential. What you are doing now is part of this mandate
debate.
Let me move to another question real quick. Secretary
Sebelius has stated that the fraud and abuse in our medical
system increases costs. Do you agree with that assessment?
Mr. Larsen. I think, yes, we can reduce costs through doing
an improved job of ferreting out fraud and abuse. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. So part of the health care plan is going to
have a huge focus on ferreting out waste, fraud, and abuse.
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And with your attention and the Secretary's
attentive focus on this.
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Good. Great. Thanks.
With 30 seconds remaining, you also mention that patients
in non-grandfathered plans now have greater freedom to choose
their own doctor. Section 1311(h) of the health care law, page
78 in the yellow book that is on the table there, authorizes
HHS to issue regulations that would prohibit health plans from
contracting with certain physicians, is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. I apologize, I am not quite sure what you are
saying.
Mr. Shimkus. Well, I am done. Maybe one of my colleagues
will follow up. It is page 78. The health care law is right
there. You are welcome to grab it. I think your health care law
will allow HHS to deny individuals access to the doctor of
their choice.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the ranking member emeritus, Mr. Dingell, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy.
The French have a great saying: The more things change, the
more they are the same.
I have seen this before. About 20 years ago, this committee
went into the matter of mischief rascality in interstate sales
in insurance, and it was a scandalous thing to behold. And we
found the state regulatory agencies didn't have the authority
to address it, that they couldn't address it, and they wouldn't
address it.
Beyond that, we found something else. We found that folks
were traveling around the country with suitcases full of cash
running off to the Cayman Islands and all kinds of other
places, that places like Louisiana and Texas, next-door
neighbors, couldn't deal with their problems of enforcing the
laws. It was a terrible mess. And insurance ratepayers were
getting skimmed left and right, and commissioners of insurance
came into this committee to complain about the fact that this
was going on.
So I can see that the insurance companies have been busy,
and I can see they are looking forward to cutting a fat hog,
which this bill will permit. So I have a few questions here.
So, to Director Larsen, please answer yes or no. Section
2796 of H.R. 371, the Health Care Choices Act of 2011, would
exempt health insurers in a secondary state from complying with
any state law regarding fraud and abuse other than those that
meet the definition in section 2795. I am concerned that the
definition of fraud and abuse in H.R. 371 is so high states
would find it nearly impossible to prosecute an insurer for
fraud and abuse, thereby opening wide the door to fraudulent
activity. Now, do you agree with that statement, yes or no?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. All right. I happen to believe that H.R. 371
would increase the opportunity for rascality, particularly due
to lack of enforcement authority and oversight tools, and, as
Mr. Pallone has pointed out, money and the capabilities to deal
with these things that would be available in the secondary
state. These states would be unable to revoke the license of an
out-of-state insurer if they were found to be acting
fraudulently; and, without this type of tool to discourage
abuse, I am curious how a secondary state could in fact protect
their constituents.
Again, as a former insurance commissioner, do you believe
that a secondary state would be able to audit an insurer's
license in another state under H.R. 371, yes or no?
Mr. Larsen. I am sorry, that they would or would not be
able to audit?
Mr. Dingell. Say it again?
Mr. Larsen. Well, let me answer this way: I think that
provision of the law would give me great pause as a former
commission in my ability to oversee.
Mr. Dingell. It would be a wonderful opportunity for
rascals and rascality.
Further, if a secondary state found that an insurer acted
fraudulent in their state, do you believe again that H.R. 371
would allow a Secretary of a secondary state to prevent the
insurer that acted fraudulently from operating within their
boundaries? Yes or no?
Mr. Larsen. I think it would be difficult, yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Mr. Finan, it is clear that one of the
side effects of this bill will be a race to the bottom, and
insurance companies will be huddling up in the states with the
most lenient regulations. For example, under current law, if a
constituent of mine suffering from breast cancer has a
complaint about their insurer not covering the cancer treatment
recommended by their oncologist, my office could help them
receive recourse through the Michigan Insurance Commissioner.
I am curious how my office would handle such requests under
H.R. 371. If a constituent purchased their inadequate insurance
in Iowa, am I to expect that the Iowa Insurance Commissioner is
going to regulate this insurer? I happen to think that this
puts too much hope and trust in the insurance industry and in a
ramshackle system of regulation. I previously told my friends
on this committee this would be like using one pat of butter
for a whole loaf of bread.
Is it your opinion, Mr. Finan, that you believe that one
state or even a small group of states would be equipped to
handle the concerns and complaints of residents of a
neighboring state?
Mr. Finan. We are deeply concerned about the ability of any
state insurance department to enforce or act across state
lines.
Mr. Dingle. Thank you.
Now, one of the biggest accomplishments of The Affordable
Care Act is that consumer protections make up what is called
the Patient's Bill of Rights. H.R. 371 would repeal these
protections, leaving consumers once again vulnerable to
lifetime limits, annual limits, discrimination for pre-existing
coverage, limited health benefits, and rescissions. I tend to
believe that repealing these protections would enable the
insurance companies to discourage or prevent those suffering
from cancer or other illness from entering their pool.
Do you agree with this assessment, yes or no?
Mr. Finan. Absolutely.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your kindness. I think we
have a bad bill here.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman; and the chair
recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Dr. Murphy, for 56
minutes for questions.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you very much.
Mr. Larsen, at the end of your testimony--I couldn't find
your written testimony--you made reference to that if a person
has to go back to another state because they are having
problems with their insurance company, you said, basically, it
was likely their consumer complaints or problems would go
unresponded to or unheeded. Can you explain that?
Mr. Larsen. I think the issue is, if there is--I think the
terminology that this uses is the primary and secondary state.
If you are a resident of the secondary state, now you are
essentially beholden to the resources of the insurance
department in the primary state.
Mr. Murphy. But how did you word that, though? If you were
not from that state you felt they weren't going to be
responsive?
Mr. Larsen. It is a resource issue, frankly. If you have
got a company that is selling in 50 states from one primary
state and that primary state has to address the concerns or
complaints, which you always get as an insurance commissioner--
--
Mr. Murphy. So you feel they would be less likely to be
responsive?
Mr. Larsen. It is a resource issue. There are only so many
people----
Mr. Murphy. OK. Have you ever been to a restaurant where
you got bad service or bad food?
Mr. Larsen. Yes, I have.
Mr. Murphy. Do you go back?
Mr. Larsen. I try not to.
Mr. Murphy. Do you tell your friends not to go back?
The answer is that I think if a person goes to a restaurant
with bad service, they are about 12 times more likely to tell
friends about it, but they go to a good restaurant, they tell a
few. But the point is, word gets out; and that ruins that
restaurant's reputation.
Let me ask this: Does Medicare run things well? Because I
know I have got staff that are always dealing with Medicare and
Medicaid problems. As a matter of fact, I have introduced a
bill to deal with some of things that CMS has promised. Yet
when plaintiffs' attorneys and trial attorneys are trying to
seek information, just information, from Medicare with regard
to how much Medicare has paid on a bill, it can take them weeks
or months to find this out, and oftentimes this is an error.
Now, my problem is seniors who have this issue, they have
nowhere else to go. They have no other restaurant they can turn
to. They have no other car dealer they can turn to. They are in
a single market here where they have nowhere else to go.
So, along those lines, one of the things I hope you will
look into, when an organization has a monopoly on something,
there is no competition or anything else that anybody can do,
and that is part of what we are seeking here, is to find
another way of that. So if a person doesn't like the service
from one insurance company, they say I am not going to go back,
and that information does get out.
So I would ask the other panelists along those lines, what
mechanisms does someone see in this bill or something that
should be added to it that, if a person is shopping across
state lines, that should be available for people to have
information as to whether or not an insurance company covers
certain things or they are in effect inefficient.
Can someone answer that for me?
Mr. Finan. I would like it address that.
First of all, health insurance is not like a restaurant. I
totally agree with you. You get lousy service, you don't go
back. That is the end of that.
But what about the cancer patient who is in the middle of a
treatment, is being denied coverage they think they are
entitled to under the contract? What is the recourse? They
can't go to another health insurance plan at that point. That
is impossible.
Mr. Murphy. That is a good point. But that is a different--
I understand the point. Look, I don't want anybody to be denied
coverage. I don't want anybody cut from coverage. That is
another issue. And I do want to ask you a question about
cancer.
But my point is, however, I know in the Pittsburgh market,
we are basically locked into two companies who cover the
dominant part of the market and a couple other ones. But people
don't have any other choice. So even if they say I didn't get
good service from this insurance carrier and didn't get that
one, they have got nowhere else to go.
Ms. Herrera, can you answer that? Is there any mechanism
you see that states can help demand or provide along these
lines?
Ms. Herrera. Well, my expertise is in the area of state
legislation; and in all of the states that have enacted this
legislation, the primary state's insurance commissioner, the
primary state's courts, would adjudicate those views.
Mr. Murphy. Well, then let me go back to this cancer
question. Because, Mr. Finan, this is very important for
cancer. Because I strongly support your concerns here. But do
you see anything in this bill that prevents us from either--
maybe it should be added to this bill, maybe another bill--that
would deal with the issue of denial of coverage or denial of
pre-existing conditions or cutting someone? Do you think that
is something we still need to make sure that we address as
Congress, to make sure you still can't deny coverage?
Mr. Finan. Yes. The Affordable Care Act, one of the big
advances from a cancer patient and survivor perspective is that
there is establishment of clear consumer rights, including, for
example, the right to appeal and the clarification. This bill,
as I understand it, would repeal all of those provisions. So,
therefore, you go back to the old system where there are----
Mr. Murphy. It would repeal every single provision?
Mr. Finan. As I understand it, it would repeal title I of
the Affordable Care Act, which embeds all of those consumer
rights. So, therefore, you go back to a system where the
consumer is totally confused. We have seen this very often
among cancer patients, that they are denied coverage, they
don't know how to appeal, the rules are convoluted.
Mr. Murphy. Well, there is something in here on page 22
about the right to an external appeal process, so maybe we
should discuss that more and review that, because I would like
to find out. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentlewoman from California, Mrs. Capps, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you. And I appreciate the previous 5
minutes.
I don't want to keep you on the hot seat, Mr. Finan, but I
would like to continue this conversation about chronic
diseases.
When most people think about individuals who can't get
health insurance coverage because they are sick, they do think
about individuals with catastrophic illnesses like cancer or
AIDS or multiple sclerosis or any number of debilitating
progressive conditions. I will give you a little more time to
amplify it for us, some of the difficulties you have documented
in cancer patients getting insurance and accessing treatment
once they have insurance and the challenges that would be posed
by this bill, as you understand it.
Mr. Finan. What I stated in my statement and are absolutely
essential are the common rules. There needs to be guaranteed
issues, that insurers are not discriminating. That helps level
the risk and level the cost.
Insurance is about cost sharing. It is about sharing risk.
I mean, I have had homeowner's insurance for 30 years and have
never collected, but I am perfectly fine with that.
In health insurance, we know that sooner or later most of
us will experience a serious claim, and so we have to set the
rules so that cost is spread. It is essential to have essential
benefits. Because, too often, and we see this increasingly
often, where patients don't--get in the middle of treatment and
then they realize they have run out of benefits.
Mrs. Capps. Right.
Let me just ask you, because we are faced with two choices.
We have the law now that the approach, as you understand it
under the Affordable Care Act, but now the Health Care Choice
Act, how would you contrast ramifications for people with
cancer? Do you believe that the protections on access to
coverage would be eroded under this bill that is before us?
Mr. Finan. Oh, very quickly. No question.
Mrs. Capps. Just highlight a couple of the areas, if you
would.
Mr. Finan. Well, again, it is a race to the bottom.
Insurers are going to sell weak benefit plans at a relatively
low cost to relatively healthy people.
Mrs. Capps. And if you become sick--because a healthy
person can have a diagnosis with cancer, and then life changes
in an instant before their eyes.
Mr. Finan. And that is correct. And then, all too often,
insurers engage in practices to force people out. There have
been rescissions. This committee has done a lot of excellent
work in that area. And where do they go? Then they wind up in
pools that are extraordinarily expensive.
I know of an example of a few years ago of a woman who
moved from Alabama with insurance, wanted to move to Virginia,
which is an insurer of last resort, which means the Blue Cross
there does have to provide insurance, but they can rate based
on the risk. And a woman with breast cancer that had completed
her treatment was given a premium of over $60,000 a year. If
you inflated that to current costs, it is probably more than
$75,000 to $85,000 a year. That is what will happen to cancer
patients under this kind of system where you bifurcate the risk
pools.
Ms. Kaptur. And cherry-pick----
Mr. Finan. Cherry-pick. They will get great prices. But
people with chronic conditions like cancer are going to wind up
with extraordinarily expensive insurance.
Mrs. Capps. And, like you say, the reason we have health
insurance is to protect us if something catastrophic happens.
Mr. Finan. When you become ill.
Mrs. Capps. Yes.
Mr. Larsen, I want to use the rest of the time to talk
about the difference between-- well, talk about what states'
rights involve. You highlight in your testimony that this bill
would create an unlevel playing field where some of your
constituents are protected by the laws in their states and some
are not.
In addition, you note that this bill would undercut the
authorities of state governors, state legislators, and
insurance regulators. So states' rights are out the window,
something that most of our colleagues on the other side of the
aisle often point to as the reason to block-grant Medicaid or
to repeal the Affordable Care Act.
What would this do to consumers? How would it ultimately
hurt them, if it would?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I think it would. And it is a huge
change. I mean, compare the resources that different insurance
departments have. I think the state of Texas has 20 times the
staff as a state like Idaho. So if, for example, an insurer
decided to use as its primary state a lightly regulated state
with very little staff, it is hard to imagine how that staff
could handle essentially regulating products that might be sold
in 50 states.
Mrs. Capps. How would you imagine a state insurance
commissioner--that is something you know something about. How
would that state insurance commissioner punish abusive
insurance companies that may be located in another state?
Mr. Larsen. Again, if you don't have the authority over the
company that is selling to your residents, you----
Mrs. Capps. You have no control.
Mr. Larsen. Certainly you can, you know, talk to the other
insurance commissioner, but, at the end of the day, if they are
selling products legally under a proposal like this in your
state and they have only so many resources and so many laws--
because it is not just the resources. It is the consumer
protection provisions.
Mrs. Capps. And wouldn't most of the insurance companies
want to locate in a state that had very few regulations?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I mean, I think that is the purpose, to
sell your policies out of a lightly regulated state, both from
a resource standpoint and certainly from a benefit requirement.
You going to be selling, you know, thin, light policies in my
state. My healthy young people will gravitate to these
policies, and it will essentially destroy the risk pool in my
state, and I can't do anything about it.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and recognizes
the gentlelady from Tennessee, Mrs. Blackburn, for 5 minutes
for questions.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate so much you all are here to talk about this
issue. This is one we have talked about for a good period of
time. At the core of it is how do you increase access to
affordable health care insurance and affordable health care
delivery for all of our citizens.
Now, you know, there are a couple of ways that we can go
about this, but I find it very interesting that there are some
in this room who seem to believe that individuals can't make
their own decisions about health insurance, that it is going to
take the Federal Government, and I find that very sad. I think
that most people find a product that works for them, and they
are knowledgeable consumers, and they want to go out and buy
the best that they can afford. We see it in other sectors of
the free market system.
Mr. Finan, did you read the bill?
Mr. Finan. Yes.
Mrs. Blackburn. You read the bill.
Mr. Finan. Yes.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. You know, I would encourage you to go
back and read the portion--and Mr. Parente actually spoke to
this. You not only have your primary state but your secondary
state insurance.
Mr. Parente, would you like to elaborate on that point,
when it comes to consumer protection?
Mr. Parente. You have both states having your back,
basically, which is better than just having one state.
And, yes, you have the issue of essentially whether the
state insurance commissioner does have the resources to be able
to do this. But understand that if insurers start to migrate to
that state and that insurer pays taxes because they are
migrating to that state based on their revenue, guess what the
insurance commissioner office is going to do? Staff up.
You are going to set up a competition amongst the states on
who wants to actually have the insurance companies operating
within their parameters. And to the restaurant comment, do a
good job.
So the issue of cancer and chronic conditions, one thing I
would like to point out that is in this study that we looked at
that was discussed in the previous committee hearings, if you
have a chronic condition and you have cancer, you are better
off under an interstate provision than the status quo. And the
status quo will take us to 56 million uninsured by 2014.
This law that is being discussed or things like that
addresses those people with cancer and chronic conditions
today, not in 2014. How can you say to somebody 3 years from
now it is oK for you to die because you can't have insurance
coverage because we have to wait for the law to come into
power?
Mrs. Blackburn. OK, Ms. Herrera, let's talk about state
insurance commissioners and legislatures. Do you find that they
evaluate the cost of the mandates before they implement them or
do they put them in place and then do a review?
Ms. Herrera. In about 28 states, they have what is called a
Mandated Benefits Review Act, which requires a cost-benefit
analysis for proposed state mandates before they take effect.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. As a practical matter--and, Mr. Howard,
let me come to you on this. Because I think that some of the
research work you all at Manhattan Institute have done--as a
practical matter, insurers have to offer policies that
consumers are willing to purchase. We know that. And I believe
consumers are pretty savvy. Shouldn't they be able to determine
which type of benefits that they want, that insurers are
willing to buy, that they can go to one of the states which has
offered a certain set of mandates, a certain set of benefits,
and then make those choices, knowing that they are going to
have that benefit review in that state, find a product that
fits them, and then be able to move that into the marketplace?
So shouldn't they have the ability to make that decision?
Mr. Howard. Absolutely. And I think that what we need to
think of this is as a dynamic system. So no state is going to
want to have the reputation of being a fly-by-night state where
they were allowing terrible or abusive insurance practices.
They in effect would want to become the Delaware of insurance,
where they would want to have the reputation for the best
solvency requirements, the best consumer protection, and the
most affordable policies. So states would have powerful
incentives to attract consumers, as Dr. Parente just pointed
out, for reasons of accruing premium taxes, to have the right
mix of coverage that was both affordable and----
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you for that.
I have got another question. Mr. Larsen, your testimony
praises PPACA for supposedly aiding children with pre-existing
conditions. Yet what we have seen in some surveys since PPACA
was signed into law is that the carriers are no longer offering
child-only health policies in 20 states. The so-called
protection for children with pre-existing conditions has turned
into a nightmare, an absolute nightmare, where many parents
cannot find coverage for their children at all. Do you believe
that that is an acceptable outcome?
Mr. Larsen. Here is what I would say. We have----
Mrs. Blackburn. Yes or no?
Mr. Larsen. We have stopped the process. We tried to stop
the process of insurance companies not providing coverage to
sick kids, which they actually agreed to do and then decided
that they didn't want to do. And we have given them every tool
possible in terms of open enrollment, rating options,
everything. And I think----
Mrs. Blackburn. Do you find it acceptable that premiums
have increased on young adults 17 percent? AP reported that
young adult health premiums have increased 17 percent because
of the new law. Do you find that acceptable?
Mr. Larsen. Those certainly aren't the numbers that we have
seen, and I am not familiar with that.
Mrs. Blackburn. I will be happy to supply you with the
article.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and recognizes
the ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Waxman, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I find this bill like a bad penny--it keeps on coming back.
And it doesn't make sense now, particularly since we have the
Affordable Care Act. The Affordable Care Act was supposed to
deal with the problem of people who have pre-existing--one of
the big problems. People can't buy insurance, and they can't
buy insurance in the individual market often because they have
pre-existing conditions.
Dr. Howard, would this change the practice for pre-existing
conditions if an insurance company still wanted to
discriminate?
Mr. Howard. You know, in states that have implemented both
community rating guaranteed issue----
Mr. Waxman. I am just asking you, is there anything in this
bill that would prevent denying coverage because of pre-
existing conditions?
Mr. Howard. It would allow people to buy insurance that was
more affordable. It would give people more options to buy
insurance.
Mr. Waxman. Well, what if the insurance companies didn't
want to cover them because they had pre-existing conditions?
Mr. Howard. Insurance companies that didn't offer coverage
or offered unaffordable coverage should have the option of
state high-risk pools, federally funded, hopefully, to have
that option.
Mr. Waxman. That is not in this bill. That is not existing
law.
Now, let me go through, rather than the abstract of some of
these issues, let me get into some details.
Dr. Howard, do you believe that insurance companies should
cover the adopted children of their policyholders?
Mr. Howard. If they would like to pay for that additional
coverage. If people want to pay for additional coverage, it
shouldn't be mandated that everybody has to cover that, which
just passes costs along to other consumers.
Mr. Waxman. You don't think it is appropriate for states to
require coverage of adopted children the same as their other
natural-born children? In fact, I can't imagine how anybody
could justify an insurer not covering adopted children in the
same way they cover other children. The Blackburn bill would
end that protection that has been adopted by 45 states.
Dr. Howard, do you believe that insurance companies should
be required to cover disabled dependents, such as disabled
adult children living with their parents?
Mr. Howard. I believe that states that have those
requirements--the problem is that insurers will offer any
benefit to consumers----
Mr. Waxman. You could buy anything if you have the money,
but there would be no requirement that the insurance companies
cover disabled adult children. Disabled adult children, often
unable to work, would have nowhere to turn for their health
care unless they could be covered under their parents' policy.
Nowhere, of course, except Medicaid, which the Republicans are
proposing to destroy. The Blackburn bill would eliminate this
protection that 42 states have chosen to cover.
What about coverage for well child care?
Mr. Howard. states in this market--if we move to an
interstate insurance market, individual states will decide what
the best mix of coverage is. So for things such as disabled
children or covering adopted children, a state would say that
is a valuable policy. We are going to keep that.
Mr. Waxman. Can they mandate it? They can't require it. A
policy approved in Iowa must be sold in the state of Nebraska,
isn't that right? And if that policy doesn't cover it and other
policies decide they have to compete with this cheaper policy
and they stop offering coverage, the state has no ability to
mandate, is that right?
Mr. Howard. That is correct. But they have----
Mr. Waxman. OK. Now what about this coverage for well child
care? This is now guaranteed by 34 states that help healthy
babies stay healthy. And that would be eliminated. Thirty-four
states have required it, and this would be eliminated.
Do you believe insurers should cover diabetic testing
supplies to make sure that diabetics can manage their diabetes?
Mr. Howard. Congressman, I believe what would happen is
that insurers would look at individual mandates on a case-by-
case basis and say does this add value to the policy and help
keep our individual policyholders healthy? In many cases, they
may keep some of those mandates. They are likely to get rid of
mandates that don't have the right cost-benefit balance.
Mr. Waxman. Excuse me, the insurance companies will decide
if they want to cover that, and they won't be told they have
to, only if they think it is something they think is part of
the package they want to offer.
Mr. Howard. That gets consumers to buy their policies.
Mr. Waxman. Yes. But if consumers don't have a choice of
any policy that covers it, then they just have to buy whatever
is available. This particular requirement on diabetic testing
supplies has been guaranteed by 47 states, and that would be
eliminated by the Blackburn bill in those states.
I could keep going. Emergency care is required in 47
states; alcoholism-substance abuse treatment, 45 states. Maybe
an insurance company would decide that is too much, and they
don't want to provide that. Colon-rectal cancer screening, out
of the munificence of an insurance company, they may decide
that keeps people from getting colon cancer, but it is cheaper
to sell a policy that doesn't cover that. Cervical cancer
screening. And we can go on and on.
I must say, Mr. Chairman, that I find it amazing when
people quote the wisdom of Dennis Hastert to say you don't
force them to buy a Cadillac. If we don't allow people with
pre-existing conditions to buy anything because there is
nothing available to them, they won't even be able to buy a
jalopy. And I am always amazed when I hear people say we are
going to give people the freedom, give them the freedom to buy
something that won't be available to them because they can't
afford it or it is just not even offered.
So I yield back my time.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Mr. Waxman.
I yield to the gentleman from Georgia, Dr. Gingrey, for 5
minutes.
Dr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
I am going to turn to Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen, would you explain to us again what your
position is within the Center for Medicare and Medicaid
Services, what your title and responsibilities are?
Mr. Larsen. Sure. I am the director of the Center for
Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight, and this Center
focuses strictly on the private-market health insurance reforms
with the Affordable Care Act. So exchanges, implementation of
the MLR provisions, rate review. We do not handle--a different
Center handles Medicaid and a different Center within CMS
handles Medicare.
Dr. Gingrey. Right.
Mr. Larsen. We are strictly the private market.
Dr. Gingrey. Thank you for clarifying that.
In your testimony, you state that because of the Affordable
Care Act, sometimes referred to as ObamaCare, that most
insurance companies cannot discriminate against someone because
of pre-existing conditions; and you go on to state that ``we
have also prohibited insurance company rescissions, so most
insurers can no longer cancel coverage when individuals get
sick just because they may have made a mistake in filling out
the application and doing the paperwork.''
In all, you use the phrase ``most''--the word ``most''--
eight times in your testimony when referring to insurance plans
or companies. I am curious, Mr. Larsen, which insurance plans
do not fall under the protections you praise for the Affordable
Care Act? You say most, not all.
Mr. Larsen. I will go back and look.
The nutshell version is, for example, rescissions, which is
one of the provisions that takes effect now, that is in effect
today, that applies to all insurers. And then when we get to
the exchanges in 2014, the prohibition on pre-existing
conditions, exclusions, and exclusions, you know, based on
health status will disappear.
Dr. Gingrey. Well, let me interrupt you just for a second.
Would you say then that maybe one particular plan that is not
covered is the Medigap plan, the Medigap plan offered by AARP,
which controls over 30 percent of that market? My reading of
the bill suggests that they are not really covered. You don't
have jurisdiction over the Medigap plans that are offered by
AARP, is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. Not in my shop, no. There is a different set of
rules that apply to the Medigap plans and the conditions under
which they have to be issued. So we don't deal with the Medigap
in the exchanges.
Dr. Gingrey. Are the Medigap plans, for which we all know
in previous testimony that AARP reaps a pretty significant
profit, royalties they call it, are they subject to these same
consumer protections that you talked about in regard to----
Mr. Larsen. There is a whole different set of protections
and provisions that deal with the Medigap policies. So, for
example, Medigap isn't part of the private-market reforms we
are talking about.
Dr. Gingrey. The fact is, of course, that AARP, the
American Association of Retired Persons, who promotes and
markets this Medigap policy for a particular insurance company
from whom they receive a lot of royalties since it is 30
percent of the market, that they were granted an exemption from
a lot of this oversight and regulation. Who knows whether that
is a political support sort of thing, a reward for endorsing
ObamaCare.
But help me understand something else. You are here today
testifying on behalf of the administration that, without
ObamaCare's consumer protection, cross-state purchasing is a
bad idea. Yet seniors under Medigap plans are not afforded
those same protections. Yes or no?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I can't really speak to kind of the
details of the Medigap plan.
Dr. Gingrey. Well, I can speak yes or no, and the answer is
no.
Do you believe that seniors under Medigap plans should
enjoy the same consumer protection as younger Americans?
Mr. Larsen. As which Americans?
Dr. Gingrey. Younger.
Mr. Larsen. I think anybody in a Medigap plan should have
the right to consumer protections, and what those are compared
to what other policies are I can't get into.
Dr. Gingrey. Can you explain to me why seniors were not
given the same consumer protection under the Affordable Care
Act as younger Americans?
Mr. Larsen. Again, it is a different regime, the Medigap or
supplemental policies to Medicare, as opposed to policies
issued in the commercial market.
Dr. Gingrey. But wouldn't you agree that they deserve the
same consumer protections as any other Americans?
Mr. Larsen. They may, and they may get them. I don't know.
Dr. Gingrey. Mr. Larsen, the Obama administration and the
congressional Democrats cut over $500 billion out of Medicare
to help finance ObamaCare. And ObamaCare is not Medicare. It is
a new entitlement program, maybe an entitlement program for
younger people. They didn't provide consumer protection for
seniors that were afforded to every other American.
It is hard to ignore the fact that this administration
purposely, purposely, raided Medicare to fund a political
takeover of health care and quite simply ignored the needs of
seniors in the process. And now the solution they say is iPad.
If you think the first rate was bad, what until you see the
second.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and yields 5
minutes to the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, for
questions.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, that is interesting, that the
gentleman is criticizing the Democrats on Medicare, when he and
all but four other Republicans voted for a plan that
essentially ends Medicare. It could have a different name, but
it won't be Medicare-guaranteed benefits for the elderly.
I wanted to clarify something else, and that is the
Affordable Care Act, as I understand it, does include a
provision to allow insurers to sell insurance across state
lines and only be subject to laws in the issuing states, but
that there is also a provision known as the health care choice
compact that includes a number of protections for states and
for consumers. So insurance companies can sell across state
lines under the Affordable Care Act, am I right?
Mr. Larsen. There is a mechanism to do that. The only
difference is it doesn't result in the preemption of either
state's laws.
Ms. Schakowsky. Right. So the state laws that were cited by
Ms. Herrera--I think you mentioned Georgia, Maine, Wyoming,
maybe some others--those laws would, under the bill we are
talking about today, would be preempted. They would be
eliminated. Am I right?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Ms. Schakowsky. Under the Affordable Care Act, those states
would be able to maintain their laws.
Mr. Larsen. Right. We get the benefit of interstate sales
without the problems associated with one state preempting the
laws of another state.
Ms. Schakowsky. I really wanted to clarify that, because I
think we are talking about it as if the Affordable Care Act
doesn't allow for states to sell policies. We just do it with
the interest of consumers in mind.
Mr. Finan, you seem anxious to respond to comments or
questions that were raised by my colleague from Illinois, and I
wanted to let you do that. But I wanted also to clarify
something else.
Mr. Parente said--and it is true that some of the
protections of the Affordable Care Act don't go in place for 3
years. So, you know, he is saying that, right now, cancer
patients can just die or something. But does this bill really
protect cancer patients? So if you could say what you wanted to
say and then also----
Mr. Finan. I just wanted to go back to the gentleman from
Illinois, who has left, but he said cancer patients should be
most concerned about uninsured. We are obviously very concerned
about that. But the problem of under-insurance is an extremely
important one, too. And we do see this, and it is becoming
nefarious, where patients are in the middle of treatment,
realize their benefits have run out, that they simply can't go
to the doctor anymore, they can't get more treatment because it
is not covered.
Ms. Schakowsky. So it is not like they can pick another
restaurant.
Mr. Finan. No. Exactly. That is exactly the point.
I am sorry, what was your second question?
Ms. Schakowsky. The second question was that, while it is
true, and for some people I am sure troubling, that the
Affordable Care Act's full provisions don't come in for another
3 years, do the provisions under this bill provide the kind of
protection that you need?
Mr. Finan. Well, first of all, some of the provisions of
the Affordable Care Act have kicked in. We do have extensions
of dependent coverage. There is no ban on lifetime limits now.
There are raising of the annual limits. So some of the benefits
have kicked in. There is a transition.
But the point is, if we didn't have the Affordable Care Act
act, we would be in a worse place. We would go back to the pre-
Affordable Care Act where none of those provisions are in
place. So the Affordable Care Act is moving----
Ms. Schakowsky. But would this bill----
Mr. Finan. No, as I understand the bill, it would
essentially go back to the world of protections we had before
the Affordable Care Act; and, in fact, it would exacerbate it
for all of the reasons I said. You wind up with a race to the
bottom and you wind up with cherry-picking, which makes
things--ultimately, we would wind up with a worse situation
than we had before.
Ms. Schakowsky. Let me just finish with this. As a former
state legislator, we worked very hard on both sides of the
aisle to put in the consumer protections that are in our state
legislation that range from mammograms to all kinds of things
that we thought should be available in our state. And that is
true, and Mr. Waxman enumerated many that are so popular that
40-45 states have those. Those, as I understand it, Mr. Larsen,
would all be eliminated if there were something from out of
state.
Mr. Larsen. Sure. If an insurer picked as its primary state
a state that didn't have those benefits, and there are a small
number that don't, then, yes, that would set the standard or
the ceiling for all other states in which those policies were
sold and you would not get the benefit of those.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and recognizes
the gentleman from Louisiana, Dr. Cassidy, for 5 minutes for
question.
Dr. Cassidy. Folks, I have 5 minutes. If I interrupt you, I
am not being rude, I am just trying to maximize.
Dr. Howard, Mr. Pallone spoke glowingly of how New Jersey
regulates, protects consumers, et cetera, et cetera, and they
don't want a race to the bottom. What I see, though, from your
excellent testimony, Ms. Herrera, is that the premiums for
somebody with an individual policy in New Jersey are about 40
percent higher than in Pennsylvania. New York, which also has
banned community rating, I suppose, and guaranteed issue, it is
more than double.
What is going to be the impacts upon insurance? What is the
data? Everybody is talking about how they feel. I want data.
What are the data about doubling of premium and what that does
to your rate of uninsured?
Mr. Howard. I defer to Dr. Parente on the exact numbers.
Mr. Parente. I mean, basically, if you have premiums that
are, you know, substantially less, obviously more people are
going to get coverage. That is the best way to deal with it.
Dr. Cassidy. If you lower premiums by 50 percent, that
would have a significant impact on the ability of people to get
good coverage, correct?
Mr. Parente. Yes.
Dr. Cassidy. And data shows that?
Mr. Parente. Yes. That is what the study shows. That is
what we are trying to say.
Dr. Cassidy. Mr. Finan, we actually have empiric data. We
know that ERISA plans have few mandates. No cancer mandates
that I know of. And yet we know that they, if you will, can be
compared to plans which have lots of mandates, including some
ERISA plans governed by state insurance companies.
Is there any difference that you know of, data, not
feelings, but data that you know of, in difference in cancer
outcomes between those covered by ERISA plans without mandates
and those covered by plans subject to mandates?
Mr. Finan. I do not know of any specific data, no.
Dr. Cassidy. I didn't think so. So, in fact, much of what
you are saying is kind of an existential anxiety. I am not sure
you actually have data to show that the mandates improve. Just
comparing ERISA to non-ERISA, no mandates to mandates, I am not
sure you have that data.
Mr. Finan. But the problem is----
Dr. Cassidy. No, no, no, no, I am sorry. I am really into
data right now.
Dr. Parente or Dr. Howard--I am checking for your Ph.D.s, I
am sorry--Mr. Larsen suggests that the community rating keeps
the young and healthy in the market. He kind of painted a
catastrophic, oh my gosh, if we don't keep them in market,
terrible things happen.
Can you elaborate--maybe it was you, Dr. Howard--what
happened in New York state to the rates of uninsured among the
young when they put in community rating?
Mr. Howard. The market collapsed.
Dr. Cassidy. I am sorry. What did the market do?
Mr. Howard. The market collapsed.
Dr. Cassidy. And that is not an existential anxiety. That
is data, correct?
Mr. Howard. That is correct.
Dr. Cassidy. Do you want to elaborate a little bit more?
Mr. Howard. Yes. As recently as 2000, I believe, there were
over 128,000, 130,000 people in New York's individual direct
pay market. Today, there are fewer than 30,000 in that market.
And people have recognized because costs have skyrocketed and
young and healthy people have had to drop out of the market.
Dr. Cassidy. So it went to this highly regulated market
that theoretically is going to provide protections for people.
You say the market collapsed.
Mr. Howard. Theoretically, it is supposed to get people to
stay in the market, but because young people are very cost
sensitive, they drop out.
Dr. Cassidy. OK, got you.
And obviously one thing that was a problem that PPACA had
to address was the problem of the disproportionate rate of the
lack of insurance among the young. If you will, we created the
problem that we then had to cure.
Dr. Parente, in your data, in your paper, you suggest that
Alabama would be really at a competitive advantage because they
have few mandates.
Mr. Parente. That is correct.
Dr. Cassidy. I was thinking, Mr. Finan is discussing a
woman that moved from Alabama to Virginia, had to drop her
policy apparently because she was no longer allowed to purchase
that from Alabama and so was faced with a large increase. But
in your paper you would suppose that Alabama would begin to
sell. If you will, she would have been able to keep her policy.
The more robust we have interstate commerce, the more likely
someone could continue to keep their policy upon which they
were, correct?
Mr. Parente. That is correct.
Dr. Cassidy. OK. That is pretty interesting.
Now, Mr. Finan, I just see you biting your lip. I know you
want to respond to me. What would you say, man? And I only have
59 seconds, so I may cut you off to respond to you.
Mr. Finan. Going back to your ERISA issue, you are talking
apples and oranges. For the most part, large employers, whether
they be self-insured or have commercial insurance, do a very
good job or a relatively good job of covering serious
conditions because they can spread the risk. They have a large
number----
Dr. Cassidy. If we have somebody who is interstate,
interstate, we actually have the ability to share risk. Some of
the concerns you and Mr. Larsen have actually don't pertain to
this bill. We could easily have an anti-rescission bill in
here. We could easily have other things that you are
postulating would be a problem.
Mr. Finan. But the fundamental difference is in the
individual market you are selling to individuals. You are not
selling to large groups. When you sell a plan to a large group
of 5,000 or 10,000----
Dr. Cassidy. We could have a guaranteed renewability. I
mean, that could be added.
Mr. Finan. But you are not going to sell in the first
instance. If you are an insurance company, you are looking at
the individual and his or her risk at the point of enrollment.
If that person has cancer or a history of cancer, you are--you
the insurance company--are going to deny coverage.
Dr. Cassidy. If you look at the experience in Holland, if
you look at the experience in Holland, there are actually
companies that specialize in people that are high risk.
Mr. Finan. I am sorry, which company?
Dr. Cassidy. In Holland. If you actually look at the
experience in Holland, there are actually companies that make a
living specializing in those who at higher risk. The market
will respond.
I yield back. I am out of time.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
I am sorry, I am out of order. Mr. Guthrie for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it very
much.
To Mr. Larsen and Mr. Finan, the concern, the major
concern--there are several concerns you voiced--but the major
concern you voiced is that if a state with low mandates came
into Kentucky--Kentucky has 34 mandates, I believe--and offered
health insurance, and the young, healthy would purchase that
health insurance, and, therefore, as a matter of fact--to quote
Mr. Larsen--destroy the risk pool. And that is your major
concern. So it is acknowledging that people are sharing costs
as you went forward.
You also mentioned, Mr. Finan, that you had homeowners
insurance, which I have as well, and you paid 30 years on it,
and I paid for quite awhile, because we have the risk of
something happening. I want to be covered for a calamity.
However, if I could purchase homeowner's insurance when my
house is on fire or when it was burning or when a tornado was
coming, you wouldn't have paid for it for 30 years if you could
have bought it when you needed it.
Mr. Finan. Absolutely.
Mr. Guthrie. So when Mr. Larsen talks about the market
working with the exchanges, I think you are going to have the
exact same problem you are talking about here with the Health
Care Act. If you are 27 years old and healthy and you are going
to have a list of mandates that your guys are going to
subscribe, because you are going to have essential health
benefits, if you call them that, and you are going to have to
pretty much match the most expensive state. Because if you
don't, all of the lists that--Ranking Member Waxman listed all
of those. If a state goes beyond what you offer, the state has
to pay for it. They have to actually subsidize those coverages.
So either you are going to sit here and listen to a list that
he is going to read off about you not covering, you are going
to cover everything.
So my point is, I don't see how you can get around the
premiums are going to increase for anybody because of the
Health Care Act. It has to. Therefore, if you are young and
healthy and you get guaranteed issue and you get community
rating--and we have seen it New York. We have examples of it
happening, talking about data. What is going to happen to the
young and healthy? They are going to drop out of the market.
Now you have the mandate to buy, but if my math is correct,
I think it is a $600 fine plus 1 percent of your salary. So if
you are a 27-year-old engineer making $50,000 a year and are
healthy, you can pay an $1,100 fine--and the most expensive
state I think is Massachusetts. It is $14,000 a year, health
insurance. And let's even factor that back down to $10,000. So
I can pay an $1,100 fine or $10,000 health insurance policy.
And if I need health insurance--as a matter of fact, I
think you can tell your anesthesiologist just before he puts
you out to let you make one last phone call to your health
insurance company to buy health insurance. But I think that
would actually be allowed in the law.
And I don't see how this whole argument about this bill
destroying the risk pool, how does the Health Care Act not
destroy the risk pool under that scenario?
Mr. Larsen. Well, you are still going to have coverage
options with the various levels within the exchanges for
individuals. You are going to expand the risk pool, which is a
good thing. The problem with these proposals is the risk
segmentation that we get into.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, why would a young, healthy person
purchase health insurance with guaranteed issue? In New York,
you have seen it. You have seen it. Why would a young, healthy
person under PPACA purchase health insurance when the fine is
$1,100?
Mr. Larsen. People are going to have the opportunity to get
comprehensive, affordable care in the exchanges. Even the CBO
estimates that the exchanges are going to reduce administrative
costs for insurers because they are not going to have to spend
the time and the money and the resources underwriting people
and setting up rating rules to exclude sick people. So it is
going to be an attractive option.
Mr. Guthrie. But if the premium is not somewhere close to
the fine, or $1,100 a year under my scenario of $50,000 a year
for a 27-year-old, if the premium is not somewhere close to
that and you can get it when you need it, why would you buy it?
Mr. Larsen. I think people want comprehensive health care.
Mr. Guthrie. But they can get it if they need it, as
opposed to paying $10,000 a year. I mean, why would somebody
under that scenario laid out in health care buy health
insurance if they are a young person? I mean, that is the major
problem with the law. The guaranteed issue, the mandate to buy
is covered by if you don't buy it, you have to pay a fine.
But I don't understand--if the market is going to work as
you have seen in New York--I don't know if New York has a fine,
but people can drop out of the market and pay the fine. I don't
understand why you are not going to have the same problem under
the Health Care Act on a national scale that you are talking
about having by letting people having mandate-like benefits to
purchase. Why that is not going to happen. I mean, I just don't
see how that is not going to happen.
Mr. Larsen. I think you are going to see people that want
to get comprehensive coverage through the exchanges.
Mr. Guthrie. But I believe they can buy it--but the
guaranteed issue, why would they do it? That is my point. Why
would a healthy person, young, do it?
Mr. Larsen. There is a lot of people that can't get their
coverage today. I mean, that is the issue that we are dealing
with today, which is the broken market.
Mr. Guthrie. But it is still going to have a different risk
pool. Because if you are young and healthy and drop out, then
it is going to be more expensive; and, therefore, more young
and health will drop out and it will become more expensive.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from New York, Mr. Weiner, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Weiner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think actually this is an interesting conversation about
whether or not you should have insurance regulated by states. I
think you can make a pretty good argument that maybe this
should be something that should be governed nationally.
Now I would be interested in knowing whether my Republican
friends would be interested in the repeal of the provision that
essentially permits insurance companies to operate outside many
of the antitrust laws because they share information. The
argument always was, let them share information because it is
important for their business model to be able to do it.
But I actually think that most citizens when you ask them,
do they want, if they live in Tennessee, to have Blue Cross of
Utah covering them, there is a practical reason why that
doesn't happen, right? If you are Blue Cross of Utah, you have
to hire a bunch--or get a lot of people in your program that
are Tennessee doctors. You don't want to go to a doctor in
Utah. You are shaking your head no, Dr. Parente?
Mr. Parente. Yes.
Mr. Weiner. You think that patients in Tennessee would like
to have a doctor in Utah?
Mr. Parente. I am saying if they are in the ERISA plan, or
more than likely if they are a Federal employee that is living
in Tennessee, they are already working through United Health
Care, GEHA, Blue Cross/Blue Shield National Association,
getting a national provider----
Mr. Weiner. But Blue Cross of Utah--let's assume for a
moment I am in Tennessee, let's say Chattanooga, and I have a
doctor in Provost and I am sick. So it is a long flight. I
think it is going to be a pretty long flight, so I am probably
going to want a doctor in Tennessee.
So Provost, the firm in Utah, is going to have to set up
some kind of a plan for Tennessee. They have to serve some
doctors, right?
Mr. Parente. No, they are going to have a reciprocity
agreement with the----
Mr. Weiner. So, frankly, you do want to have some level of
state regulation on where people are going to be operating, but
I do think that if you really want to have interstate--ability
of people to buy interstate, then you definitely like what you
saw in ObamaCare, because by establishing basic standards that
allow a foundation that we can all kind of compare--which is
the fundamental notion here--is that we should be able to
compare these products. We should have access to them.
Interstate compacts could be formed, maybe even someday a
national compact, although I think that would be offensive to
the sensibilities of many of my Republican friends. And,
frankly, you are much closer to having this. But the real
objective has to be it has to be something that someone in New
Jersey wants from someone in Tennessee.
And the effect of the law, if this were to become law, is
that basically you are saying to a citizen, you are going to
outsource your rulemaking and your regulatory structure to
another state. Why even have the states? Why have the states be
involved in the insurance market at all then, at that point?
Why not just get them out of it completely and just regulate it
nationally? I mean, is that the position of the panel? I guess
it would be an intellectually consistent position to say to do
that. Why do the states have to be involved here at all?
The reason the states are historically, is because it is
thought that you needed some consumer protection be done at a
state level, that you be able to call your local state attorney
general or your state insurance commissioner and say, ``I've
got a beef with this insurance company and how they are
treating me.''
Under this law that we are considering today, this bill
that we are considering today, it is my understanding that what
will happen is you are going to have some authority of the
local guy to call Tennessee and say, ``Hey, stop violating my
citizen's rights.'' But that is really it; you are not going to
really be able to march into Tennessee and be able to--I guess
you can sue them in Tennessee court if you want.
But this is another instance where my friends want to
take--they did this last week with their tort proposal--they
want to remove the state's authority to govern this stuff, to
govern their own citizens. It is a strange place that that they
argue. They always talk about the needs, the rights of states.
And what you are doing now is not only taking rights away from
states and giving them to the Federal Government, which they
did last week with the tort reform proposal, but now they are
saying give it from one state to another state. I think that is
truly problematic.
But if you do believe in the idea, and I kind of in a
general sense I believe in the idea, like having more ability
of people to purchase products that are more advantageous to
them. But I don't believe that I should outsource New York's
authority to govern insurance to Texas or to New Jersey.
And I think my state legislature, for all its weaknesses
and flaws, I want to vote for them, and I want them to have the
power to pass laws. My state insurance commissioner is
appointed by my Governor. I don't think that is outside the
realm of what is practical.
What it really comes down to is my Republican friends, they
don't have a consistent thrust on what they don't like about
health care reform. They just know they don't like anything
that is being done presently by the people who are trying to
fix it, and I think that's evident here today..
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes
of questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you and the
ranking member for allowing me to waive on.
Mr. Finan, I know we were discussing Congresswoman
Blackburn's bill. There is an old saying that an ounce of
prevention is worth a pound of cure. And I am concerned this
proposal may actually raise health care costs overall as many
individuals who need preventative care don't get it.
A good example: Some cancers can be treated early if
detected early, with better results for the patient's health
and lower costs.
Colorectal cancer is one of the examples. According to the
CDC, nine out of every ten people whose colorectal cancer is
found early and treated are still alive 5 years later. If
everyone age 55 or over had regular screenings and all
precancerous polyps were removed, as many as 60 percent of the
deaths from colorectal cancer could be prevented.
Could you please comment on how this legislation will
worsen health care outcomes for individuals with cancer and
raise health care costs overall?
Mr. Finan. Yes, thank you, Congressman. That is an
extremely good and important question. The health care system
today, or up until today, has given way too little attention to
prevention and screening. We, the American Cancer Society and
the Cancer Society Action Network, have fought vigorously to
expand mandates in states on mammograms and colonoscopies, for
example, because they are proven--they are cost-effective in
reducing cancer. If people get screened properly and according
to guidelines, they are much more likely to be detected at an
earlier stage, and therefore they are likely to get better
treatment.
But as I understand the way this bill would work,
interstate sales would not be required to cover those
screenings, so we would be taking a huge step backward in terms
of addressing chronic illness. And chronic illness is the major
driver of health care costs in this country.
Mr. Green. My other question is for the whole panel. Mr.
Finan, of the problems you mentioned is those who are uninsured
and receiving a diagnosis of cancer. You also mention that even
insured people, 25 million face major struggles paying their
bills now. How is it that people with insurance are not able to
cover their health care costs? And I know there are lots of
different products out there that you can buy a $25,000 plan.
And if you have cancer, $25,000 may not even cover your first
surgery.
Can you talk about how folks who have insurance are not
covered by that insurance for their treatment, particularly in
cancer?
Mr. Finan. Well, because today there is no such thing as an
essential benefits package, insurers can offer a wide variety
of sources, and some will argue that that provides choice. But
the reality that we have seen all too often is that cancer
patients who get in the middle of treatment all of a sudden
discover there are limits within their plans. They can only go
to the doctor X number of times, or there is no coverage for
anesthesiologists or something in network.
And one of the very serious problems we have is the lack of
transparency in insurance. Most consumers buy insurance because
of the cost, but they don't have any understanding of what is
in the benefits package. They don't know how well it will cover
them if they get a chronic disease like cancer or heart
disease.
One of the great advantages of the Affordable Care Act is
much more requirements to increase transparency, to force
insurers to disclose more information, and to provide consumers
with more information.
Mr. Green. Well, and I understand, because up until the
Affordable Care Act, typically insurance was a state product,
except for ERISA. And I have a lot of companies who come under
Federal laws, no essential benefits under ERISA either. And
there have been problems in some of my large industries, but
most states make up for that by having a mandated benefit.
I have to admit I was in the state legislature in Texas for
20 years, and we started out really well, because my first term
we actually required insurance companies as mandated benefits
that covered children from the time they were born, and not
wait until they survived 30 days from birth before they would
provide health care. That was great.
But then I saw over the rest of the years, and even maybe
now, the laundry list got so big it was almost
incomprehensible.
Now, I know Alabama has a very small list, but I would
compare some states that had such huge mandated benefits, it is
really difficult. And I would like the panel to talk about that
at least in the last 20 seconds that I have.
Mr. Parente. Just a quick comment. I am a professor of
finance and insurance. There is technically not a term called
``underinsurance'' in theory in insurance law. It is a term
that has been popularized by Karen Davis at the Commonwealth
Fund to basically talk about the cost hardships associated with
just living. And insurance is part of just living in a western
industrialized society.
The point is this law, this policy, will reduce the premium
cost on average for all Americans, and that will enable them to
buy insurance easier and faster.
Mr. Green. You are talking about the Affordable Care Act?
Mr. Parente. No, I am talking about letting people buy
insurance across state lines. Anything the Affordable Care Act
is going to do is hypothetical and 3 years in the future, other
than the provisions passed already that have provided some
protections that are there.
To be very clear I applaud some of the things that are in
the exchanges. And my idea, the exchange is a bipartisan idea
that actually has a lot of potential and is consistent with the
interstate components.
Mr. Green. You surprise me because typically everything
bad--everything that is in the law is bad. Although there are a
lot of things in there that we worked on very bipartisan, you
are right.
Mr. Parente. Yes, well, I am speaking from the value of
tenure.
So what I am trying to say is that this thing that we are
discussing, interstate commerce of sales of health insurance,
could reduce, and actually from our research, shows would
reduce the number of people who cannot buy coverage because the
price points are too high from the mandates.
And what I want to know is how can the human physiology be
so different across states that the mandates have such wide
swings? Or is it the true difference is simply a difference in
lobbying skill across the states in conjunction with insurance
commissioners?
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and yields to the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Engel, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Engel. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
it.
I would like to start by saying I am very concerned that we
are holding this hearing today to discuss H.R. 371, legislation
that would facilitate the purchase of insurance coverage across
state lines. And my concern is the fact that H.R. 371 preempts
state consumer protections that are critical to the quality of
care and health of a patient. And in addition, this legislation
repeals all insurance reforms and patient protections that were
included in the Affordable Care Act. I think it is throwing the
baby out with the bath water.
I find it aggravating, disappointing, and frustrating that
this committee has continuously done nothing but take up
legislation that would repeal the Affordable Care Act, punish
patients, and put the insurance companies back in control of
our health system.
I would like to direct my question to Mr. Larsen. Mr.
Larsen, many states have spent years developing standards for
insurance plans that they believe not only provide adequate
minimum coverage for beneficiaries, but also make sure that
providers will be adequately reimbursed for services rendered.
If we allow the purchase of insurance policies across state
lines, why wouldn't employers look to purchase insurance on the
basis of the least cost to them and not on the basis of whether
it will adequately provide coverage or payments to providers? I
would call it a race to the bottom; would you?
Mr. Larsen. I think that is exactly right. You are going to
see companies, both the insurers and the companies, looking for
the market that has the thinnest and therefore cheapest
coverage. And, of course, everyone wants inexpensive coverage
until they get sick, and then they want comprehensive coverage.
That is why we have got to get a comprehensive benefit package
that is available to everyone, that is still affordable.
But when you go down this route, you end up segregating the
market, and the young people get peeled off and the healthy
people get peeled off, and what you have left in a market is
sicker people who get sicker and more expensive, and you are
not solving the problem. The only savings you are getting is
from peeling off the healthy.
Mr. Engel. That is why we have the individual mandate in
the Affordable Health Care Act, because if everybody is
insured, then everybody has the good coverage and you don't
cherry-pick or, as you say, have a situation where everybody
wants to pay a minimum and then wants maximum coverage when
they do get sick.
You know, when you are 26 or 27--my kids are around that
age--you think you are never getting sick. And then suddenly
there is an accident or whatever, and then you find out that
you are sick. And if you are uninsured, where do you go? You go
right to the emergency room, which is the most expensive health
care for everybody, and we are all paying for it.
Now a number of states, including my home state of New
York, have developed programs that assure that if a given
insurer in their state were to go under, that the state would
step in and pay the bills, assuring that the affected customers
would have access to care and providers are paid.
So let me ask you this: As a former insurance commissioner,
can you tell me if we allow interstate purchase of insurance,
how would individual states protect their citizens and
providers from the insolvency of an insurer?
Mr. Larsen. And with all the talk about health care reform,
you know, that is one of the critical functions of what states
do, is make sure that the companies are there when the claims
need to be paid. So solvency regulation is critical. And if you
lose your ability to ensure the solvency of companies that are
selling policies to people in your state, that is a huge loss.
Mr. Engel. Thank you.
Dr. Parente, I saw you shaking--nodding your head, so I was
wondering if you have any comment.
Mr. Parente. No, I agree. What we are talking about in
these laws doesn't get rid of insurance commissioners'
functions at all. It lets the insurance commissioners basically
be accountable to lobbyists, that the stuff comes in for the
individual mandates and say, Do you realize by putting that
mandate into place, you have now priced out somebody that
otherwise really needs this care from being able to afford it,
and basically makes that more of a dynamic economy about
understanding the pros and cons of having that lobbying
function.
It is great to have protections, but they don't come
without cost, because at the end of the day an actuary will
look at anything that you add, and put ``This will now add cost
to it.'' It has already happened with ACA, even though people
didn't think that would happen when it was first developed.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank
you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
our questioning.
This was an excellent panel. I want to thank all the
witnesses and members for their participation. I remind members
that they have 10 business days to submit questions for the
record, and I ask that the witnesses all agree to respond
promptly to those questions.
Mr. Pitts. This subcommittee is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:19 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Leonard Lance

I want to thank Chairman Pitts for scheduling a hearing on
this very important subject.
Mr. Chairman, many experts agree that the high cost of
health care is a key contributing factor to the high number of
uninsured Americans. A survey done by the Employee Benefit
Research Institute found that 85 percent of uninsured workers
reported that they did not have coverage because it was either,
``too expensive or they could not afford it.''
The cost of health care is rising rapidly. It is imperative
that Congress enact innovative solutions to make health
insurance coverage more affordable for individuals and small
businesses alike. Allowing the purchase of health care coverage
across state lines will increase competition and choice, drive
down prices and could dramatically reduce the number of
uninsured.
I look forward to hearing this morning's testimony and am
ready to work in a bipartisan capacity to promote interstate
purchase of health coverage and expand the number of affordable
health care options for all Americans.
----------

Prepared statement of Hon. John D. Dingell

Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing focuses on a topic that should be familiar
to some Members of this Committee. H.R. 371, the Health Care
Choices Act of 2011, is strikingly similar to H.R. 2355, the
Health Care Choices Act of 2005. Although as we have seen in
the 112th Congress, my colleagues would not dare miss an
opportunity to strike away at the heart of the Affordable Care
Act, and have included in H.R. 371 language to repeal the
consumer protections that make up the Patients Bill of Rights.
Now I know that good legislating is a difficult process,
but continually reaching back to the arsenal of old legislation
does nothing to help move our debate and discussion around
improving our health care system forward.
Quite frankly Mr. Chairman, this is legislation that is not
needed. states can already pass laws to allow for the sale of
health insurance across state lines. Further, the Affordable
Care Act, which my colleagues on the other side profess to hate
so much, would allow for states to band together to enter into
a health care choice compact that would allow for the sale of
insurance across state lines while also maintaining the
critical consumer protections.
Allowing such a reckless piece of legislation to move
forward would be a race to the bottom--for our health care
system and for our nation's health.
We will see insurance companies fleeing for whatever state
will either let the industry write the regulations or ensure
the least amount of oversight and restrictions on their
practices, guaranteeing overwhelming profits for their coffers,
and drastic cuts in the coverage available to those most in
need of health insurance. This will harm the sick, the elderly,
and the disabled--all of whom already pay high costs for their
medical care.
This should not be a surprise to my colleagues as we have
seen this exact situation play out in the credit card industry.
My colleagues point out that this legislation will help to
lower premiums, and highlight the differences in premiums
between New York and Iowa. If a New York family is able
purchase their insurance in Iowa they may see lower premiums,
but this will not the lower the cost of a medical service in
New York. If I was a smart businessman in Iowa, why would I
choose to cover a New York family knowing the high cost of
medical services there?
Reduced insurance premiums for some people are little
consolation for the consumers who, under H.R. 371, would be
left without coverage or would no longer have coverage for
critically needed benefit such as diabetes care or maternity
care or cancer treatment.
Insurance companies would be empowered to avoid caring for
the sick people who cut into their profit margin and would
instead look for the young and healthy who afford them the
greatest opportunity for profit and the least opportunity for
payoff and payout.
I hope that today's hearing will be a useful one for my
colleagues, and I hope that this hearing will help to show that
the solution proposed in the Health Care Choice Act will not
help to protect our people from serious wrongdoing and will
instead allow the rascals who have been able to exploit the
weakness of the current system to achieve great economic
success.
----------


