- THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 2: CHINA'S ENERGY PORTFOLIO AND THE IMPLICATIONS FOR JOBS AND ENERGY PRICES IN THE UNITED STATES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 2: CHINA'S ENERGY PORTFOLIO AND
THE IMPLICATIONS FOR JOBS AND ENERGY PRICES IN THE UNITED STATES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 4, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-31

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-390                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ANNA G. ESHOO, California
SUE MYRICK, North Carolina           ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
Vice Chair                         GENE GREEN, Texas
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN BILBRAY, California            JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLIE BASS, New Hampshire          TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
BOB LATTA, Ohio                      JIM MATHESON, Utah
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              Islands
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

7_____

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JAY INSLEE, Washington
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JIM MATHESON, Utah
MARY BONO MACK, California           JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
BRIAN BILBRAY, California            ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       GENE GREEN, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          LOIS CAPPS, California
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky                  officio)
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Kentucky, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     5
Hon. Brian Bilbray, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     6
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     7

Witnesses

Steven Koptis, Managing Director, Douglas-Westwood...............     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Fredrick Palmer, Chairman, World Coal Association................    17
Prepared statement...........................................    20
Deborah Seligsohn, Principal Advisor, China Climate and Energy
Program, World Resources Institute.............................    48
Prepared statement...........................................    50
Mary J. Hutzler, Distinguished Senior Fellow, Institute for
Energy Research................................................    62
Prepared statement...........................................    64

THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 2: CHINA'S ENERGY PORTFOLIO AND
THE IMPLICATIONS FOR JOBS AND ENERGY PRICES IN THE UNITED STATES

----------

MONDAY, APRIL 4, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:10 p.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Whitfield
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Whitfield, Shimkus, Walden, Terry,
Bilbray, Scalise, McKinley, Gardner, Pompeo, Griffith, Rush,
Markey, Green, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff Present: Ray Baum, Senior Policy Advisor/Director of
Coalitions; Maryam Brown, Chief Counsel, Energy and Power;
Allison Busbee, Legislative Clerk; Garrett Golding, Legislative
Analyst, Energy; Cory Hicks, Policy Coordinator, Energy and
Power; Jeff Baran, Minority Senior Counsel; Phil Barnett,
Minority Staff Director; Greg Dotson, Minority Energy and
Environment Staff Director; Caitlin Haberman, Minority Policy
Analyst; and Jocelyn Gutierrez, DOE Detailee.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. I call this hearing to order. Ranking Member
Rush, I know, has been in Illinois and was expected to be
delayed on his return, but we do expect him to be here soon.
Certainly Ranking Member Waxman is here, so as I said, I will
call this hearing to order, entitled the American Energy
Initiative, and I would say that this is the second hearing
that we have actually had on this topic of the American Energy
Initiative. It will be a wide-ranging discussion of the
domestic energy needs of our country and the impact that
decisions in other parts of the world have on what we are
proposing to do here.
The dominant area focused in today's discussion is the
rising role of China. For the past 30 years China has
experienced a remarkable economic boom in an effort to
modernize and assert its position in the global economy. In
fact, the International Energy Agency recently projected that
the world will require 40 percent more energy in the next 25
years. Now, that is quite an increase in demand for energy. And
I might also say that the International Energy Agency has
called China, China, a coal-fueled economic miracle. Last year
China became the largest energy consumer in the world.
The economic progress in China has been made possible
through the availability of affordable, secure, and abundant
sources of energy. China understands the importance of
acquiring the resources necessary to power new manufacturing
consumers, fuel millions of new automobiles, and electrify the
homes and businesses of the world's largest population.
Becoming the largest energy consumer in the world has helped
China become the U.S. chief economic competitor.
As a result of the tremendous surge in demand, world energy
markets have taken notice and are adjusting. China's increased
oil demand over the past 10 years has had a major impact on
global oil prices. Coal consumption in China has risen at a
tremendous rate and is projected to continue on the same path
for the foreseeable future. Nuclear renewable and alternative
energy technologies have also taken significant steps forward
this decade as well.
China is playing for keeps in its quest to modernize this
economy to become globally competitive and improve the standard
of living for 1.3 billion citizens. To do so, it realizes the
value in pursuing energy in all its forms. Rather than
abandoning fossil fuels in exchange for renewable energy, China
continues to burn coal at an astonishing rate, using 3.5 times
more coal than the U.S. and building, last year, one new coal-
fired plant every 2 weeks with technology that exceeds our own.
It is reported they are undergoing a safety review as a
result of the situation in Japan. But China, my understanding,
is continuing to build 25 nuclear plants, 25 times more than
the U.S. is building. China leads the world in hydroelectricity
usage. China is the second largest consumer of oil behind the
United States, but the difference is quickly shrinking.
During the recession, instead of billions of dollars of
wasteful stimulus spending, the Chinese put their billions
toward ensuring oil resources around the globe, some with our
allies but some with countries who are not.
With this hearing we hope to explore these issues and many
more. If we are to win the future, as our President says, we
must understand the role China plays in energy markets and the
various sectors affected by it. Part of this strategy must be
to prevent the EPA from increasing U.S. energy prices by
regulating greenhouse gases through the Clean Air Act, and
allow for the environmentally friendly use of our domestic
resources such as coal, natural gas, and oil. Greenhouse gas
regulation and policies to stop the use of domestic sources of
fuel make the U.S. less competitive with China, not more.
Instead, we must unleash the innovation and efficient
allocation of resources made possible only through a free
enterprise system in the absence of burdensome Federal
regulations and mandates.
On the subject of oil, as you know, there are about 85
million barrels of oil being produced each day throughout the
world. They are projecting by the year 2030 that China alone
may be consuming 50 million barrels of oil. That is a lot of
oil.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.002

Mr. Whitfield. So we look forward to the testimony of our
witnesses today. And, Mr. Rush, we are delighted to see you. We
appreciate you coming back from Illinois. I know that you had
some issues you were dealing with there. And if you are
prepared at this time I would recognize you for your
introductory remarks.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the guests
for being here today. Today's hearing is timely in that it
falls on the heels of President Obama's call to increase the
Nation's import of foreign oil by one-third in 10 years, as
well as the President's drastic cuts forwarding Republican-
backed proposals to the Department of Energy programs such as
the Renewable Energy Loan Guarantee program and the Office of
Science which invests in basic energy research.
I find it quite ironic, Mr. Chairman, that we hold this
hearing focusing on China's energy and portfolio and
implications for jobs and energy prices in the U.S. against the
backdrop of my Republican colleagues' continuous calls for cuts
of our own investment in the technologies and programs that
would help build and strengthen our economy for the future.
As President Obama noted in his speech last week, and I
quote: ``We want to cut our research and development into new
technologies. These cuts will eliminate thousands of private
sector jobs, terminate scientists and engineers, and end
fellowships for researchers, graduate students, and other
talent we desperately need for the 21st century.
``At a moment like this, sacrificing means investment.
Reducing our energy security makes us more dependent on oil,
not less dependent on oil. That is not a game to win the
future, that is a vision to keep us mired in the past.''
As China steadily increases its own investment in clean
energy technology, my colleagues on the other side are
proposing drastic cuts to the very program that would help us
compete in the 21st century.
In one of my amendments to the Upton-Inhofe bill in the
full committee markup, I repeatedly cited China's investment in
clean and renewable energy technologies as yet another reason
why the mostly Republican-passed H.R. 1 continuingresolution
and the Upton-Inhofe bill was bad policy for this country. H.R.
1 would drastically reduce Department of Energy loan guarantees
for renewable energy and energy efficiency projects by billions
of dollars.
Upton-Inhofe would prohibit EPA from regulating greenhouse
gases, which would in turn hinder additional research and
development in this country for newer, cleaner energy
technologies.
Like President Obama articulated, many of my constituents
also feel that we cannot afford to relinquish our leadership
role in the area of investment in clean and renewable energy,
not to China, not to anyone. My constituents understand that
investing in these technologies will provide jobs and business
opportunities here in America that can help propel our economy
forward.
Mr. Chairman, just weeks ago in a hearing on the Department
of Energy's budget, Secretary Chu confirmed the importance of
investing in clean energy and technology, and told us that the
draconian cuts proposed by my Republican colleagues will make
the U.S. much less competitive globally. Repeating this theme,
just last Thursday in a report of the National Academy of
Sciences, Secretary Chu emphasized the importance of investing
in scientific research as being crucial for our security now as
it was during the Cold War.
When speaking about a race between the U.S. and China in
investing in clean energy and technology, and how we have seen
it ground to the Chinese, Secretary Chu said, ``Chinese leaders
are moving aggressively, not because of environmental concerns,
but because they see great economic potential. He went on to
say that China, and I quote, ``has taken over the world in
high-tech manufacturing. That is our Sputnik moment. This is
not a threat to our national security or our mission, but our
economic security.
And despite some of the testimony that we may hear today,
downplaying China's commitment to aggressively increase its
investment in clean energy technology, I would point to the
report just issued by the Pew Charitable Trust. The Pew report
found that for the past 2 years China has outpaced the U.S. in
clean energy investment.
In 2010 China attracted $64.4 billion in clean energy
technology, a 39 percent increase from 2009, compared to just
$34 billion in the U.S. In fact, Pew reports that the U.S. Has
slipped from first to third in clean energy investment in a
span of just 3 years, ranking behind both China and Germany,
which doubled its investment in solar installation to $41
billion in 2010.
Mr. Chairman, the American people will not accept us
willingly ceding ground to other countries in this race to
secure the future. As President Obama, Secretary Chu, and a
host of other leaders have warned, we cannot sacrifice our
investment in clean energy now and we expect to lead the world
in the future.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Rush.
At this time, Mr. Bilbray, I will recognize you for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRIAN BILBRAY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Bilbray. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I
appreciate you holding this hearing, and especially the
emphasis of what is going on in China, because, you know, you
hear a lot of people saying let's invest in this or let's do
that. Let me tell you something. If you look at the statistics
of China, it sure looks a lot like the let's-do-it-all
proposal. Short of the fact that they tend to have no
commitment to expansion of solar, the fact is the Chinese are
finding reasons to do things, rather than finding excuses not
to do things.
Just in their nuclear involvement commitment themselves, we
are looking at a threefold increase. In fact, the latest data
that we have seen is they are looking at 20 new units going in
and nuclear power plants. We have, what, two, maybe three
possibly. We are talking about an economy one-tenth our size.
That is almost 100 times more commitment to nuclear than what
we are talking about in this country.
And let me point out that there are opportunities for us.
Some may say, What about the safety issue? The fact is next-
generation technology, such as gas-cooled reactors, totally
avoid the problem that we have seen in Japan and some of the
concerns there; at the same time, addressing one of the big
bugaboos that we talked about with nuclear, and that is the
disposal issue. The fact is gas-cooled reactors have the
potential to be developed very quickly, to be able to not only
use uranium, but also to be able to use plutonium and burn up
not only weapons-grade material, but also waste from other
power plants. These are all technologies that we ought to be
pushing forward now, continue to push forward, rather than
retreating.
Obviously from the data we seen here, Mr. Chairman, China
is not retreating. They are not stalling. They are not putting
moratoriums. They are going full steam ahead into a future that
provides their citizens with cost-effective energy, and we darn
well ought to be leading them, not following them down this
road.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Waxman, is recognized
for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today we have an
opportunity to dispose of some persistent myths about China and
energy that we have heard from special interest groups for
years. It has become almost an article of faith among those who
oppose any efforts to cut domestic carbon pollution that China
will never take meaningful action to cut their pollution. For
years they have argued, Why should we take steps if China
refuses to?
Today we will hear that this is a myth and China is taking
action. In its new 5-year plan, China set a target of reducing
carbon dioxide emissions per unit of GDP by 17 percent by 2015.
That means fewer carbon emissions for each dollar of economic
growth. The Chinese have set a goal of getting over 11 percent
of China's energy from non-fossil fuels by 2015. That target
includes 70 gigawatts of new wind capacity, which is equivalent
to over 100 coal-powered plants. China's current wind capacity
is 41 gigawatts, and that is already the highest wind capacity
in the world. The 5-year plan also calls for China's successful
industrial energy efficiency program to be expanded.
These targets are consistent with meeting China's
commitment under the Copenhagen Accord to reduce its carbon
intensity by 40 to 45 percent from 2005 levels by 2020. Chinese
officials are even talking about pilot cap-and-trade programs
and a carbon tax to reduce pollution. China has also shut down
70 gigawatts of its most inefficient coal-fired power plants.
Last year, investment in China's clean energy sector rose
to over $54 billion. That made them the world's leader in
attracting clean energy investment. The United States ranks
just third in the world with $34 billion in clean energy
investments. We are now behind China and Germany.
The Chinese are now the world's largest manufacturer of
wind turbines and they are the world's largest manufacturer of
solar panels. Over the next decade, the global clean energy
market is going to be worth $2.3 trillion. The Chinese know
this and are pursuing policies that will help them compete.
China's number one priority is jobs and economic growth. They
know that clean energy and climate policies create jobs and
economic opportunities.
While China is moving forward, we are headed in reverse.
The Republican budget cuts investments in renewable energy and
energy efficiency by 35 percent. So we are going in the wrong
direction. This week the House will take up legislation to
block EPA's modest carbon pollution requirements for the
Nation's largest polluting facilities.
The policy being pursued in the committee is based on
science denial, and it will be an economic debacle for our
Nation. Money, investments, and jobs will flow to China and
other nations that are investing for the future.
We need to stop the partisan fear-mongering. We should
embrace setting commonsense, cost-effective rules of the road
for carbon pollution. Ensuring that our largest facilities are
energy efficient is going to boost their competitiveness and
spur innovation.
Ambitious clean energy policies are going to produce clean
energy jobs. China has figured it out. We need to start getting
serious about winning these global clean energy markets.
I look forward to hearing the testimony of our witnesses,
especially Debbie Seligsohn from the World Resources Institute.
She is an expert based in China and can tell us what is really
happening on the ground there. I am pleased she is here with us
today.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
And at this time, we will go to our panel of witnesses. We
have with us this morning Mr. Steven Kopits who is Managing
Director for Douglas-Westwood. We have Mr. Fred Palmer who is
chairman of the World Coal Association. We have Ms. Deborah
Seligsohn who is Principal Advisor, China Climate and Energy
program, with World Resources Institute. And we have Ms. Mary
Hutzler, Distinguished Senior Fellow, Institute for Energy
Research.
Once again I welcome you to the hearing. We appreciate your
being here and look forward to your testimony.

STATEMENTS OF STEVEN KOPITS, MANAGING DIRECTOR, DOUGLAS-
WESTWOOD; FREDRICK PALMER, CHAIRMAN, WORLD COAL ASSOCIATION;
DEBORAH SELIGSOHN, PRINCIPAL ADVISOR, CHINA CLIMATE AND ENERGY
PROGRAM, WORLD RESOURCES INSTITUTE; AND MARY J. HUTZLER,
DISTINGUISHED SENIOR FELLOW, INSTITUTE FOR ENERGY RESEARCH

Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Kopits, I recognize you for 5 minutes of
your opening statement.
Mr. Kopits. Thank you very much.
Mr. Whitfield. Be sure to turn your microphone on.
Mr. Kopits. Which button is it? All right.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN KOPITS

Mr. Kopits. Mr. Chairman, and members of the committee, I
am deeply honored for the opportunity to appear here before you
today to discuss China's oil and gas market. Our firm, Douglas-
Westwood, is a leading consultancy in market research covering
oil field services offshore and in difficult-to-access markets
like China and Russia, among others. I manage our New York
offices. And I am solely responsible for any opinions expressed
herein.
Let's begin with China's oil demand. China consumes 10
million barrels of oil per day on global consumption of about
88 million barrels. China is already the second biggest
consumer of oil in the world, as the chairman has noted.
How will China's demand develop? The historical record
suggests that oil demand evolves quite similarly across a range
of countries, with demand ascending an ``S'' curve as the
country motorizes. China entered this ``S'' curve around 2005
and we forecast China to reach steady state consumption in a
2025 to 2030 period. At that time, we would anticipate that
China might have per capita oil consumption around that of
South Korea, implying demand in excess of 50 million barrels a
day. That contrasts to the U.S. with 19 million barrels of
consumption today. Further, we see China surpassing U.S.
consumption levels around 2018.
As for China's oil supply, China's conventional oil fields
are mature. The country currently produces around 4-1/2 million
barrels a day and this level is anticipated to remain broadly
stable for the rest of the decade. Like the U.S., China
currently meets about half its needs through imports, and this
is new.
As late as the 1990s, China was self-reliant in oil. Today
it must be active in global markets to secure domestic needs.
Indeed it has to obtain about an additional 1 million barrels
per day each year just to keep up with the demand, and the
situation will deteriorate markedly in the coming decade. By
2020 China's dependence on foreign oil may be as much as 80
percent versus an anticipated 40 percent for the U.S. China's
vulnerability is a cause for concern for that country's
policymakers.
Turning to natural gas. China consumed 3.9 trillion cubic
feet of natural gas in 2010. The U.S. consumes six times as
much. China's per capita consumption is even lower, about 1/
26th of U.S. As a consequence, there is considerable scope for
rapid consumption growth of natural gas in China well past
2030. China's natural gas demand surged 22 percent last year
and growth has averaged nearly 15 percent over the last decade
annually. We anticipate this pace to continue. This would imply
demand doubling to 2015 and nearly quadrupling from current
levels to 2020.
China's natural gas production has tripled in the last
decade from 1 trillion cubic feet in 2000 to 3.3 trillion cubic
feet in 2010, a growth rate over 13 percent per annum. We
project this to double to 6 trillion cubic feet in 2015 and
nearly triple to 8.6 trillion cubic feet in 2020, implying a 10
percent growth rate for the balance of the decade.
Coal bed methane and shale gas are hoped each to contribute
5 to 10 percent of the natural gas supply in 10 years' time.
As late as 2006, China was self-sufficient in natural gas;
however, the country has been a net importer since then, with
imports soaring to 550 billion cubic feet in 2010. Our forecast
calls for imports of 1.5 trillion cubic feet by 2015, rising to
4 trillion cubic feet by 2020, representing an import
dependence of more than 30 percent by that time.
Indeed by the end of decade, China may import more than
total consumption today. China has three leading options for
the import of natural gas: Central Asia, Russia, and LNG
shipments. Overall, China's natural gas import prospects look
promising from a diversity of sources, each with substantial
supply capacity.
The Chinese oil and gas sector comprises essentially of
three companies: Sinopec, PetroChina, and CNOOC. Sinopec and
PetroChina operate primarily in onshore fields and have
refining and distribution operations. CNOOC specializes in
offshore oil and gas exploration and production, although it is
has diversified recently. All three Chinese majors are medium-
to large-size oil companies and have a combined market
capitalization of about $450 billion. That is about the market
cap of Exxon. PetroChina, the largest of the three, has about
the same capitalization as General Electric. The shares of all
three companies are listed on the New York Stock Exchange and
the companies provide standard disclosures in English, as
required by the SEC.
Our analysis suggests that Chinese oil majors act much like
other companies to maximize revenues and profits to gain
exposure to growth plays like shale gas; to partner with other
oil companies to obtain capital and technical knowledge; and to
diversify their portfolios to manage risk. We believe they do
not represent the material risk on the supply side, but China's
oil demand will likely keep pressures on oil prices for the
indefinite future.
I thank you for your attention and will try to answer any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kopits follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.008

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Kopits.
Mr. Palmer, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF FREDRICK PALMER

Mr. Palmer. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. It is a
delight for me to be here; it is a high honor and deep
privilege.
I am here to talk to you today about the growing use of
coal around the world, the second Industrial Revolution now
underway in the developing world, particularly in Asia, and led
by China.
I am chairman of the World Coal Association, the global
voice of coal for international producers from the United
States, Australia, South Africa, India, China, Europe and
Indonesia.
Shenhua, a state-owned enterprise in the People's Republic
of China and largest coal producer in the world, recently
joined World Coal Association. Coal-India is also a member.
World Coal Association regularly collaborates with trade
associations, with coal freight associations around the world,
including the China National Coal Association. And I am happy
to say we will have our first board meeting ever in Beijing
this June.
I present this testimony today in my role as chairman of
the World Coal Association. I am also Senior Vice President of
Government Relations at Peabody Energy, the world's largest
private sector coal company, and a global leader in clean coal
solutions, as an international coal producer in the United
States and Australia.
America and other mature economies have a unique
opportunity to create a 21st century energy policy through 21st
century coal technology, following the lead of China-led Asia,
through the installation of state-of-the-art low carbon coal
technologies and what we call ``green coal.''
Energy is as essential as food, shelter, and clothing. The
United States has linked life expectancy and income with per
capita energy use. The World Resources Institute found that
with every 10-fold increase in energy use, individuals lived 10
years longer. Half the world population, 3.6 billion people,
lack adequate access to modern power. As many of you know,
energy disparities are growing in your own districts. Studies
show that today's middle-class Americans pay a disproportionate
amount of their after-tax income on energy, and it is due, with
respect, to what we believe is a flawed energy policy in the
United States.
This energy inequality will only escalate as populations
multiply and electricity use increases. The world is in the
early stages of global hypergrowth and energy demand, as
nations such as China, India and Indonesia industrialize and
urbanize. The International Energy Agency projects that nations
will require 40 percent more energy in the next quarter
century.
We believe coal is the only fuel with the low cost and
large scale to satisfy this long-term need. Alternatives to
coal are limited, strained, or centered in political
flashpoints. Coal was widely disbursed, broadly available,
easily transported, energy dense, and very affordable. In the
U.S. the delivered cost of coal averages just one-half to one-
sixth that of more volatile natural gas. Oil hovers around $100
a barrel and new nuclear construction brings unique risk, both
physical and financial.
By contrast, the world has trillions of tons of coal
resources. That is why coal has been the fastest growing fuel
in the world for the last decade, reaching about6.5 billion
tons of coal consumption per year in 2010. Coal was the
catalyst for economic growth, in the last 20 years has almost
doubled with an increase of about 3 billion tons of coal per
year. We know it can and will be a low-cost, low-carbon path
for our environmental objectives.
Of course we have choices in the United States. We can
pursue complex and punitive regulations through the EPA with
unintended consequences, or we can build advanced coal
technologies that are available, affordable, and deployable
today.
Coal technologies in our country have always met
environmental objectives. In the U.S., electricity from coal
and GDP have more than tripled since 1970. At the same time,
criteria emissions per megawatt hour declined more than 80
percent according to the EPA. Today's efficient plants receive
a CO
2
rate that is typically 15 percent better than
the existing fleet and as much as 40 percent better than the
older plants.
The world's leading economies have taken notice, and China
models itself and patterns itself in their infrastructure and
energy development after the United States. There are some 430
gigawatts of supercritical and ultra-supercritical power plants
in operation or under construction worldwide.
China's coal consumption in the last 10 years has more than
doubled to more than 3.5 billion tons in 2011, as the chairman
noted. China alone is home to 36 percent of the world's most
advanced coal fleet, and the growth of goal use will approach
4.5 billion tons per year by 2015. That is up from about a
billion tons from here in 5 years, or one U.S.
China is investing in clean energy technologies on an
unprecedented scale, as you will hear. And Peabody is part of
this revolution advancing the next generation of clean coal
technologies. Chief among these is the GreenGen project, near
Tianjin, China, one of the world's largest near zero-emission
initiatives, and Peabody is a partner in that. Peabody in fact
is the only nonstate-owned enterprise partner in Tianjin.
We also are advancing green coal partnerships on three
continents. While the developing world is investing in energy
innovation, the U.S. Is still debating options. My question to
the subcommittee is simple and respectful: What are we waiting
for?
Advanced coal in the U.S. will combat energy poverty, and
fuel an industrial rebirth. The U.S. should set a national goal
to ensure at least half of all new generation is fueled by
coal, and next-generation clean coal technologies are
demonstrated and commercialized. These technologies should
include coal for electricity generation, coal for natural gas,
coal for liquids, coal for chemicals, and CO
2
from
combustion or gasification of coal, for a robust and enhanced
oil recovery program primarily for the Gulf States and Rocky
Mountain west. NTL says we can do 2-1/2 million barrels per
day. This is the path for the People's Republic of China. It
should be our path as well.
Mr. Chairman, we appreciate the opportunity to appear in
front of you today, belive strongly that coal alone has the
power to address energy inequality, reindustrialize our
economy, and improve the environment. Coal is energy, and
energy is life. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Palmer follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.036

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Ms. Seligsohn, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DEBORAH SELIGSOHN

Ms. Seligsohn. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield and members of
the committee, for inviting me to testify here today. My name
is Deborah Seligsohn and I am Senior Advisor to the World
Resources Institute's Climate and Energy program based in
Beijing. We have an active program with Chinese partners,
working on Chinese energy policy and transformation.
I joined WRI 3\1/2\ years ago, coming from the U.S.
Department of State, where I was in the Foreign Service for 21
years, with over a decade at the U.S. Mission in China,
completing my work there as the U.S. Ambassador science
counselor in Beijing.
In my time in China, which began actually in 1984, I have
seen an incredible transformation in Chinese life and Chinese
society. Riding my bicycle through the streets of Beijing in
1984, I was often showered in coal dust, and the city was dark,
and the sidewalks basically rolled up by 8 o'clock at night.
I think you all know, either from seeing China firsthand or
from reports on television, that China and Beijing are very
different today, with world-class subways, the largest
intercity rapid rail transport in the world, booming
industrialization and urbanization. This has really changed the
perspective in China and what people want from their country,
from their community, and from their energy policy.
I want to present to you today three ideas that perhaps
challenge some of the conventional wisdom about Chinese energy
policy. The first is that the Chinese are doing what they are
doing on energy transformation because they are concerned about
energy security and about their economic future.
Secondly, China's energy policy has the result of curbing
fossil fuels over time and expanding the use of multiple
alternative sources. And finally, China is doing this because
they see it as a real opportunity to dominate in the new
industrial area.
So turning to my first point, energy security has always
been very important to China. As a number of people have
already noted, China is very dependent on imported oil. It has
also depended on trying to move coal around the country, which
can be difficult, especially in snowstorms and dealing with
rail capacity.
China today is less than 10 percent of the global oil
market and they are already concerned about the impact on
relations with other countries and on that economic impact. But
going beyond this traditional energy security concern, China is
now concerned about what its future economy will look like and
sees energy policy as part of the way to drive the economy in a
transformation from heavy industry to higher value-added, more
knowledge-based, more service-oriented economy.
Looking at these things by working on energy efficiency,
through its energy intensity targets, trying to reduce the
amount of energy use per unit GDP, and by developing its
nonfossil energy sources of all kinds.
If you walk around in China, no one thinks there is room
for U.S. levels of consumption. The country is simply too dense
and crowded. There is no room for all that energy, all those
cars and roads. And that is why they are really looking at
trying to create a much more efficient country for addressing
some of these issues.
Secondly, the way they are doing that is by really trying
to curb fossil fuel growth and expand alternatives. They are
promoting this transformation through policy mandates at the
national and local level.
Now, I am not trying to present with you a naive idea that
China is trying to abandon coal overnight. While it is true
that China is building coal plants now, every 2 weeks; remember
that 4 years ago it was two plants a week. So that is a rather
rapid change. Efficiency is improving. They have the largest
wind capacity in the world, and they are looking to have the
largest nuclear capacity by 2020.
Finally, they are doing this because they see it as an
opportunity. China missed the Industrial Revolution, it was
late to the IT revolution, and they see this new clean energy
revolution as one where they can be first, and they do very,
very well.
If you think about an area like electric vehicles, China
see this as a solution to its imported oil dependence and a way
to domesticate its vehicle fleet. It also sees other countries
as fairly late to the table in this area, and a real
opportunity.
We have talked about its lead in wind and solar industries.
They are looking now at whether they should perhaps be doubling
their solar goal again in this 5-year plan. They are leading in
carbon capture and storage for a time when they may need to
control the carbon emissions from coal. So they are looking
across the board.
So in conclusion, let me suggest that while China sees
energy policy as critical to its economic future and it wants
to dominate this global industry, this is not a game where the
U.S. is going to be left out, unless we choose to. This is a
game where we can win. We are a world technology leader; we
have the skills and the innovation hub to do it. The question
is do we have the supporting policies to make that possible
here at home. And that is what is really going to make a
difference, what kind of market do we create in the United
States? Thank you very much. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Seligsohn follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.048

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Ms. Hutzler, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARY J. HUTZLER

Ms. Hutzler. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee,
thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss China's energy portfolio. I am a senior fellow with the
Institute for Energy Research, a nonprofit organization that
conducts historical research and evaluates public policies and
energy markets.
Secretary Chu and other officials tell us the U.S. is
losing the race with China regarding clean energy. That is a
very narrow picture of the energy situation in China. China is
not leading a clean energy revolution, but instead is leading a
global race for all fuels, to fuel an economy growing at 7 to 9
percent per year and to provide a better life for its people.
China has a goal of producing 15 percent of its primary
energy consumption from carbon-free energy by 2020. It expects
to meet that goal primarily with hydroelectric and nuclear
technologies because non-hydro renewables, mainly wind and
solar, supply only a small amount of energy on a primary
consumption basis. China is planning on hydroelectric power to
supply 9 to 10 percentage points of its 15 percent goal by
reaching a capacity level of 300 gigawatts, about 50 percent
more than it has today.
At the pace China is adding hydroelectric capacity, it will
have not trouble exceeding that goal by 2020. It currently has
twice the amount of hydroelectric capacity as the U.S. has, and
will have almost four times as much once it reaches its goal.
China is expecting nuclear power to contribute up to 6
percentage points towards its 15 percent goal in 2020. China
has 13 nuclear reactors operating, and at least 25 reactors
under construction, half of the units in the world's
construction pipeline.
Official China nuclear capacity projections are 70 to 80
gigawatts by 2020, and 400 to 500 gigawatts of nuclear by 2050.
If China meets its 2030 target of 200 gigawatts, it will have
twice the amount of nuclear capacity as the U.S. The U.S. has
not issued a construction permit for a new nuclear plant since
1979.
China's goal for wind in 2020 is 150 gigawatts, and it is
almost one-third of the way there. As Mr. Waxman noted, China
now has more installed wind power than any country in the
world, but the U.S. is a close second. Because China's wind
capacity is not all connected to the grid, the U.S. Has 30
percent more usable wind capacity than China.
China has one-fourth the solar capacity of the U.S. and
generates a mere 1/100 of a percent of its electricity from
solar. So China does not have much solar capacity. It leads the
world in solar cell manufacturing, exporting 95 percent of its
production. Because manufacturing costs are lower in China,
some U.S. solar manufacturers are moving there.
Part of China's goal is to be self-sustaining in energy
technology, and it is learning from U.S. experts in solar
energy, nuclear power, and other technologies. For example,
China has a goal to enter the global nuclear marketplace by
2013, just a few years from now.
China relies on coal for over 70 percent of its energy and
over 80 percent of its electricity. The U.S. relies on coal for
21 percent of its energy and 45 percent of its electricity.
According to the Energy Information Administration, China will
be heavily reliant on coal 25 years from now, generating 74
percent of its electricity from it. With its massive coal use,
China will be emitting more carbon dioxide emissions than any
other country in the world, over 30 percent of the world's
total in 2035, and twice the amount the U.S. is expected to
emit. China passed the CO
2
emissions years ago, and
recently in energy use.
In summary, the Chinese are not fixated solely on green
technology. China is a on a fast track to bring on line new
generating units of all types. Because China is endowed with a
sizeable amount of resources, and because coal is the cheapest
energy source in China, coal-fired generating additions will
far outpace those of other technologies.
Thank you. I will be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hutzler follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67390.066

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Ms. Hutzler. And thank you
all for your testimony. We appreciate it very much.
Mr. Palmer, I believe you said world energy demands will
increase by 40 percent by what year?
Mr. Palmer. 2030.
Mr. Whitfield. 2030. Now in my view, it is impossible for
the world to have any chance of meeting its electricity demands
without using coal anytime in the near future. Would you agree
with that, Mr. Kopits?
Mr. Kopits. I would indeed.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Palmer?
Mr. Palmer. As certain as the lights in this room.
Mr. Whitfield. Ms. Seligsohn?
Ms. Seligsohn. There are technical ways, but it seems
unlikely that that will be the choice that people make.
Mr. Whitfield. Ms. Hutzler?
Ms. Hutzler. Yes, they will.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Now, one the things that I am concerned
about is we all recognize with that kind of increase and demand
we are going to have to have energy from all sources. But I
genuinely believe that this administration is adopting a policy
to penalize fossil fuels. That is my belief just from the
action being taken at EPA, particularly when you consider how
clean our air already is compared to the rest of the world. It
looks like we are adopting a policy to penalize fossil fuel.
And I am concerned about that because of the increased cost of
producing electricity and for us to remain competitive in a
global marketplace as we try to seek jobs and to grow our
economy.
Ms. Hutzler, we have heard a lot about China's moving
forward, making great strides in wind power and solar power;
but even so, my understanding is that the U.S. over the last
few years has actually produced more wind power and solar power
than China, particularly if it is connected to the grid. Would
you agree with that?
Ms. Hutzler. Yes, certainly in terms of grid-connected
capacity, we have.
Mr. Whitfield. With all the wind power that they are
building, how much of it--it is my understanding like 30
percent of it is not connected to the grid.
Ms. Hutzler. That is my understanding also.
Ms. Seligsohn. Can I clarify that?
Mr. Whitfield. Sure.
Ms. Seligsohn. Basically China doubles its wind capacity
every year, and so it is always running behind in connecting it
to the grid. So they were 6 months behind a couple of years
ago, they are now about 4 months behind, so they are catching
up. It gets connected to the grid; it just runs late.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Now, the thing that really disturbs me
about their development of wind power, and I may be wrong on
this, but it is my understanding that under the Kyoto Protocol
there was a clean development mechanism established so that
countries from around the world, like the U.S. and other
countries, their taxpayers would pay into this fund and that
other countries would be able to utilize that fund to develop
wind power, solar power, that would not be built without that
fund. And so China, who has one of the strongest economic
engines out there in the world, is taking taxpayer dollars from
Americans to build wind power and solar power in China through
this fund. Is that correct, Ms. Hutzler, or not?
Ms. Hutzler. Yes. My understanding is that is the way China
started their wind program.
Mr. Whitfield. So U.S. taxpayers are subsidizing China's
development in wind that many people in this country are
applauding China for doing; is that correct?
Ms. Hutzler. That is correct in terms of them getting off
the shelf in terms of building wind power, yes. But my
understanding, the U.N. has recognized that they were lowering
their subsidies and that was why they were qualifying for the
program. And that has stopped at this point.
Mr. Whitfield. And then I read an article, I guess just in
the last few days, that the World Bank is going to limit
funding for coal-fired power stations. And it says primarily
bowing to pressure from green campaigners to radically revise
its rules, that the World Bank is planning to restrict money
for coal-fired power stations. Now I would like for somebody to
explain, How are we going to meet our electricity demands
worldwide if we are going to stop funding coal-fired plants?
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Chairman, if I might. I think the World
Bank ought to careful what it asks for, because there is a bank
called the Asian Development Bank. And like everything else in
Asia, the growth of welfare at the World Bank over time will
become irrelevant if it gets out of the business of funding
developing-nation fossil projects, because there will be Asian
banks that will absolutely do that. It is absolutely in our
interest, the World Bank's interest, to continue as a World
Bank, to be funding these projects. The projects will
absolutely go ahead because the demand is there, and the
resources are there, and these international entities that have
been created in Asia, through ASEAN and other entities will
supplant the United States and the OECD countries in terms of
world leadership with the developing world, no question.
Mr. Whitfield. Well thank you, Mr. Palmer. My time has
expired. I recognize the gentleman from Illinois for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Ms. Seligsohn, your facial expression really
indicated that you wanted to answer the question that the
chairman asked Ms. Hutzler and you didn't have an opportunity.
Would you like to expound upon that?
Ms. Seligsohn. Yes. The United States is not a party to the
Kyoto Protocol and the clean development mechanism is under the
Kyoto Protocol so no U.S. money goes through the clean
development mechanism. The money basically comes from private
investors in Kyoto party nations, like in Europe, who choose to
get some of their emissions credits through the clean
development mechanism by investing in countries like China or
India, or African countries, or developing countries around the
world.
The other thing I wanted to clarify, the World Bank isn't
really needed for investing in coal-fired power plants in
China. There is plenty of commercial money for investing in new
power plants in countries like China. Both the World Bank and
the Asian Development Bank are quite interested in working with
the Chinese to invest in carbon capture and storage technology,
and those next-generation coal-fired power plants would enable
the Chinese to produce low emissions or zero emissions coal-
fired power plants.
So there is a lot of interest in that area among the
international banks. But the idea of those banks is to promote
the kinds of things that private sector banks don't promote
already.
Mr. Rush. I understand that you live in China or have lived
in China for a number of years.
Ms. Seligsohn. I have lived in China for 17 of the last 27
years.
Mr. Rush. And in your prepared remarks, you made an
observation that the international partnerships with Chinese
clean technology companies are growing rapidly. And you go on
to say that what makes China so attractive to U.S.
international investors is a clear policy framework that gives
businesses the certainty that they are looking for before
investing.
Can you expound on this observation and talk about how the
political climate in China, where policymakers are actually
engaging in short- and long-term comprehensive policy
decisions, making investments more enticing than the
environment that we have here in the U.S. With the lack of
congressional leadership? Does the certainty that stems from a
clear policy framework make it easier to attract foreign
investment or domestic investment, or both, for clean energy
technologies in China?
Ms. Seligsohn. Yes, sir. I think one thing that all of us
would agree on is that building a new power plant or a refinery
or any other kind of energy infrastructure takes a number of
years. And so the Chinese have a 5-year planning process that
sets out clear goals for the next 5 years in terms of
percentages of different fuel sources and what kinds of new
policies they might be introducing, everything from energy
service companies to new energy efficiency guidelines. They
also have medium- and long-term goals; they have a medium- and
long-term research and science plan, they have energy plans.
They also have a renewable energy law that provides clear
guidelines as well as targets.
So the net result of all of this is that, yes, companies
both domestic and foreign know what the policy picture is, know
which kinds of energy projects are going to be supported over a
number of years.
Of course, there is also a certain amount of change from
year to year. One of the changes that has happened is, for
example, in the wind area; wind has grown much more quickly
than policymakers imagined, even 4 or 5 years ago, and so they
have actually increased the goals a number of times. But there
are a number of supported policies and they tend to stay for a
number of years; whereas, you know, in the United States, new
energy developers have worried about tax breaks coming and
going and that kind of thing. It is worth noting that in the
United States 70 percent of all energy subsidies are to fossil
fuels.
Mr. Rush. Your 5-year framework over the years--on the 5-
year plan to reduce energy intensity stuff for dioxide and
chemical oxygen demand, or COD. Can you tell the subcommittee
if the Chinese have been successful in meeting these goals set
forth in their reduction plans? Have they fallen short, met
their expectations, or exceeded their expectations? And how
have the Chinese been so successful if they met this goal and
how have they met these goals?
Ms. Seligsohn. The Chinese almost met the goal for energy
intensity. They got 19.1 percent and the goal was 20 percent.
This is a good sign that they were so clear about being just
shy of the goal rather than trying to sort of meet it. They
actually exceeded the sulfur dioxide and the COD goals in the
last 5-year plan. The 10 percent goals were exceeded by both.
And that was an extraordinary victory for the Ministry for
Environmental Protection, which is China's newest Ministry. It
only reached Ministry status in 2007.
In earlier years they have had much more trouble enforcing
their environmental targets. And this really reflects a change
in Chinese society and in Chinese government, in just the last
5 years, in focusing much more closely on these types of
environmental goals.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Terry, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I want to
say that I am impressed with China's measures. I am impressed
with the amount of electrical generation that they have been
able to bring on rather quickly. Since pollution is a global
issue, I am pleased that they are taking measures to reduce it.
I just want to make sure, as we discuss and we put China up on
a pedestal, that we are looking or comparing apples to apples
here. And so--forgive me, Ms. Seligsohn, did I say that right?
Ms. Seligsohn. Seligsohn.
Mr. Bilbray. Deborah.
Mr. Terry. Yes. When we talk about China meeting their
goals for NOx and SOx and all of the particulates that we have
already in our Clean Air Act, I don't want you to itemize, but
would you supply to this committee a side-by-side of what
China's particulate regulations are to the United States',
because I want to see how they compare?
Ms. Seligsohn. We would have to get that to you.
Mr. Terry. I would appreciate that, because that will help
us really look----
Ms. Seligsohn. It is worth noting that NOx, for example,
only comes in as a goal in this next 5 year----
Mr. Terry. Well, out of all the particulates, particularly
from electrical generation.
Ms. Seligsohn. Well, my point is it is a work in progress.
There definitely----
Mr. Terry. And my point is we are not dealing with apples
to apples, and I would like to know. Because I think it is
unfair to have this discussion in generalities instead of
specifics.
The other question is, I am impressed with China's
portfolio. In fact, that is part of the battles that we have
had on this committee with past. I am embarrassed that we don't
have a long-term energy policy, but then we haven't been able
to use hydro, and China has a 22 gigawatt Yangtze River. That
is impressive. But we can't do that in the United States
because of environmental policies. We want to do coal and clean
coal technologies, but any use of coal or mention of coal, my
gosh, shall you would think that you were pillaging. And so we
can't use coal or even clean coal technology.
So, Deb, once again, you had mentioned in a very positive
way that coal, gassification, capture, sequestration, zero
emission, coal-fired plants that China is building, I want to
do that, too. But we can't seem to get it off the ground here.
The Obama administration, this administration, there has been a
NexGen sitting on the books for years, but Bush didn't go
forward with it because of environmental, and now our current
President isn't going forward with it. So what is China doing
that we can't do here?
And then--well, let's go with that question, real quick.
How can they build it so quickly over there and we can't even
get a pilot project off of the ground?
Ms. Seligsohn. There definitely is more of a policy
consensus in China on the importance of developing new coal
technologies for their portfolio. I think there are arguments
on both sides here in the United States. There are people who
really believe that it is going to be part of it, and there are
people who recognize the enormous renewable resources we have.
We do have more renewable resources than China does in terms of
availability of wind and solar.
Mr. Terry. In regard to building plants, how does China
compare with environmental impact studies, permitting
processes?
Ms. Seligsohn. They are more streamlined. I mean, China has
an EIA process, it has a permitting process, but it is
definitely more rapid.
Mr. Terry. Do they also have a right of citizen lawsuit?
For example, when a wind project is designed in the sand hills
of Nebraska or a pipeline and then citizens sue and stop the
project--does China have that right?
Mr. Palmer. They do not.
Mr. Terry. Well, I am not asking you.
Ms. Seligsohn. There are citizen suit rights. I can't give
you more----
Mr. Terry. The answer is no. Does China have citizen suits?
Ms. Seligsohn. They have citizen suits for certain kinds of
things like pollution, and I would have to get back to you with
a specific range.
Mr. Terry. Can they stop a project? Because that is part of
our problem with even wind and solar projects. The
environmental groups sue them.
Ms. Seligsohn. I don't know whether it is legally
conceivable. I do know that it is unusual for it to happen.
Mr. Terry. I appreciate that.
Does somebody else want the last 13 seconds?
Mr. Palmer. I would just like to say on that, the process
goes through the NEA, the National Energy Administration, and
the NDRC, the National Development Resource Commission; and it
as an application grant project. There is very--I have seen--
Peabody is active in China in a major way. I have seen no
evidence of citizen activity in this process at all.
Mr. Terry. Mr. Kopits, my time is up, but maybe----
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Waxman is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Ms. Hutzler, you heard Ms. Seligsohn's answer,
which was contradictory to yours, about this bank funding
Chinese activities and whether U.S. taxpayers are contributing
to it. She said that we are not because we never ratified the
Kyoto Protocol. Do you agree with her?
Ms. Hutzler. Yes, I do agree with what she said. But it is
true that developed nations get credits for the clean
development program, and that is how China started with their
wind program.
Mr. Waxman. But the United States is not one of those
developed nations.
Ms. Hutzler. That is correct.
Mr. Waxman. OK. So your answer to the chairman was not
correct. Because his question was, are American taxpayers
subsidizing these activities in China; and the answer should
have been no. Isn't that right?
Ms. Hutzler. Yes.
Mr. Waxman. The chairman said something that the government
has policies that penalize coal. What policies does the U.S.
government have that penalizes coal?
Mr. Palmer.
Mr. Palmer. There is a great controversy right now,
Congressman, over the Environmental Protection Agency's
proposed rules for particulate emissions from coal plants and
also greenhouse gas emissions.
Mr. Waxman. Do you think those were set in place to
penalize coal or to protect the public health from particulates
which can be a danger, to--
Mr. Palmer. Mike Morris, who is the chairman of AEP,
analogized it this way. He said, if you took the Convention
Center in Washington, D.C., and filled it with ping pong balls,
what EPA is trying to do is take out one ping pong ball, and we
have----
Mr. Waxman. In other words----
Mr. Palmer. I am not finished, Congressman.
Mr. Waxman. Yes, but I want to ask you this.
Mr. Palmer. I am going to finish my answer.
Mr. Waxman. No, it is my time, and you will answer my
questions.
Mr. Palmer. OK.
Mr. Waxman. And my question is this: Is the EPA not going
against other sources of particulate matter and only going
after one? I gather the ping pong they are going after is the
coal ping pong; is that a fair statement?
Mr. Palmer. The study that I have seen in connection with
the coal plants would result in a 15 to 20 percent increase in
electricity rates in the heartland of the United States,
damaging manufacturing, lost employment, and hurting people in
their----
Mr. Waxman. Is there another way we can reduce the
particulate matter? Or should we ignore the harm it does to
public health?
Mr. Palmer. Well, first of all, Congressman, the issue of
harm to public health is contradicted by recent figures that
came out last week that show more people living better, living
longer in the United States, even as coal use, coal consumption
has----
Mr. Waxman. You are really not an expert on public health.
You are a representative of the coal industry. I would submit
to you and to anybody watching this that the U.S. EPA has an
obligation to deal with particulate matters which get into the
lungs and can cause disease, whatever the source may be. So I
don't think it is particularly singling out the coal industry
when the EPA says that they want some technology that is
already available, the best control technology to be used.
But it is interesting, I haven't heard in these discussions
the idea that China is not doing anything. That is what we
usually hear: China is not doing anything, so why should we?
Ms. Seligsohn, you testified China has a 5-year plan that
actually calls for a number of significant actions to address
carbon emissions. If this plan is implemented, will China be on
track to meet its commitments under the Copenhagen Accord?
Ms. Seligsohn. Yes. Actually, it will be ahead of the
curve. It will be more than two-thirds of the way to the
commitments made for 2020.
Mr. Waxman. Now, why should we believe them? Have they met
their targets they set in their previous 5-year plan?
Ms. Seligsohn. They came quite close on some, and they
exceeded on others.
Mr. Waxman. Some of their energy policies appear to be
quite aggressive. Is it true that China has shut down over
70,000 megawatts of old, inefficient coal plants during the
last 5 years and replaced those plants with newer, more
efficient coal plants?
Ms. Seligsohn. Yes.
Mr. Waxman. And now China is planning pilot programs
involving cap-and-trade and carbon taxes?
Ms. Seligsohn. They are actively talking about it, and both
were listed in the party's documents about the 5-year plan, so
it seems likely that we will see them in the next 5 years.
Mr. Waxman. Now, is China uninterested in jobs and economic
growth? Is it safe to conclude that they would be adopting all
of these climate and energy policies if they were killing jobs
and slowing China's economic growth?
Ms. Seligsohn. I think it is safe to say that they don't
think so, that the wealthiest areas of China are the areas that
face the highest energy prices, not the lowest energy prices,
and that they think that transforming to a much higher value-
added society and not depending on heavy, dirty industry is
part of their future.
Mr. Waxman. I want to add my voice to all the members of
the panel. I think we are going to continue to use coal for the
foreseeable future. We shouldn't use coal--if we can get it to
pollute less, if we can get cleaner coal, that would be great
for this country and for the world. And we shouldn't put all of
our baskets in coal. Because if we can develop alternatives in
supplementing energy from coal, we have a chance to reduce some
of these carbon emissions.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Bilbray, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bilbray. Thank you very much.
Deborah, you wanted to answer a question to this guy; and
he cut you off. The issue about--were you trying to say, when
we were talking about the citizen litigation against that, it
hasn't happened, but it could theoretically in the future?
Ms. Seligsohn. I need to actually go check with an
environmental lawyer. There are areas where there is actually
limited citizen litigation. It is a very different system than
ours and so--but it isn't simply the NDRC and the NEA. There is
permitting from the Lands Ministry, the Environmental
Protection Ministry----
Mr. Bilbray. Right. The big issue, though, is the private
action of where people actually can make money by litigating.
Ms. Seligsohn. There have been a number of dams blocked by
citizen protests and then, you know, Premier Wen Jiabao has
actually---
Mr. Bilbray. But what I am saying was that protest was
actually grass roots, but it was not somebody suing and
basically taking an action and then actually being able to make
a living off of these--you don't have lawyers making--you know,
you don't have large corporate firms that specialize in
blocking these projects. Is that fair to say?
Ms. Seligsohn. It is fair to say the Chinese legal
profession is----
Mr. Bilbray. OK. I am very impressed with the 5-year-plan
concept. I will just tell you for a fact you could not do--you
know, I have done methane recovery systems on landfills. You
can't even get the environmental impact reports done in this
country in 5 years. So it is really exciting to hear about a
country that actually can have implementation plans in 5 years.
And how long does it take to hook to the grid or to get the
lines from the grid over to these wind generators?
Ms. Seligsohn. Well, they generally run about 4 months
behind. So they may be completed, and it may take another 4
months to connect. They had a problem with connections in
remote rural areas, and they put in an additional fund last
year to build more rural lines.
Mr. Bilbray. And how long would they take from the time
that somebody asked for it to the time that it--or the time
that somebody decides in government to build it and it actually
ends up hooking up?
Ms. Seligsohn. Well, it is pretty quick.
Mr. Bilbray. How fast?
Ms. Seligsohn. I would have to check to get you a number.
What I can say is the average grid connection is 4 months after
completion of the project.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. I appreciate that.
I mean, San Diego County, with 3 million people have been
trying for 20 years to get another grid connection so that we
could hook up to the outlying areas. We are trying to hook up
to solar now out in the deserts. The trouble is getting the
permit. So I think we are really on a big issue.
The fact is, China does not have the gauntlet that we have
in this where--the huge gap between the concept of
implementation and the completion--or just getting the permit.
You know, there is a totally different world here that we need
to talk about.
Let me just say this. Would you agree that if we are going
to be as aggressive with this broad portfolio as China, those
of us in government have to take a look at how we are managing
our procedures to be able to make that possible in a timely
manner?
Ms. Seligsohn. Yes, but there a number of other countries
like Germany, Denmark that we can look at for ideas. It is not
that China, with all of its other governance problems, is going
to be the model for how to address all of these issues.
Mr. Bilbray. But then again, Germany doesn't have nuke, but
it buys its energy from the nuclear power plants in France,
right?
Ms. Seligsohn. I am not actually sure about that. But I am
just saying there are number of European countries, including
France, that deal with these questions within a democratic----
Mr. Bilbray. I know. And including France has proven that
we can recycle and do a lot of other things. But China is the
one we are really focusing on here. And that is where I just
wanted to point out that we have some major, major differences
between the regulatory structure in the United States and the
regulatory structure in China. That is fair to say?
Ms. Seligsohn. That is absolutely fair to say.
Mr. Bilbray. Do you think that their streamlined regulatory
structure has been a major contributor to their ability to be
so aggressive at developing a broad spectrum of energy
technologies?
Ms. Seligsohn. I think it has been one way. But if you look
at the gains in wind in other countries, there are ways to do
it with more protections.
Mr. Bilbray. But what I am saying is you are talking one
over here, one over here. We keep talking about that broad
portfolio where you don't just pick one technology, you draw on
it all. And that seems to go into----
Mr. Palmer, do you know if we have any nuclear--I mean, any
coal plants left in California?
Mr. Palmer. California buys coal. I think there may be a
couple of very small units, but coal-based electricity
operating. But I just think you are so right--correct in terms
of identifying the regulatory morass in the United States in
getting something built. Certainly you can't do it California.
Mr. Bilbray. I think Richmond was our last coal-fired
plant. In all fairness, I think you go to jail if you burn coal
in California.
Mr. Palmer. Well, you have to meet a natural gas standard,
which is to say you have to have carbon capture and storage.
And that is----
Mr. Bilbray. I really look forward to that. I mean, I will
tell you, with our State we actually developed the technology
and the genetic research that allowed us to develop alternative
fuels like algae. But our scientists at Scripps Institution of
Oceanography and the University of California San Diego had to
leave the State to go into production. Because you couldn't get
a permit, not in 5 years, you couldn't get a permit in
California in 10 years. OK? So, believe me, California, we
understand the challenge. So thank you very much.
Mr. Palmer. Let me just make one point, and that is China
may not be a model. I know what isn't a model. The State of
California is no model.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Green, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me take a different line of questioning, I guess,
because I am amazed that we are talking about how great China
is in trying to compare it to our system. Do they have trial by
jury in China?
Ms. Seligsohn. No.
Mr. Green. Freedom of speech?
Ms. Seligsohn. No.
Mr. Green. You know, freedom is expensive. And we may not
have the lawsuit--they may not have the lawsuits we have, but
at least we go to court instead of having to protest down at
the local dam and threatening to overthrow or kill the local
province officials for building that dam.
Is that what typically happens? Is that the way the Chinese
can protest a particular plant being built, or the
expropriation of their land they have lived on for generations,
actually owned by the government? Is that how it works?
Ms. Seligsohn. Well, their protests--they don't usually
involve threatening to kill anybody.
Mr. Green. Well, I have heard other things. But that is
their avenue to get the attention of their government. They
can't go to the courthouse and sue their government.
Ms. Seligsohn. As I said, there are areas where they can,
and there are certain--there has actually been some quite
successful environmental lawsuits. There is also a growing
effort to use public hearings in China. There is also a system
of petitions. But it is a work in progress, and the Chinese
would be the first to say that they are trying to improve their
governance in this area; it is not that they have a perfect
system.
Mr. Green. Well, and I am not--but, obviously, we don't
have a perfect system. But I think if you have a command
economy, you lose a lot of freedoms that I think both sides of
the aisle we would enjoy and we enjoy in our country. So I
think comparing how Chinese make a decision, that may work in
China, but it really doesn't work with the history we have in
our country since 1776. And so I think holding us up to--they
are a command economy. If the leadership in China is sold on a
certain idea, that is what they do. Is that correct?
Ms. Seligsohn. It is more complicated than that, because it
is--there are lots of different interests, and the companies
are separate from government, and there is a lot of negotiation
that goes on.
Mr. Green. Well, I know some of the companies are not
separate from government.
Ms. Seligsohn. State-owned enterprises are separate from
government ministries, and they do rival with each other quite
a lot, actually.
Mr. Green. Well, I guess it is--you know, a free enterprise
economy, which is truly free enterprise and not controlled free
enterprise, and I guess that is what bothers me.
Ms. Hutzler, this chart that you put up from the Energy
Administration Institute--or Administration--and I was a
business major and went to law school, so I have to admit
numbers sometimes get in the way. But I don't see how in 2007
they produced a little over 3,000 billion kilowatt hours; in
2035, they plan to over triple their kilowatt hours with
reducing their coal by only 6 percent and going from 2 to 6
percent nuclear. They are actually going to reduce their
natural gas, reduce their coal, reduce their hydro, go from
zero to four in wind power and zero to three in biomass.
It seems like the expansion is actually in things that we
know we want. We want wind, we want solar, we want biomass. But
I wish I could tell you we are ever going to be able to turn on
the lights in this room with wind, solar, and biomass.
So I don't know. I am going to find out where these numbers
come from, because I think some of them are questionable
because it just doesn't seem like it adds up, that they can
over triple their kilowatt hours by reducing from the
traditional sources, whether it is coal or natural gas, and
even only tripling their nuclear power. Because now they only
have 2 percent nuclear power, and they are going to 6 percent.
Do you know how much nuclear power our country produces,
and we haven't built a plant since the '80s? I think we only
produce about--what--20 percent, 22 percent?
Mr. Palmer. That is about right, 20 percent.
Mr. Green. So, even at 22 percent, we are way far ahead of
where China is right now in nuclear power.
Ms. Hutzler. That is right.
Mr. Green. I know China, they have some natural gas from
around the Xi-an area, because I was there a number of years
ago. But they were pretty inefficient. I don't know if they
have discovered additional natural gas domestically. I know
they are buying a lot. In fact, they are bidding up the price
around the world.
I also know they are buying coal. Can China produce enough
domestic coal to generate their electricity?
Mr. Palmer. No. They are now a major coal importer, and
that is new. There was a time of about 7 or 8 years ago when
the fear in the seaborne market what that China exports would
swamp. But they are very opportunistic.
Mr. Green. I am almost out of time. Let me ask something.
Those plants that China is building that are new coal plants--
we know we build coal plants today much cleaner and better than
we did 30 years ago. What are they doing? Are we just not
replacing our coal plants?
Ms. Hutzler. Yes, that is correct. They are building
supercritical plants at a very fast pace, but we are building
coal plants at a very slow pace, if at all. We have built more
in 2010 than since 1985. But then it is only about 6 gigawatts.
They build 10 times as much as what we do in a year.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I will close by saying I guess if
the President and his Cabinet can decide they are going to
build a coal plant in my area and not have to go through any of
the local regulations or anything like that, and even take the
land that I own to do it, which sometimes you can--but, again,
they are a very command economy, as compared to a free
enterprise and freedom economy that we are accustomed to.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. McKinley, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Hutzler, just a couple of quick questions. Can you
compare the average wages for a Chinese worker and an American
miner?
Ms. Hutzler. They are vastly different. The Chinese work
for a mere fraction of what they cost.
Mr. McKinley. Both in the mining and energy production and
China would be--I am told as much as a factor of 10 to 15
times.
Ms. Hutzler. I would believe so.
Mr. McKinley. Do you have a sense of how many families are
dependent, either directly or indirectly, on coal production in
America?
Ms. Hutzler. No, I don't have that number, but I can get it
for you.
Mr. McKinley. Have you seen that report that was produced,
apparently by the EPA, that said that if all the greenhouse
gases were fully implemented under the Clean Air Act that the
global temperature would only drop less than a tenth of one
degree?
Ms. Hutzler. Yes.
Mr. McKinley. So, from your viewpoint, is it worth all the
expenditure and the distraction from our manufacturing and our
base to spend that kind of money for a tenth of--less than a
tenth of a degree?
Ms. Hutzler. From my viewpoint, no, it is not.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you.
Maybe the question was asked, but if I could try again. I
didn't hear all the questions. Do you have a record or has
someone published anything about the number of coal-fired--
these super-critical facilities in China say over the last 5
years? Do we have a sense? I have heard as much as one a week.
I have heard four a month or two a month. Is there a reliable
source of information on that?
Ms. Hutzler. The source I use is the National Energy
Technology Laboratory, and they are saying it is probably about
one gigawatt a week, which would be one or two plants, one if
it is a gigawatt and two if it is 500 megawatts.
Mr. McKinley. And who provided that?
Ms. Hutzler. The National Energy Technology Laboratory.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you for bringing that subject up. You
are aware that the President's budget slashes their research by
over $800 million on coal technology.
Ms. Hutzler. No, I wasn't.
Mr. McKinley. For someone that we want to out-innovate,
outproduce, we are going to slash the very thing that could
create cheap----
I am just curious--in a little bit of time, it just seems
to me kind of self-evident with the Chinese energy production
they have little environmental constraints on their water
discharge, their greenhouse gases, their particulate matter,
their fly ash, their wages are a fraction, like you just
pointed out. Their health care is poor. Their retirement
pension plans almost nonexistent, other than government-run.
Their monetary system is being subsidized. Why do you think we
keep using China as the poster child for energy?
Ms. Hutzler. Well, probably because people would like to
look at them as leading the clean energy race. But, as I tried
to point out, they are leading the race in all fuels, and they
are doing that to make a better life for their citizens and to
keep their economy growing at the fast pace that it is growing
now.
Mr. McKinley. At the detriment of their people.
Ms. Hutzler. No, I think you need all fuels for----
Mr. McKinley. Really?
Ms. Hutzler. Certainly.
Mr. McKinley. Can you share with us--because one of the
issues we are facing here in America, obviously, is the issue
of fly ash, that the EPA has a knee-jerk reaction to a dam
collapsing in Tennessee and they want to make it a hazardous--
treat it as a hazardous material. How does China treat its fly
ash?
Ms. Hutzler. I am not an expert on that. Maybe Mr. Palmer
might know.
Mr. McKinley. You spent 17 of your last 27 years--what are
they doing with fly ash in China?
Ms. Seligsohn. I don't know. I would have to check. I can
get back to you.
Mr. McKinley. OK. And if the production of power--if we
don't have the ability to recycle fly ash, what do you think
would happen to the price of power in America?
Ms. Hutzler. It would increase dramatically.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Does the gentleman from Massachusetts seek
recognition?
The gentleman is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
So, Ms. Hutzler, we are really making tremendous gains in
wind power in the United States, huh? Twenty-seven thousand new
megawatts were installed in the last 4 years? And that is quite
a number. Do you expect to see that growing dramatically in the
years ahead?
Ms. Hutzler. Yes. The Energy Information Administration
sees about half of the increase in capacity in renewable
technologies to come from wind.
Mr. Markey. So what do you think by 2020 we could have? If
it is 27,000 in the last 4 years, what do you think we can see
by 2020 in installed wind capacity?
Ms. Hutzler. I don't think they are projecting that, even
though the increase is large, that will get more than 50 or 60
gigawatts.
Mr. Markey. Additional gigawatts?
Ms. Hutzler. No, that is total. There is only about 20
gigawatts extra.
Mr. Markey. Only 20? So you are saying we have already
passed the peak in terms of new wind installation?
Ms. Hutzler. Probably.
Mr. Markey. Well, I think you are 100 percent wrong on
that.
And how about in solar? How do you see solar going? There
were 1,000 new megawatts this year. The solar industry says it
should be 1,500 this year. Last year, it was 1,000 new
megawatts; 1,500 new megawatts this year will be installed; and
they are predicting 2,000 megawatts next year. Do you see that
slowing down, too, after next year?
Ms. Hutzler. No. Actually, solar, they have increasing
more, but that is because we have very little today. We only
have about one gigawatt today.
Mr. Markey. Well, do you think we can have--well, there was
one gigawatt installed in 2010, so we have more than that.
Ms. Hutzler. One point three, something like that.
Mr. Markey. So what do you see by 2020, the installation
for solar?
Ms. Hutzler. Maybe another 10 gigawatts.
Mr. Markey. Ten altogether?
Ms. Hutzler. Yes.
Mr. Markey. So you are saying that last year's pace, 1,000,
will just be the same pace, and it won't increase over the next
10 years?
Ms. Hutzler. Well, I am saying it is going to increase but
not at the same rate.
Mr. Markey. You only see 1,000 a year? Is that what you are
saying?
Ms. Hutzler. Actually, less.
Mr. Markey. You see less than 1,000.
Do you see the price of solar coming down over the next 10
years, with the global investment in China and other countries?
Or do you see it staying the same?
Ms. Hutzler. It will come down, but it is going to come
down as a basis of what is being built. And even the Chinese
feel that solar is more expensive than other technologies, and
they are pushing the non-solar ones.
Mr. Markey. Actually, in the Bloomberg story here, China,
the world's biggest energy consumer, will cut its 2020 target
for nuclear power--this is a story from 2 days ago--nuclear
power capacity and build more solar farms, following Japan's
atomic crisis, said an official at the National Development and
Reform Commission in Japan. It is going to cut its goal of
80,000 megawatts by 2020 and, instead, it is going to
dramatically increase its goal of 20,000 megawatts of solar. It
is going to dramatically increase its goal by 2020 in China.
So don't you think that the totality of all of the
investment that is going to be made in China and Japan now and
other countries is going to dramatically lower the price of
solar and make it more competitive and not have it just be a
grand total of 1,000 per year every year from now on but maybe
2,000 or 3,000? You don't think that is going to happen?
Ms. Hutzler. It has a long way to go. It is about three
times as much as other technologies and even more than that of
natural gas.
Mr. Markey. I understand that. If the price is cut in half,
do you see any increase above your 1,000 per year projection?
Ms. Hutzler. There might be a slight increase, but it is
going to be very difficult to get it down to that level.
Mr. Markey. You are a very pessimistic person,
technologically. You know, it is like talking to maybe the
owner of a typewriter company in 1990 seeing no threats from
computers over the next 20 years so we are going to double our
investment in typewriters because how can we ever have all
people using computers only in 20 years because the price is
just not competitive with Underwood typewriters so I am
investing all my money in Underwood right now.
And you could go through other industries. But you can have
these revolutions very quickly, as you know; and I just think
that you are displaying an amazing amount of--let me say, you
just don't believe in the market system.
Ms. Hutzler. I most certainly do.
Mr. Markey. Oh, no, you don't.
Ms. Hutzler. I do.
Mr. Markey. You are projecting today 10 years from now,
even though there is a global investment that is being made in
wind and solar that is going to drop the price and make it much
more likely that there is going to be an investment, even as
the market has been moving away from coal and moving towards
renewables and natural gas. I mean, natural gas and wind have
been the largest single additions to our grid in the last 4
years. You agree with that.
Ms. Hutzler. Yes, I do.
Mr. Markey. But you see wind falling off and solar not
contributing, and do you see coal increasing going forward?
Ms. Hutzler. Yes, but very little.
Mr. Markey. Yes. But larger than wind and solar?
Ms. Hutzler. No, about the same, I would say.
Mr. Markey. About the same. So you see wind kind of slowing
down to the pace at which new coal is being installed in the
country, and I kind of disagree with you on that. Just looking
at the market forces over the last 4 or 5 years, I mean, the
charts for wind and for solar and for natural gas are way up
high and for coal and for nuclear is nonexistent, way down
here. So the market has moved, Wall Street has moved, private
investors have moved, and they have moved globally; and the
more that there is a doubling of the installed capacity across
the planet, the more you are going to see----
Mr. Bilbray. [presiding.] The gentleman's time has expired,
and the chair will remind the gentleman that we still are--as
somebody who just made a purchase of solar panels myself, we
are still using monocrystal, which is the same technology we
have had for 30 years. The price is modified, and that is
great, and the thin film has major--a lot more technical
problems than what people talk about, and still monocrystal is
still the cutting edge. And the same thing it was when we were
in school and we started making those little kits. So,
hopefully, we will see the balance where it is appropriate,
where it is down.
Mr. Markey. Mr. Chairman, the price has dropped
precipitously from the time when we were kids. When we were
kids, the price was $10 a kilowatt hour; and it is now down
into the 20 to 25 cents. And that is all I am talking about. I
am talking about the significant reduction in the price.
Mr. Bilbray. I understand that. In San Diego, we have a
major manufacturer of solar panels, owned by the Chinese,
manufactured in the Chinese with their coal and then exported
it and assembled in San Diego for the market that is basically
being created by our government regs and subsidies.
So, hopefully, the gentleman from Colorado, Yuma, might be
able to enlighten us, too, about how maybe we ought to change
our laws so people get on solar rather than having power lines
required by government to be brought way out into the boonies
of the plains of Colorado.
I yield to the gentleman from Colorado at this time.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and, to the
witnesses, thank you for your time and testimony today.
Just a couple of points. I was reading an article recently
in the Denver Post. It cited an author of a publication called
Power Hungry. Robert Bryce, the author, reminded the audience
that Americans get 140 time as much energy from coal, oil, and
natural gas as they do from the clean energy sources such as
wind and solar. Is that an accurate statement?
Ms. Hutzler. Yes.
Mr. Gardner. Do you see that changing dramatically in 20
years? Will it be 140? Will it be 100? Will it be 5?
Ms. Hutzler. It will change but very little.
Mr. Gardner. So in 20 years from now you are still saying
that we will get be 140 times more energy from traditional
sources than some of the new sources that have been talked
about today?
Ms. Hutzler. Yes.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you.
And, Ms. Hutzler, just to continue with our conversation,
what lessons can the United States learn from China's
experience in constructing wind farms? And to further that a
little bit, specific question, under what geographic and
engineering conditions is wind generation appropriate and
beneficial?
Ms. Hutzler. Well, I certainly believe that we need all
technologies. The trouble with wind is that you have better
sites. There are good resources versus more difficult
resources. And so, as you add on wind capacity, you eventually
get to the point where it is going to cost you more because you
have got sites that aren't as conducive in terms of
constructing the wind units.
Mr. Gardner. And do you see land use problems in the United
States affecting our ability to access good wind sites?
Ms. Hutzler. More than likely. I mean, certainly with solar
we have people complaining about the massive land use issues
there, so I imagine that will eventually happen with wind as
well.
Mr. Gardner. And does China have an equivalent of like a
United States Department of Interior that prohibits the siting
of certain wind opportunities or transmission lines?
Ms. Hutzler. I am not an expert on China's government, so
maybe Deborah could answer that question.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you.
And just, Mr. Palmer, to turn to you, what do you see is
the biggest impediments to the United States to building new
energy technologies? Not new energy in the sometimes modern-day
acceptance, but just energy technologies overall.
Mr. Palmer. Well, you asked me energy, Congressman. I
apologize. I am a coal guy, so I am going to answer with coal.
The impediments to coal right now are really regulatory,
and that is really EPA, and it is the new source review. It is
the best available control technology. It is where are we going
with greenhouse gas regulations? Is it legal, the lawsuits that
are going on, the efforts going on in the Congress to change
that regime? And the need to put in----
Our CEO, Greg Boyce, gave a talk last year to the World
Energy Congress in Montreal and talked about the Peabody plan
which is super-critical--ultra-super-critical--to replace the
older units and to give us growth and to re-industrialize. And
it is more efficient from a carbon standpoint, near-zero
criteria pollutants, carbon capture ready as we develop CCS
technologies and a regulatory regime and put the industrial
heartland back to work, make the front range safe for coal
again and your State, and we have been involved in natural gas
wars there. And nothing against natural gas or shale gas, but
it is no carbon answer. And the problem is Washington, D.C. You
live outside the Beltway, people understand the need for coal.
You come----
Mr. Gardner. Thank you.
And if I could just go down and get a yes-or-no answer from
every single one of you. Do increasing energy prices pose a
threat to our economy? Mr. Kopits.
Mr. Kopits. Well, we haven't spoken about oil today. I am
amazed we have been sitting here for, I don't know, about an
hour and not nary a word on oil. And I was hoping Mr. Green
from Texas would come up with an oil question.
Right now, from where we sit, the U.S. has fallen into
recession every time crude oil consumption as a share of GDP
has exceeded 4 percent. And that is about $88. We are at $119--
--
Mr. Gardner. I hate to interrupt. We only have about 50
seconds. So do rising energy prices pose a threat?
Mr. Kopits. The issue is that energy prices, particularly
oil, are critical right now for the U.S. economy.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Palmer.
Mr. Palmer. I would agree.
Mr. Gardner. Ms. Seligsohn.
Ms. Seligsohn. Without proper policies, it can be a
problem, but there are ways to plan for that.
Mr. Gardner. So the answer is, yes, rising energy prices
pose a threat to our economy.
Ms. Seligsohn. Well, China has coal prices above the world
average, and it is doing oK right now. So I think there are
indications that----
Mr. Gardner. If that increases, they will be fine then?
Prices increases?
So, no, you do not believe that increased energy prices----
Ms. Seligsohn. It can be a threat.
Mr. Gardner. Ms. Hutzler.
Ms. Hutzler. I agree.
Mr. Gardner. And I want to cite a recent study by the
Beacon Hill Institute at Suffolk University in Boston concluded
that by 2015 consumers in Colorado will be paying about $1.4
billion in higher energy costs as a result of the renewable
energy standard. Do we see energy costs increasing as a result
of that kind of policy?
Mr. Hunter. Yes.
Mr. Palmer. Absolutely. Skyrocketing.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you.
Mr. Bilbray. The gentleman's time has expired, and the
chair would just say those of us in California really feel for
your pain in Colorado.
At this time, I will yield to the gentleman from Kansas.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will be happy to talk about oil there in just a second,
but first I want to just make a comment.
I heard Mr. Markey say to you, Ms. Hutzler, you are a
pessimist because you didn't believe these things would happen.
We have been investing taxpayer money in wind and solar since
the Synfuels Corp. You can go back through the ages. And the
typewriter is still around. That is, the energies we have been
using for a long time are still around, and everything that I
see from everyone on this panel suggests they are going to be
around for an awfully long time. So you are dually noted that
your pessimism is appropriate, given the reality of the energy
situation I think that the world faces.
Ms. Seligsohn, you said I think that 8 percent of the coal
plants in China have been taken offline and replaced. Is that
right? Is that the right number that I read from your
testimony?
Ms. Seligsohn. Yes.
Mr. Pompeo. And that is not--a similar phenomena has not
taken place in the United States?
Ms. Seligsohn. By government mandate. Yes.
Mr. Pompeo. And so what is it that has prevented us from
doing that in the United States? What has stopped the United
States from taking older coal plants off-line and putting new
coal plants online?
Ms. Seligsohn. That is not the way our laws are written.
Mr. Pompeo. So it is a regulatory burden.
Ms. Seligsohn. Well, no. I mean, this would be an
additional regulation if you did this. It is the opposite.
Mr. Pompeo. So you are suggesting mandate it. Today, we are
doing just the opposite. We are penalizing companies that want
to take off old power plants and want to put on newer, more
efficient plants; is that correct?
Ms. Seligsohn. Right.
Mr. Pompeo. Let me give you an example. Mr. Palmer, maybe
you can help me with this. Today, there is a plant in Kansas
called the Holcomb plant. We have been trying to get Holcomb
online in Kansas for a long time. Our former Governor, now
creating havoc at Health and Human Services, stopped it. We are
now starting to moving forward, and EPA has stuck their ugly
hand in the cookie jar again. They are trying put on a newer,
cleaner technology. Can you tell me what it is besides EPA that
is stopping Holcomb from moving forward?
Mr. Palmer. First of all, in my past, before Peabody, I was
coal supplier to Holcomb. I knew the guys that built the first
unit and had a great relationship. I love Western Kansas, and I
won't go into that. But it is near and dear to me.
Secondly, it is all about carbon, full stop. We have the
super-critical, pulverized coal today. Your ultra-super-
critical gives you near-zero criteria emission pollutants--SOX,
NOx, and Mercury. There is no argument over that. It is state-
of-the-art stuff.
It is more efficient on carbon. But it is a carbon agenda.
It has been since it started. It is right now. It will
continue. And that is what is holding up the next generation of
generation in the United States of America of coal generation,
is this fixation on emission, carbon emissions above everything
else as the driving policy here, not in China, in the United
States.
That is what is preventing Western Kansas from having an
additional unit for Holcomb. And that electricity would go to
the front range. And Tri-State, who is a part of my past as
well, was going to build that transmission line; and they have
been in the carbon wars on these plants since Governor Sebelius
stepped into it. And now she skipped town, and she is here. But
it is a bad day for Western Kansas, and it is a bad day for the
U.S. when carbon emissions govern our lives every day, and that
is what is going on.
Mr. Pompeo. Let me just ask you a different question.
Is there anything equivalent to EPA's new Utility MACT
Rules in China?
Ms. Seligsohn. Yes, there is review that--well, I mean,
they do it independently. They close the old ones and then they
have requirements on the new ones, including EIA----
Mr. Pompeo. So if, by chance, the Chinese were going to
follow the rules and there were Utility MACT Rules, you say
they would still be able to build these new plants?
The answer is no. They can't. I mean, Holcomb is going to
be shut down by these new Utility MACT Rules. There are not
going to be able to make it.
Ms. Seligsohn. The point is the Chinese just shut down when
they feel it ought to be shut down.
Mr. Pompeo. Right. Precisely. Precisely. A government
agency shutting it down. That is what is, unfortunately, not
happening here. We are not allowing new technology to move
forward, at least in Kansas.
I have been to the Chinese oil fields, most all of them,
spent a significant amount of time there. Are there any
regulations, whether they are local, provincial regulations, or
national regulations on fracking in China?
Ms. Seligsohn. I don't believe they are yet. It is one of
the things they are looking at, and they have a cooperative
agreement with DOE that they signed during President Obama's
visit to China 2 years ago.
Mr. Pompeo. Do you think there will be better compliance
with those new fracking regulations than, say, with IP rules
today?
Ms. Seligsohn. China's compliance in most areas of
environmental governance has improved considerably in the last
5 years. As I say, their ministry is new. This is a new area,
and the rate of increase is quite impressive. But how fracking
will work, I think it would be a little too early to tell.
I would also note that the Chinese don't see climate change
goals as in any way contradictory with all of their other
energy and environmental goals. Climate change is the pillar in
their 5-year plan.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Ms. Seligsohn.
My time is up. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Bilbray. Thank you.
There are no speakers on this side, so I will yield to the
gentleman from Virginia, the Commonwealth of Virginia.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was interested in Congressman Green's comments. I think
he missed some of the sarcasm on this side when he thought we
were holding China up as the example. I think the point was
that so many of my colleagues were asking questions about China
doesn't do this and China doesn't do that, and then they were
being sarcastic when they said, well, don't you think it would
be great if we did that?
Because I think that everybody understands that the Chinese
have a completely different governmental system than we do. But
we are getting a little tired of having the administration, the
current administration, and its allies come in here and say,
well, China is great, and you ought to be like China. Because
we are not going to move 22 million people out of their
ancestral home areas in order to have a more efficient
hydroelectric system, and we are not going to do some of the
things that China has done. All we are asking for, I believe,
speaking for myself, is that we have some reasonable
regulations and not unreasonable regulations; and I don't
believe the Chinese are anywhere near our regulatory scheme.
And, in that regard, Mr. Palmer, can you tell me, are the
Chinese anywhere near our regulatory scheme when it comes to
coal, since you are the coal guy?
Mr. Palmer. No, and I want to put in context my comments
about China. Because I do go to China, and I have high
admiration for what they have done there. I am not in here
talking about political systems or ideology or any of that, but
I see a society that believes in energy supply for people, to
raise people up and out of poverty. And I think that is what we
ought to do here.
In terms of the specific question on the regulatory regime,
they have a--you know, they have decided, as a matter of
national policy, they have an ability to do it directly. They
have the money in the bank that they have amassed very shrewdly
over a period of time. They are putting in state-of-the-art
clean coal technology. That is what they are doing. And they
are driving carbon capture and storage research and development
and this GreenGen Project that we are in, and that is what they
are doing.
From that standpoint, from the standpoint of getting our
regulations right so we can use our own technology, we are
state-of-the-art in terms of technology. We know how to do
these things. That is our point, is that the value, the people
value associated with low-cost, abundant, always available,
reliable electricity, as opposed to high prices and scarcity,
are values we ought to adopt. They have adopted. And we had it
before, but, right now, in Washington, that is not popular to
talk that way, period. Full stop. And we think that needs to
change. That is why we come at it the way we do.
Mr. Griffith. And if we continue down our regulatory
scheme, you anticipate that we will have some scarcity or high
prices?
Mr. Palmer. Absolutely. It is designed to do that. If you
look at the ideology behind the environmental community and you
go back 10 or 20 years, it is absolutely designed to do that.
Mr. Palmer. And when we do that, we not only drive
businesses offshore, am I correct----
Mr. Palmer. Yes, you do.
Mr. Griffith. --but we also raise the cost of the average
citizen of the United States to have the power to heat and make
sure that their homes are reasonably----
Mr. Palmer. And every metric says that low-cost electricity
is a requirement for more people to live longer and live
better; and if you take up the cost of energy, you drive down
human health and welfare.
So EPA has it exactly wrong in terms of how they come at
this. Not to argue with the values on emissions, but there is
no attention paid to the underlying value of the activity that
creates the emissions. In other words, what are we making with
this fuel that creates emissions and what are the benefits of
that? They don't consider that, they don't look at it, and it
is not relevant. And we are on a path to high prices in the
United States. Absolutely, we are.
Mr. Griffith. And would you agree with me that if you
represented a district where the median household income was
somewhere around $35,000 a year, that on the trajectory we are
on on energy costs that I am going to have some people that are
going to be cold in the wintertime; isn't that correct?
Mr. Palmer. I would totally agree with you, and I would
expect they will be pounding the table in the mornings when you
are having coffee with them saying, go back to that city and
tell them what is going on here.
Mr. Griffith. And, in fact, we are already seeing it; isn't
that correct? And are you aware that Appalachian Power has just
asked the Commonwealth of Virginia for I think a 9.6 percent
increase? I may be off a little bit.
Mr. Palmer. I wasn't aware of that, specifically. But, for
sure, the capital investment associated with this, what I
call--people call a train wreck. We have friends in the
railroad industry don't like that. I call it a tsunami.
Mr. Griffith. It is just a mess.
Mr. Palmer. It is a high-priced----
Mr. Griffith. And the end result is you don't have to be an
expert in health to understand that this is going to have a
negative impact on the health of the citizens, particularly
those who have less economic means than others.
Mr. Palmer. I would agree. It is common sense.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you.
I yield back my 17 seconds.
Mr. Bilbray. Thank you very much.
I appreciate the discussion especially about keeping
seniors warm. As a Californian, it was always interesting that
this town talks a lot about helping to keep the seniors get
enough fuel so they can stay warm, but they don't talk about
those of us in California that our seniors need enough gas to
get to the shopping center to be able to buy food. But it is a
different world all around this country.
Mr. Shimkus, you are recognized.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
panel for being here today, and I am sorry about running back
and forth, as we all do on fly-in day and then are pulled out
for another meeting. Obviously, we would like to go in numerous
directions but have limited time.
Does anyone know about the Judgment Fund? Can anyone tell
me about the Judgment Fund?
Mr. Palmer.
Mr. Palmer. I know a little bit about it.
Mr. Shimkus. Can you briefly explain what the Judgment Fund
is?
Mr. Palmer. I believe it is a path for NGOs typically----
Mr. Shimkus. An NGO is a----
Mr. Palmer. A nongovernment organization.
Mr. Shimkus. An example of that would be----
Mr. Palmer. Sierra Club or the NRDC or Friends of the
Earth.
Mr. Shimkus. And what happens in this process?
Mr. Palmer. They sue the United States.
Mr. Shimkus. OK.
Mr. Palmer. On an environmental issue.
Mr. Shimkus. Right.
Mr. Palmer. Let's say an agency wants to settle that on the
grounds that the environmental group is willing to settle it.
They get their attorney fees that comes out of the Judgment
Fund, is my understanding.
Mr. Shimkus. And who funds the Judgment Fund?
Mr. Palmer. The US of A, the Treasury. I think it is on
automatic pilot. I think it is----
Mr. Shimkus. Let me get this right. So you are saying that
an NGO, a nongovernment organization, can sue the national
government; and then they can, after there is the legal
process, then maybe the agency decides to settle it----
Mr. Palmer. Or the NGO wins the lawsuit.
Mr. Shimkus. Then the NGO can go to this Judgment Fund,
which is funded by taxpayers----
Mr. Palmer. Correct.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. To pay their legal costs.
Mr. Palmer. Correct.
Mr. Shimkus. So that taxpayers are funding these lawsuits
against the private sector.
Mr. Palmer. I wouldn't characterize. I will let you
characterize it, Congressman.
Mr. Shimkus. I am just asking questions.
Mr. Palmer. For sure it is taxpayer money that is paying
the legal fees for these lawsuits. No question.
Mr. Shimkus. Ms. Seligsohn, does China have anything like a
Judgment Fund?
Ms. Seligsohn. No.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Thank you.
Ms. Hutzler, I kind of like this. We do--you know, we have
been preaching all of the above. Energy strategies, I think you
mentioned that in some of the question and answers that what
China is doing is trying to have more energy across the board,
whether it is renewable, whether it is nuclear, whether it is
coal. And I think it is important to put into perspective that
this is 2035. Ten thousand billion kilowatt hours, 74 percent
still being produced by coal. But that 74 percent, even though
it is 80 percent, has to be much more coal use; is that
correct?
Ms. Hutzler. Yes, exactly.
Mr. Shimkus. Do you have a percentage of the increase in
electricity generation by coal for China in 2035?
Ms. Hutzler. No, but I can get that for you.
Mr. Shimkus. But it is pretty massive.
Ms. Hutzler. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And that is based upon the other question you
had about a gigawatt, a coal-fired power plant every week,
correct?
Ms. Hutzler. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And those are the stats we have used here for
the last couple of years. So I find those very, very similar.
The regulation was also discussed by my colleagues back and
forth--and anyone who wants to answer this, if there is
uncertainty of future regulation, what does that do to the
capital markets to build new facilities? Anyone want to take a
stab at that?
Mr. Palmer. I think in our space, Congressman, in the
context of the utilities, you can talk to co-ops, you can talk
to Amron in St. Louis, you can talk to AEP, you can talk to
Southern Company, but they look at the framework, and they say,
I have got to put in 3 or $400 million on a 250 or a 300 or 400
megawatt power plant, and I have still got out here greenhouse
gas emission potential and----
Mr. Shimkus. Sorry to cut you off, but I have limited time.
The Morning Energy reported that the national air quality
standard for ozone, boiler MACT, toxic standards for power
plants, coal ash rules, and climate regs, a final report should
be due August 1, 2012. Does that discourage----
Mr. Palmer. It freezes everybody in their tracks.
Mr. Shimkus. It freezes people.
Mr. Palmer. Right. Freezes them. So the old units continue
operating that are inefficient. No, you can't upgrade them,
because you have got to go through----
Mr. Shimkus. Well, it is interesting, because we talked a
lot about super-critical power plants; and we are working with
one now that is state-of-the-art, high-tech, and they are being
frozen because of the transport rule. New reg, new power plant,
state-of-the-art, unsure whether they can start because of
transportation.
Let me finish up. Mr. Kopits, because you have been pretty
quiet since I have been up here. I was real interested in this,
because it really kind of addresses this same issue about
percentage increase. You project China's oil demand exceeding
50 million barrels per day in 2025, 2030?
Mr. Kopits. That is correct.
Mr. Shimkus. And so how are they going to do that?
Mr. Kopits. They are not. What you end up with is, in 2030,
the range of forecasters put it at 105 million barrels a day
that we can do. Chinese is about half of global demand growth.
So if you take that, you just can't make the numbers work.
Mr. Shimkus. So that supertanker coming from somewhere,
China is going to bid against us if we don't do energy security
here in this country. They are going to buy up the world
demand--I mean, the world supply, I should say.
Mr. Kopits. They already have. Yes. OECD consumption since
the beginning of the recession is down 5 million barrels, and
non-OECD consumption is up six million barrels.
Mr. Shimkus. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. [presiding.] Thank you, Mr. Shimkus.
Mr. Scalise, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
holding this hearing.
We have spent a lot of time today going through the various
changes in China's energy needs and how they are planning to
meet it. I know many of us on this side are strong proponents
of an all-of-the-above energy strategy for the United States. I
have been very disappointed by this administration's failure to
embrace that same kind of approach. In fact, frankly, I know
more right now about, based on your testimony, about the things
that China is planning over the next 20 or so years than I do
about how this country is going to meet the energy needs, based
on mixed messages we have gotten from the President, especially
just over the last few weeks.
Of course, I represent an area, South Louisiana, where we
are still reeling from the impact of the President's
permatorium, his refusal to let our people go back to work
drilling safely in the Gulf of Mexico. Gas prices have nearly
doubled since President Obama took the oath of office; and I
think the fact that they are still holding so many vast
reserves away from production in America----
You know, the President said last week he wants to reduce
imports by a third, and yet the week before that he said he
wants to drill in Brazil. And the weeks and weeks before that
he refuses to let our people go back to work drilling safely.
And these are companies that had nothing to do with the BP
disaster, companies that were drilling and exploring for energy
in a very safe way that are not going back to work. In fact,
12,000 jobs have been lost because of the President's refusal
to let them go back to work drilling safely for domestic
energy.
So, Mr. Kopits, if you can talk about what you see in terms
of the impact of especially the President's actions here in
America and specifically as it relates to the Gulf of Mexico
with the refusal to have a real consistent policy that lets
people go back to work who never had any safety issues and the
jobs that we have lost from it and the energy security we have
lost from it.
Mr. Kopits. Yes. The EIA forecasts production in the Gulf
of Mexico to drop 600,000 barrels a day from May, 2010--so that
is immediately following Macondo--to May, 2012. That is 11
percent of U.S. crude production. So that is a very, very
material number; and I would describe that drop as
catastrophic.
Mr. Scalise. The drop in exploration? What specifically
would you characterize----
Mr. Kopits. The drop in production.
So we anticipate--this is government numbers. EIA
anticipates U.S. crude oil production in the Gulf of Mexico to
drop about 600,000 barrels a day from the day after Macondo to
May, 2012. That is 11 percent of U.S. crude oil production.
Mr. Scalise. And I know, again, getting back to these mixed
messages----
Mr. Kopits. The supply is about $30 billion. I think from
memory it is about $30 billion of economic activity, it is
about $8 billion in taxes, and I calculated about 65,000 man
years.
Mr. Scalise. Those are massive numbers. And, clearly, if
the President wants to talk publicly about a strategy to reduce
imports by a third, which, frankly, I think if we were actually
utilizing an all-of-the-above strategy that I know our
chairman, that many of us here would like to see us use, we
could absolutely eliminate our dependence on Middle Eastern
oil--and, of course, we have seen the volatility over there
that is only increasing. But you don't get there by shutting
off American resources and literally running these resources to
other countries.
We have been tracking the deepwater rigs that have left
America because of the President's policies. Two of those rigs
went to Egypt. Egypt. And so you have got employers saying I
would rather do business in Egypt than in the United States of
America exploring for energy.
And so I will ask you, Ms. Hutzler. You had talked about--
and I know you have done some studying on this. But when we
talk about the--looking long range and production and the
President is bragging today about how high production is. Of
course, production today is really an accumulation of efforts
and exploration over years and years, in many cases, long
before the President came into office. If you look at the drop
in production, we would see, especially because of his
policies, have y'all looked at how those policies, the lack of
clear clarity on issuing permits, how that affects our ability
to produce in America to meet those growing demands?
Ms. Hutzler. I don't have a forecast on that. But certainly
I agree with Mr. Kopits that the Energy Information
Administration has shown that offshore production in the Gulf
of Mexico has gone down dramatically because we are not
drilling there.
Mr. Scalise. And, again, I reiterate, we have lost over
12,000 jobs. Another company just went bankrupt a few weeks
ago. And with gas as high as it is, you would think--we know we
have reserves--these companies would be out there working 24/7.
And, in fact, because of the President's own policies, they
can't even go back to work drilling safely.
And I will just reiterate, companies that had absolutely
nothing to do with the BP horizon. These are companies who had
great safety records who are shut down today because of this
President's policies. And then, you know, he gives these mixed
messages, but we don't see a clear policy. So I appreciate your
comments and yours, as well, Mr. Kopits; and, hopefully, we can
get an all-of-the-above energy strategy.
I yield back the balance of my time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Scalise; and I want to thank
the panel today. We appreciate your being here very much.
Obviously, the policies in China as it relates to energy has a
direct impact on what we are doing in America as well as the
rest of the world, and your testimony has been quite helpful.
We will keep the record open for 10 days for any additional
material.
And, with that, this concludes today's hearing. And we look
forward to working with all of as we move forward.
[Whereupon, at 5:04 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


