- INTERNET GAMING: IS THERE A SAFE BET?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INTERNET GAMING: IS THERE A SAFE BET?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 25, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-100

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
74-869                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade

MARY BONO MACK, California
Chairman
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       JIM MATHESON, Utah
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
PETE OLSON, Texas                    MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio)
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Mary Bono Mack, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. G.K. Butterfield, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina, opening statement.....................     7
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     8
Hon. Brett Guthrie, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, prepared statement...................     9

Witnesses

Alfonse D'Amato, Chairman, Poker Players Alliance................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Parry Aftab, Advisory Board Member, Fair Play USA................    22
Prepared statement...........................................    24
Ernest Stevens, Jr., Chairman, National Indian Gaming Association    35
Prepared statement...........................................    37
Keith S. Whyte, Executive Director, National Council on Problem
Gambling.......................................................    60
Prepared statement...........................................    63
Kurt Eggert, Professor of Law, Chapman University of School of
Law............................................................    67
Prepared statement...........................................    69
Daniel Romer, Director, Adolescent Communication Institute,
Annenberg Public Policy Center, University of Pennsylvania.....   100
Prepared statement...........................................   102

Submitted Material

Letter, dated October 24, 2011, from Frank J. Fahrenkopf, Jr.,
President and CEO, American Gaming Association, to Mrs. Bono
Mack, submitted by Mr. Barton..................................   115
Statement, dated October 25, 2011, of Frank J. Fahrenkopf, Jr.,
President and CEO, American Gaming Association, submitted by
Mr. Barton.....................................................   117
Statement, dated October 25, 2011, of Louis Freeh, Advisory Board
Member, Fair Play USA..........................................   128

INTERNET GAMING: IS THERE A SAFE BET?

----------

TUESDAY, OCTOBER 25, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:38 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mary Bono
Mack (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Bono Mack, Blackburn,
Stearns, Bass, Harper, Lance, Cassidy, Guthrie, Olson,
Kinzinger, Barton, Butterfield, Gonzalez, Towns, Schakowsky,
and Inslee.
Staff present: Kirby Howard, Legislative Clerk; Brian
McCullough, Senior Professional Staff Member, Commerce,
Manufacturing, and Trade; Jeff Mortier, Professional Staff
Member; Gib Mullan, Chief Counsel, Commerce, Manufacturing, and
Trade; Andrew Powaleny, Press Assistant; Krista Rosenthall,
Counsel to Chairman Emeritus; Lyn Walker, Coordinator, Admin/
Human Resources; Shannon Weinberg, Counsel, Commerce,
Manufacturing, and Trade; Michelle Ash, Democratic Chief
Counsel; Felipe Mendoza, Democratic Counsel; and Will Wallace,
Democratic Policy Analyst.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Come to order. Good morning. Today we turn
our attention to a growing controversy in America--should
Internet gambling be legalized, and if so, what role should the
Federal Government play? We have divergent opinions represented
on our panel this morning, and if I were a betting person, I
would wager that we are going to have a very interesting
hearing.
And the chair now recognizes herself for an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARY BONO MACK, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

In many ways, the debate over legalizing Internet gambling
is a lot like Texas Hold'em poker. Three cards are dealt face-
up. Is the further expansion of gambling in the United States a
good bet? Can online gambling be regulated effectively? And
what role should the Federal Government play to protect
American consumers from ``sharks?'' This is the ``flop'' we
have been dealt for today's hearing.
Then there is the ``turn'' card. With billions of dollars
sitting on the table, can Congress afford not to get involved?
And finally, the ``river'' card--what impact would
legalized Internet gambling have on American consumers and the
U.S. economy? Clearly, the stakes are high, and a ``showdown''
is likely on Capitol Hill in the months ahead. As chairman of
the House Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing and Trade,
this is an issue which I will be following very closely to make
certain Americans are dealt a fair hand, regardless of the
outcome.
The purpose of our hearing is to simply take a close look
at the ``face-up'' cards--the things we know with some
certainty after 80 years of legalized, regulated gambling in
the United States. Today, we will hear from both sides of this
important yet very contentious issue.
One thing we do know is this: the vast majority of
Americans have gambled at some point in their lives. According
to the UCLA Gambling Studies Program, approximately 85 percent
of U.S. adults have gambled at least once--60 percent in the
past year. What is more, some form of gambling is legalized in
48 States plus the District of Columbia. The only 2 States
without legalized gambling are Hawaii and Utah.
Gaming policy and regulation is generally handled by the
States, although the Federal Government has been involved in
shaping the boundaries of what is not permissible. But the
legal status of online gaming is a lot more complicated. In
1961, Congress passed the Interstate Wire Act, more than 20
years before anyone had ever heard of a thing called the
Internet. Yet according to the Justice Department, online
gambling is illegal under the Interstate Wire Act because it
prohibits the use of wire communications for the interstate
facilitation or transfer of wagers.
In 1988, gambling in the United States began to proliferate
after Congress passed the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act,
addressing the jurisdiction and authority of tribes to
establish gaming on their lands. Since its passage, tribal
gaming operations have seen tremendous growth with revenues
last year exceeding $26 billion.
And speaking from my own experience--with seven casinos
located in my Congressional District--tribal gaming has been a
huge plus. It has created thousands of jobs during difficult
economic times, and the tribes have been great neighbors, too,
contributing regularly to charities and civic events.
Unfortunately, illegal gambling has been growing in
popularity as well. So in 2006, to combat the proliferation of
illegal Internet gambling, Congress adopted the Unlawful
Internet Gambling Enforcement Act. This effectively outlawed
interstate online gaming in the United States by prohibiting
gambling-related businesses from accepting payments in the form
of checks, credit card payments, or electronic funds transfers
relating to unlawful Internet gambling. The law also
establishes fines and penalties for banks and financial
companies that process such payments.
In April of this year, three of the top poker Web sites
were shut down and 11 people were indicted for bank fraud and
money laundering, raising new questions about the law.
Proponents argue that the statute has not reduced Internet
gambling; it has simply driven it underground and offshore,
where sharks can operate with impunity. Legalizing Internet
gambling, they argue, would actually allow the government to
provide greater protection for consumers.
Proponents also argue that if Internet gambling is
legalized, the U.S. would realize significant tax revenues from
online bets that are currently directed to non-U.S.-based
gaming companies. It is estimated that Americans wagered $16
billion last year on Internet poker sites alone. But those who
want to keep the ban on Internet gambling in place argue that
repealing the current law will expose more Americans to serious
problems such as compulsive gambling. They are also worried
about an increase in fraud, money laundering, and organized
crime. Still others have expressed concern that State budgets
could be harmed by the loss of lottery and gaming revenue, and
they point to a huge potential impact on existing, legitimate
gaming operations.
So, as policy makers, the issue of legalizing Internet
gambling certainly raises a lot of questions for us to
consider: How effective is current enforcement of online
intrastate gaming? What, if any, forms of interstate gaming
online gaming should Congress consider allowing? What consumer
protections exist for online gaming today and do they need to
be strengthened? And how would any easing of legal restrictions
on Internet gaming affect American consumers and other
stakeholders? Hopefully, after today's hearing, we will have a
better idea of whether we need to hold 'em or to fold 'em.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Bono Mack follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.003

Mrs. Bono Mack. And so with that, I am happy to recognize
the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Butterfield, the ranking
member of the subcommittee, for 5 minutes for his opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. G.K. BUTTERFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA

Mr. Butterfield. Let me thank the chairman for convening
this important hearing today. This is a topic that I have heard
so much discussion about since I have been in Congress, and I
am just looking forward to the six witnesses that we have in
front of us. And hopefully, you can bring us a perspective that
we have not heard before or perhaps you may be able to
reinforce some of the views that we have heard.
And so as your ranking member, Madam Chairman, I look
forward to working with you on this issue.
Congress is no stranger to this issue, and we have grappled
with how to best address it for some time now. My good friend,
Congresswoman Shelley Berkley, talks about this very often both
to us privately and in our caucus meetings, and so we want to
keep her involved and try to bring some closure to this issue.
Part of the reason why I think is because Members of
Congress, just like all of our constituents across the country,
have very personal feelings about gambling. Certainly in my
community there are divergent views and all across the country
it is the same. Some are strongly opposed to all forms of
gambling while others see it merely as entertainment. The
debate shouldn't be over whether gambling is moral or not
moral. Instead, we should acknowledge that Internet gaming is
happening now all over the world, including here in our country
where online gambling has been treated as illegal by the
Justice Department.
As a result, the American Internet gamblers have turned to
unregulated foreign offshore entities for access to games. The
offshore entities may not provide consumer protections for
those who gamble, and there is no U.S. oversight to ensure U.S.
citizens are not harmed. There is often no legal recourse for
consumers who have been wronged by bad offshore actors.
There is also the small issue of money. Last year alone,
Americans wagered $16 billion just on Internet poker. While
some of that money went back to players in the form of
winnings, the overwhelming majority remained offshore,
unregulated and untaxed. With our significant national debt, a
commonsense solution seems clear. We need a robust debate on
whether Internet gaming should be legalized in the U.S., and if
so, we will need an oversight structure put in place to ensure
consumers the strongest possible safeguards. Games like poker
and bingo are as ubiquitous in the U.S. as baseball and
football and are played by young and old alike. But technology
has indeed evolved permitting individuals to participate in
games of chance and skill in real time and remotely.
Instead of embracing a new twist on an old game, our
inaction has led Americans to spend their money offshore and at
their own peril. Permitting Internet gaming entities to operate
within the U.S. could yield tremendous financial benefits to
struggling Federal and State coffers through unrealized direct
and indirect tax revenues. It would also allow for oversight of
and accountability for the industry's business practices. Most
importantly, we would have the opportunity to create and
implement strong consumer safeguards that each entity would
have to follow.
Having anytime access to gamble real money raises
significant concerns. The compulsive gambler would no longer
have to expend any effort like driving to a casino to play the
game. A mouse click and a credit card number are all that he or
she needs to play but with no human interaction with the house.
There is no one and no way to cut someone off if they have
played too much. Before long, that same gambler has maxed out
his or her credit cards and faces the dreaded bankruptcy or
worse, he turns to criminal activity to finance his habit.
While my example may be extreme it is very possible and it
happens daily at conventional gaming houses. People ultimately
must have personal responsibility to know when enough is
enough, but when the line blurs, safeguards must be in place.
That is why any legislation that permits Internet gaming in the
U.S. must, must have protections in place to mitigate
compulsive gambling. Consumer protections must also be in place
to ensure that the games are honest and fair and truly
randomized.
Economic boom that could result from legalized Internet
gaming is perhaps the most compelling reason to give it serious
consideration. Hundreds of millions of dollars in new revenues
could be realized by struggling States. Tens of thousands of
jobs could be created all across the country to directly
support the new industry. Considering the fragile and
struggling state of our economy, I strongly believe that all
potential remedies should be considered to return us to greater
prosperity.
Thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman.
And in accordance with committee rules, Chairman Upton has
yielded his 5 minutes to me, and I would now recognize the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Barton, chairman emeritus of the full
committee, for 3 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Barton. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. It is good to have
Senator D'Amato on the panel, and I see former Congressman John
Porter out in the audience. It is good to have you here.
Poker is the all-American game. President Richard Nixon
financed his first congressional campaign partially with poker
winnings from World War II. Our current president, President
Obama, is reputed to be a very good poker player. I learned to
play poker, believe it or not, in the Boy Scouts. So if you
learn something in the Boy Scouts, it has got to be a good
thing, right? Unfortunately, because there is some chance to
it, while it is a game of skill, there are those that think we
should not allow poker to be played for money on the Internet.
Consequently, we passed the bill or law several years ago
that is unenforceable, UIGEA. It is a bad law regardless of
which side of the debate that you are on. I have introduced a
bill as the chief sponsor to remedy this, and two of my
cosponsors are Barney Frank and Ron Paul. I will postulate that
if you have got a bill that Barney Frank, Joe Barton, and Ron
Paul are all for, who can be against it? I mean we have covered
the spectrum.
You can't see this in the audience but this is a photocopy
of a registration from yesterday. A person who is in the
audience today signed up on bodog.com to play poker for money.
He deposited $50, he got a $5 bonus for making the deposit, and
he got a solicitation that if he could be more people to sign
up, too, he could get an additional, I believe, $200 in poker
chips. People are playing poker on the Internet in the United
States for money today. We think as many as 8 million players
per month play poker for money online in the United States per
month.
Having said that, it is not regulated, and so these sites
are offshore, overseas, and consequently outside the ability
for us to tax the winnings, to regulate, to make sure that it
is a fair game and everybody has an equal chance to win based
on their skill. The legislation that I have introduced, H.R.
2366, is not perfect but it would remedy most of the major
problems that we face today.
I want to thank Chairwoman Bono Mack for having this
hearing. I want to thank the ranking member, Mr. Butterfield,
for what he said in his opening statement. I think we should
have a robust debate. Perhaps there should even be an
additional hearing. But at some point in time in this Congress
I hope we can move 2366 or something similar to it, Madam
Chairwoman, to let everybody in America who wishes to play
poker in States that allow it to do so. And the bill that I
have introduced, it is a State option. If the governor of a
State says there shall be no Internet poker played by residents
of that State, it does not happen. So we are not preempting the
States, but in the States that thinks it is OK, we set up a
regulatory scheme and a taxation scheme so that we have a fair
game and everybody has an equal chance. And future President
Nixons and Obamas can play on the Internet for money and use
those earnings to join us.
With that, Madam Chairwoman Mack, I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank you, Mr. Barton.
And the chair now recognizes Mr. Guthrie of Kentucky for 2
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRETT GUTHRIE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for yielding.
And I went to college in New York State in the 1980s so I
appreciate your service Senator D'Amato. I remember reading at
the New York Media when I was in college and all the great work
you did for that State. I appreciate it.
But I am from Kentucky, and as all you know, in Kentucky we
are famous for our horses. We have two of the greatest
racetracks in the world--at Churchill Downs in Louisville and
at Keeneland in Lexington, and we breed the world's best horses
that run on them. And no matter how you cut it, Internet gaming
will affect the horse-racing business. Expanded online gaming
will result in less gaming dollars being spent at tracks. Fewer
dollars in the racing business doesn't just affect the tracks,
breeders, jockeys, and trainers; it also affects thousands of
other jobs in these communities that depend on the horse
industry.
Because of this concern, the effect on the horse racing
must be considered in the expansion of online gaming. And I
look forward to hearing from the witnesses and my colleagues on
the underlying issue of online gaming legislation. However, as
the chairman of the Congressional Horse Caucus, I must remind
my colleagues that we cannot overlook the impact that gaming
legislation would have on a $50 billion equine industry.
While I am biased towards Kentucky's thoroughbreds and our
signature race, which is truly the greatest 2 minutes in
sports, this is not a one-State issue. The horse-racing
industry supports over a million jobs nationwide. We cannot
ignore this important industry as we consider changes to online
gaming.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman.
And now we turn our attention to our panel. We have one
panel of witnesses joining us today. Each of our witnesses has
prepared an opening statement that will be placed into the
record. Each of you will have 5 minutes to summarize that
statement in your remarks.
For introduction, one witness is very well known to many of
us, former United States Senator from New York, the Honorable
Alfonse D'Amato, who now serves as chairman of the Poker
Players Alliance. We all welcome you. And then we have Parry
Aftab, Advisory Board Member of Fair Play USA. Also testifying
we have Keith Whyte, Executive Director of the National Council
on Problem Gambling. We have Kurt Eggert, Professor of Law,
from Chapman University School of Law. We have Ernest Stevens,
Chairman of the National Indian Gaming Association. And our
final witness is Dan Romer, Director of the Adolescent
Communication Institute at the Annenberg Public Policy Center.
Good morning. Thank you all very much for coming. Again,
you will be recognized for 5 minutes. To keep track of the
time, there are lights and timers in front of you. When the
timer turns yellow, you will have 1 minute left. And please
remember to turn your microphone on and bring it close to your
mouth. Although we might hear you, the TV audience might not at
home, so it is very important you remember to do that.
So Senator D'Amato, we are very pleased to welcome you and
recognize you for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF ALFONSE D'AMATO, CHAIRMAN, POKER PLAYERS
ALLIANCE; PARRY AFTAB, ADVISORY BOARD MEMBER, FAIR PLAY USA;
ERNEST STEVENS, JR., CHAIRMAN, NATIONAL INDIAN GAMING
ASSOCIATION; KEITH S. WHYTE, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
COUNCIL ON PROBLEM GAMBLING; KURT EGGERT, PROFESSOR OF LAW,
CHAPMAN UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW; AND DANIEL ROMER, DIRECTOR,
ADOLESCENT COMMUNICATION INSTITUTE, ANNENBERG PUBLIC POLICY
CENTER, UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA

STATEMENT OF ALFONSE D'AMATO

Mr. D'Amato. Well, Madam Chairman, thank you so very much.
And let me wish you a belated happy birthday. I understand
yesterday you celebrated your birthday. And I would like to
thank you again for giving us an opportunity to testify on an
issue which I care very much about. Indeed, in my capacity as
chairman of the Poker Players Alliance, I have been privileged
to represent 1,200,000 Americans who have joined our
organization and who love this great American pastime. They
love playing poker in their homes, casinos, card rooms,
charitable games, and yes, on the Internet. I want to
congratulate the committee for holding this hearing, an
opportunity to get a better understanding of what the status
quo is as it relates to poker and the Internet.
And let me say status quo is badly broken, and it benefits
no one. Although it may have been well intended, the
legislation that passed 4 years ago, the fact of the matter is
that it has created many more problems than it has solved. It
has endangered young people. It has endangered problem
gamblers. It has endangered those who want to participate in an
honest, legitimate game. And it is my fervent hope that this
committee will respond by taking up legislation similar to the
bills introduced by Congressman Barton and Congressman
Campbell. And at this point, let me take a moment to
congratulate the chairman emeritus for his leadership on this
issue. Congressman Barton, you have stolen my speech. You have
said it all and you said it much more eloquently and much more
succinctly than any former United States Senator could do
because we never had time limitations. And so this 5 minutes is
rather difficult for me to deal with. But let me just touch on
one or two points.
Internet poker, as the Congressman has just said, has not
gone away. And it is hard to envision a scenario where it will.
What is taking place now is it takes place under the radar with
no regulations, with no taxation, with unscrupulous groups who
can and do operate. They operate in the public and the
government can do little if anything and certainly doesn't
safeguard the general public. As the Congressman indicated,
just yesterday a young man by the name of John Pappas with his
Federal credit union debit card--very interesting, I guess it
is the right Pappas debit card--went and opening an account at
bodog.com. Now, he could have been anybody. He could have
opening up an account, been underage, been under the age of 21
because they give these cards to just about anybody. Once I got
one for my dog believe it or not. And so 16-, 17-, 18-year-old
can certainly do that. So where is the protection for young
people?
And let me tell you, we have people on this panel today who
speak up for young people. Parry has done a fantastic job,
Parry Aftab. One of the things that the Congressman's
legislation provides for is verification and the type of
verification that will keep youngsters who are under 21 from
playing. That is the kind of thing that you need to do. One of
the things that the Congressman's legislation will see to it
that you don't have unscrupulous operators who inveigle the
poker player's money and use it for themselves. And we have
seen that situation with Full Tilt, horrible situation where
people took poker players' money that should have been placed
in a trust account and distribute it as dividends to the people
who ran that corporation, terrible betrayal of people.
Let me say there are those Internet sites that operate
where they do have a trust account. Poker Stars, for example,
legislation required that they have a trust account for those
dollars, and that is what Congressman Barton's legislation does
so that you can't have this inveigling, so you have proper
supervision. And again, if you want to protect young people--
and I understand the genesis of this came from a genuine
concern that so many young people were flocking to the poker
rooms, the poker sites. The TV was carrying it. I think the
third most watched game on television, sports, was poker,
online poker on television. And so you had kids getting
involved. Well, how do you keep them from doing it? By passing
legislation that will require verifiable identification. That
is how you do it.
How do you keep the deadbeat dad from becoming a problem
gambling? Well, I will tell you how. You pass legislation
similar to that that Congressman Barton has put forth and you
stop it because States can then post the deadbeat dads that
will not permit them to go on the Internet and gamble.
And so for those reasons and lots of others that time will
not permit--I don't want to test your patience--let me say that
I really hope that we have an opportunity to do something to
permit a great game, a game which requires skill to be played
in people's homes. It shouldn't be that they can just go to
casinos and play. Lots of people don't have the ability to do
that. It shouldn't be that they have to go to someone else's
home or have people being invited to their home. They may not
be able to get together that game. Great pastime. This
legislation that has created and clouded the UIGEA legislation,
the situation may have been well intended; it has missed its
mark.
I thank the chair and the committee for giving me this
opportunity and I look forward to any questions that you might
have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. D'Amato follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.012

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Senator.
And now I recognize Ms. Aftab for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PARRY AFTAB

Ms. Aftab. Good morning. Thank you very much, Chairman Bono
Mack and Ranking Member Butterfield and other members of the
subcommittee, for enabling me to speak today.
I am representing Fair Play USA as a member of their
Advisory Board. I am joined in that Advisory Board by Louis
Freeh, who was director of the FBI; and the first secretary of
Homeland Security, Governor Ridge, who are unable to testify
today.
As we look at these issues, we need to recognize that they
have a lot in common with the issues that this subcommittee has
been working on--privacy, security, authentication, protecting
our consumers. It is very much a matter of protecting our kids
and protecting our families as well. So to the extent any of
you know my work, I have been probably best known for
protecting kids and families online as the unpaid executive
director of Wired Safety. We are the oldest and largest
Internet safety group in the world. And we handle all issues.
And in that capacity I receive phone calls and emails from
people who have gambled online, won, and not retrieved their
winnings; people who are confused about whether or not it is
legal for them to play poker online.
I am a lawyer and I have to parse the law to really
understand it. If you walk up and down the street, a lot of
people don't. They don't understand the difference between
online poker fun games that are just part of computer games and
those where there is wagering that takes place. A lot of the
other countries around the world have looked at this and found
the solution for the problems that we have identified with
online gambling: identity theft, money laundering, underage
gambling, problem gambling, fraud, identity theft, privacy/
security breaches. All of these issues can be dealt with the
ironic position of legalizing certain aspects of online
gambling but regulating it and being able to enforce it.
The benefits of this allow us to help people who are
defrauded, put in the safeguards that have been put in brick-
and-mortar gambling situations. As we look at this, it is not a
matter of whether gambling is moral or not. I think that issue
was dealt with many years ago when State lotteries were put in
place, when we looked at tribal gambling and we saw how many
schools could be funded with this. But we can put safeguards in
effect that are not in effect now. What is happening now isn't
working. There are millions of people gambling billions of
dollars online without any protection at all. And because of
the laws that we have, it is really a hear-no-evil, see-no-
evil, speak-no-evil situation. And these people find themselves
with no place to go but calling my cell phone at three o'clock
in the morning.
So I have a group of teens, teen angels and some of the
representatives on this subcommittee have teen angels in their
districts and they are familiar with them, and they knew that I
was testifying here today. And they are teen Internet safety
experts. So they said, well, it is really easy for us to find
these online poker sites in particular, and they went to
several of them. And one they went to I have here; it is
pokersites.com. It took them about 2-1/2 seconds to find that
one. And it has top lists of places that are the best legal
U.S. poker site 2011--betonline, bodog again. I knew they did
this because they called and asked for my credit card number to
be able to put it in place or for permission to use one of
theirs, and one of the girls was 16 years old and had her own
credit card that her parents had given her to be able to shop
at the mall. It is easy. It is too easy and there is nothing we
can do right now to keep underage gamblers out and protect
problem gamblers with the kind of things that we can do.
There are many things that we do to address online gambling
as it relates to horse racing, although I don't know anybody
who would rather go to the Internet than the beautiful State of
Kentucky. But I think that there are so many things that can be
done here if we treat this as another Internet safety, privacy,
and security issue instead of something that is unique because
it has a lot more in common with all of the other things we are
looking at than there are differences. So I am happy to discuss
any of those issues with anyone on the committee if you have
questions and help in any way I can. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Aftab follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.023

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much.
Mr. Stevens, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ERNEST STEVENS, JR.

Mr. Stevens. Thank you. Good morning, Madam Chairman Bono
Mack, Ranking Member Butterfield, and the members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for this opportunity to provide the
views of the National Indian Gaming Association on the
important issue of Internet gaming.
To place our views in context, let us start with the
Constitution. Indian tribes are recognized in the United States
Constitution as governments. Through treaties with the United
States, tribal governments ceded hundreds of millions of acres
of their homelands to help build this great Nation. In return,
the U.S. promised to preserve remaining tribal lands and tribal
sovereignty and provide for the health, education, and general
welfare of Indian people.
Unfortunately, Madam Chairman, the United States has broken
many of these treaty promises. After suffering generations of
failed Federal policies, tribes took matters into their own
hands in the 1960s and '70s when they began to use gaming as a
means to generate revenue to meet tribal needs. That is when
President Johnson and Nixon adopted the policy supporting
Indian self-determination. Indian gaming is Indian self-
determination.
In 1988, after more than a decade of legal challenges by
States and commercial gaming interests, Congress stepped in and
established a Federal law through the Indian Gaming Regulatory
Act, or IGRA. IGRA acknowledges Indian tribes as governments
with the right to regulate and operate gaming. IGRA provides
that tribal gaming revenues be used for tribal government
purposes. It also provides that tribal revenues are not subject
to taxation. And finally, the Act established a comprehensive
regulatory system that involves 3 levels of government
regulation: tribal, Federal, and State.
Twenty-three years later, more than 200 Indian tribes have
made IGRA work to begin to rebuild their once-forgotten
communities. Gaming revenues are working to improve tribal
education, health, elder care, and rebuilding tribal
infrastructure, and so much more. For many tribes, Indian
gaming is about jobs. In 2010, Madam Chair, Indian gaming
created more than 600,000 American jobs. Without question,
Indian gaming is putting people to work.
These tribes realize that the games would not be possible
without strong regulation. The tribal regulatory system employs
more than 3,400 regulators, along with state-of-the-art
technology to protect tribal revenues. In 2010, tribes spent
375 million in regulation. The system is costly, it is
comprehensive, and our record of experience shows that it is
working. Because of Indian gaming, tribal governments are
stronger, our people are healthier, and an entire generation of
Indian youth have hope for a better future.
As a result of these gains, all tribes are weary when
Congress considers changing the playing field with regard to
gambling. Legalized Internet gaming raises significant
concerns. In 2010, tribal leaders conducted more than a dozen
meetings to discuss the issues of Internet gaming. From these
meetings, tribal leaders nationwide have unified behind a set
of general principles regarding Federal Internet gaming
legislation. These principles are listed in my written
testimony, and I will try to summarize these for you, Madam
Chairman.
First, our principles require that Federal legislation
provides similar authorizations and protections for tribal
Internet gaming that IGRA provides for Indian gaming. To
accomplish this goal, Internet gaming legislation must
acknowledge that tribes are eligible to operate and regulate
Internet gaming. If a Federal regulatory system is required,
tribes ask that the NIGC be vested with the authority to
regulate tribal Internet gaming. The National Indian Gaming
Commission is the only Federal agency with experience in
regulating any form of gaming in the United States.
Indian Country's fourth principle states that the Federal
legislation must acknowledge that customers may access tribal
Internet sites as long as such gaming is not prohibited where
the customer is located. And five, legislation must acknowledge
that tribal Internet gaming revenues are not subject to
taxation. Tribal gaming revenues are 100 percent taxed. These
funds go to serve the public purpose of tribal and nearby
communities. There is no room for Federal and State taxation.
Our final principle is based on the fact that tribes have
invested significant resources on the current law. Thus,
legislation must fully protect tribal rights under the Indian
Gaming Regulatory Act and existing tribal State gaming
compacts.
Internet gaming bills that have been introduced in the
112th Congress violate many of these principles and we oppose
their passage as currently written. In addition, there are many
stakeholders that have yet to be heard from. For example,
neither of the Departments of Justice, Interior, Commerce,
Treasure, or the National Indian Gaming Commission have been
heard on this issue.
I know my time is short so I will briefly conclude, Madam
Chairman. Indian gaming has proven to be the most effective
tool to help Indian tribes address more than a century of
Federal policy failures. Tribes are concerned that legalized
Internet gaming will threaten these games. NIGA has dialogued
with Congress on Internet gaming for close to 15 years, and on
the most recent discussions, tribes have met and unified behind
these set of core principles.
We look forward to working with Congress and this
subcommittee and to ensure that any legislation moving to
legalize Internet gaming adheres to these principles that are
developed and established by the tribes across the United
States. And I thank you again for this opportunity to testify
and I am here to answer any questions you may have, Madam
Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stevens follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.046

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Stevens.
And now I am happy to recognize Mr. Whyte for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KEITH S. WHYTE

Mr. Whyte. Thank you, Madam Chairman, Ranking Member
Butterfield, and the committee members.
My name is Keith Whyte. I am the executive director of the
National Council on Problem Gambling. This is actual my 12-year
anniversary with the National Council; I started 12 years ago
this week. The NCPG is the national advocate for programs and
services to assist problem gamblers and their families. We have
a 39-year record of independence and objectivity in dealing
with the often controversial issue of gaming. We are neutral on
legalized gambling taking no position for or against it. Our
main concern is advocacy for problem gamblers and their
families.
We believe strongly the most ethical and cost-effective
response to problem gambling issues raised by the Internet is a
comprehensive public health approach. Problem gambling, like
other diseases of addiction, will likely never be eliminated,
but we can and must make better efforts to protect consumers,
prevent addiction, and mitigate the damage. It is inconceivable
that Internet gambling be legalized without dedicating a
portion of the new revenue to address the known social costs of
gambling addiction.
Madam Chairman said this in her opening statement: at least
85 percent of adults have gambled once in the past year, 15
percent at least once in the past week. You are looking at $95
billion generated by casinos, tracks, and lotteries in legal
gaming revenue alone, which obviously does not include most
sports gambling and much of the Internet gambling today. $6
billion per year comes from the special Federal withholding tax
on legalized gambling winnings. Yet unlike the Federal excise
taxes on tobacco and alcohol, not a single penny of this
Federal tax revenue from legalized gambling is returned back to
prevent and treat the social cost of gambling addiction.
Between 68 million adults and 500,000 adolescents meet
criteria for a gambling addiction in a given year. High-risk
groups include members of racial and ethnical minority groups,
young males, and veterans. The estimated social cost to
families, business, and communities top $7 billion per year
from addiction, bankruptcy, and crime. Problem gambling is
therefore an important national public health concern. Gambling
problems are significantly correlated with other substance use
and abuse problems that we know are extremely costly to our
State governments and to our families and individuals. Gambling
problems are significantly correlated with higher rates of
unemployment, bankruptcy, arrest, incarceration, and poor
physical health. In addition, millions of spouses, children,
families, and parents, employers are also negatively impacted
by gambling addiction.
It is not clear with the impact of the legalization of
Internet gambling is going to be on problem gambling. The
available research does consistently show that Internet
gambling has the lowest participation rates of any form of
gambling regardless of legality of gambling in that
jurisdiction. The rates of participation do not seem to vary
significantly whether it is legal or illegal. And as we have
heard this morning already, there are massive numbers of
Americans that are gambling online currently. Yet studies
throughout the world also find relatively high rates of
gambling problems among those who do gamble online. Of course,
those who gamble online are also very likely to gamble in
traditional forms to the extent that Internet gambling almost
seems to be an adjunct to people who are already gambling in
traditional forms.
It is also possible that people who gamble online may be
exacerbating their problems due to the unlimited access, the
high speed of play, use of credit and non-cash instruments and
perceived social anonymity, all of which are known risk factors
for gambling addiction in the bricks-and-mortar world. Since
online gamblers are known to have high rates of problems, it is
important to require extensive responsible gaming policies.
These programs provide an opportunity to create informed
consumers, to provide informed consumers with a variety of
information designed to encourage safe choices and discourage
unsafe behavior. The technology exists to allow players to set
limits on the amount of money gambled, the time they gamble,
and the deposits they make. And I am pleased that Dr. Romer is
going to speak a little bit on some of these consumer
protection policies.
Strong regulation is important but it cannot be effective
alone. It must be accompanied by equally robust prevention,
education, treatment, and research services. A portion of
gambling revenue from legalized gambling, which we estimate
would be not less than $50 million annually, must be set aside
for such programs. This need is magnified by the disparity of
services among the States as more than 1/3 of the States,
including a number of States represented by members of this
committee, provide absolutely no public funds whatsoever to
prevent or treat gambling problems. This is neither cost
effective nor an ethical means of responding to a known public
health concern.
An important and cost-free first step is to cut social
costs by designating a lead Federal agency on problem gambling.
Unbelievably--although we have heard a lot of testimony that
gambling has been around and is certainly present in most
States--there is no single Federal agency that coordinates
efforts on this issue. I call your attention to H.R. 2334, the
Comprehensive Problem Gambling Act, which has been introduced
now for the fourth time in the House, which would designate the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration as
the lead agency on problem gambling to address the public
health concerns of this issue.
I thank Representatives Barton, Schakowsky, Pitts,
Whitfield, Campbell, Frank, and many others who are current or
former sponsors of this legislation. And as Member Emeritus
Barton has said, we certainly appreciate the broad sponsorship
on our bill as well with you and Representative Frank.
In closing, millions of Americans are experiencing gambling
problems today like my friend Mike. He gambled away more than
$250,000 in the past 3 years gambling on the Internet. He lost
his job, his house, and his family. He sat in his grocery store
parking lot here in Northern Virginia and contemplated suicide.
Fortunately, he was able to get treatment, and today, he works
to ensure that hope and help are available for problem gamblers
and their families. Simply put, treatment works. It is an
investment that pays for itself many times over.
In closing, those who legalize, regulate, promote, and
profit from gambling have an ethical and an economic imperative
to minimize the social cost of gambling addiction. Thank you
for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whyte follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.050

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Whyte.
And Professor Eggert, welcome, and you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF KURT EGGERT

Mr. Eggert. Good morning, Madam Chairwoman. Thank you,
Madam Chairwoman and Ranking Member Butterfield and members. I
appreciate your inviting me to talk about this important issue.
You should know I come at this from a different angle than
most. I come from a consumer protection angle where I have
worked in most of my career. I was an advisor to the Federal
Reserve Board on consumer financial issues on their Consumer
Advisory Council, and you can imagine what fun that was during
our recent years. And so when I think about gambling, the
question I have is what consumer protection should be in place?
And I am very happy to hear many of you talk about the
importance of consumer protection in gambling because it is in
fact a crucial issue.
Gamblers used to be looked down on but now they are just
consumers. It is just another industry. And so we should treat
them as consumers as we would in other industries and think
about what consumer protection is important in this industry.
The purpose of consumer protection is to make consumers good
shoppers, to give them the tools they need to make smart
decisions when they purchase--when they go to a casino, when
they gamble online, whatever they do, we want to make them good
shoppers and protect them from shark practices. Because the
engine of the consumer economy is if the consumers drive it and
as long as they are given the information they need to make
good decisions, then companies will have to compete based on
quality of product and price, which is what makes our economy
run.
Now, in the gambling industry, they talk often about
consumer protection is honesty, fairness, and making sure that
the gambler gets paid. Those are all very important, but
equally important is that the gambling industry provides
accurate price disclosure to consumers who are gambling. Now,
the price of the game in the gambling industry is a very
interesting thing. If you play $100 slot machine, you put $100
in, but on average you get money back. Otherwise, why do it?
And so the real average price of a slot machine is the amount
that the casino retains from the gambler's bets. So if you bet
$1,000 and you get $970 back, then the price of that gambling
was $30.
For slot machines, casinos know exactly what the average
hold percentage of the slot machine is. They can order a slot
machine with a 5 percent hold percentage, a 10 percent hold
percentage, 15 percent hold percentage, and they know that is
on average what that machine will cost. The problem is that
information is not disclosed to gamblers. They may be sitting
at a 2-percent-hold-machine table or a 15-percent-hold-machine
table and not know the difference. They could be sitting at one
much more expensive or much cheaper and not be given that
information.
It is crucial that gamblers have this information so that
they can make smart decisions and so that they can shop based
on price. Any Internet gambling should include that. And so any
legislation for Internet gambling should require disclosure of
the hold percentage of every slot machine on the system.
Now, for Internet poker, it is a different proposition
because the price made by the borrower is based more on
competition of other players than it is by any setting of the
site. Here, the problem is that professional players have new
tools to use against recreational gamblers that far exceed
anything that they could do in a casino poker table. There are
computer boosts that they have; there are computer bots that
are getting increasingly effective. And so recreational
gamblers may find themselves playing against professionals who
far exceed their ability to play and the recreational gambler
may have no idea what they are getting into. There is even
computer tracking software using data mining that helps strong
gamblers identify who the weak gamblers are so they can follow
them to tables and play against them.
This is a real problem for the Internet poker industry
because the industry doesn't want all of its recreational
gamblers' money to be drained out by professionals using bots
or other tools. And so any legislation has to think about how
to have a level playing field in Internet poker. And I have
some ideas on that but my time is up so I will appreciate any
questions later on. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Eggert follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.081

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Professor.
And Dr. Romer, welcome. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL ROMER

Mr. Romer. Good morning, Madam Chair and Ranking Member
Butterfield and other members of the committee. Thanks for
inviting me this morning. It is a pleasure to be here and to
hear all the different points of view about what I think is a
very difficult issue for you to deal with.
So I have been doing research on adolescent gambling since
2002 at the Annenberg Public Policy Center and trying to
understand both the prevalence and the harms that might occur
to young people as a result of all kinds of gambling, not just
on the Internet. And we have found with a lot of the research
that we have been doing is that young people at a very early
age are starting to gamble and this puts them at risk
potentially for gambling dependence as they get older. So it is
very important for the committee and for the Congress to think
about what the impact will be on young people and their
families as a result of any actions that are taken with regard
to online gambling.
One of the things we have done since 2002 is conduct a
National Annenberg Survey of Youth, which studies young people
ages 14 to 22, and what we have found from this survey is that
most of the attempts to restrict online gambling haven't been
particularly effective, as we have already heard. We found in
our last survey in 2010 that more than 400,000 youth in the
college-age range gamble once a week and 1.7 million or more
once a month. So a lot of people are online as you have heard.
The same is true of high school kids, very high rates, but not
so much on a regular basis. So we think that age restrictions
and laws that would encourage age-restricted responsible
gambling--which is what we have seen in some of the other
countries that have allowed online gambling--may be an approach
that would work, but we are still very much in the early phases
of understanding how online gambling will work, and I think we
need research to understand it better.
But if we have legislation that can provide some safeguards
that could potentially restrict underage gamblers and also to
the extent they do go online, make it harder for them to lose
control while they are online would be excellent safeguards to
include in any legislation.
And I think the principle that I see when I look at what is
going on in Europe is this idea of responsible gambling, and so
one idea that I think is particularly helpful is that gambling
operators should not receive disproportionate income from users
who are unable to control their habit. And I think the bill
that has been put forth by Mr. Barton and others might have a
mechanism in it for the public to observe, monitor how funds
are being made on Internet gambling so that you could see if
certain gamblers are disproportionately contributing to
profits.
Now, some of the other ideas that we have heard about age
restrictions and so forth I think are very important. The
method of payment is really important. We still don't really
know how well they work. We need research, and this country is
actually way behind the U.K. and countries in Europe on
understanding what happens when young people go online and
gamble. We really need to find that out. We need monies
dedicated to that question.
I think we also need to consider and the law should
consider money and time limits. I think Keith mentioned that he
thinks this is a good idea. There should be a running clock
online, there should be a win/loss total online so that the
young person knows how much they are wagering. And this is true
whether they are 18, 21, or 51. This is something I think is
straightforward but we really don't know how many of these
kinds of restrictions would work.
We also need prevention messages online. It is much easier
to put these online than it is, for example, at a casino. And
we need to regulate or monitor the advertising that is done to
attract people. We don't want the advertising to target young
people disproportionately or addicted gamblers
disproportionately.
And so I think the challenge will be if you do legalize
this will be to put in place both things that Keith talked
about in terms of treatment but also a program of research to
figure out are restrictions that you put in place working? What
mix of restrictions work best? And what can we do in the future
to maximize the chance that this kind of activity will not
produce harms for young people and their families. And I have
included a bunch of other ideas in my testimony.
And I thank you for this opportunity to say these things.
Thanks.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Romer follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.087

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Dr. Romer.
And I am going to begin the questioning. And I thank all of
the panel for your testimony and recognize myself for 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Whyte, I would like to begin with you. And Dr. Romer
just spoke about this, too, but you state problem gamblers
could exacerbate their problems by gambling online because of
the use of credit and 24-hour availability. Would restrictions
on those factors reduce the problem, for example, limited times
and limits on credit? Do other countries offering Internet
gambling currently have restrictions to limit the use of credit
and availability, and if so, can you talk about their results?
Mr. Whyte. Yes, I can. There is some evidence from Canada
and Europe that there are supposed to be restrictions that have
been put into place which generally include, as you say, limits
on the use of certain types of payment processing, limits on
the time and money spent gambling seem to be able to not
necessarily intervene with pathological gamblers who will keep
gambling despite any and all barriers put in their way. They
seem rather to be better targeted at those people that are at
risk for gambling problems or they are moderate problem
gamblers. These restrictions, properly tailored, can be and
have shown to be effective in some studies at stopping people
from stepping over the edge and developing severe gambling
problems.
As Dan said, we are not entirely sure exactly what works
best, but we believe that there is enough evidence to show that
some of these interventions can be effective, and in fact some
of them can be much more successfully implemented on the
Internet with account-based wagering than in a traditional
gambling forum.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you.
Mr. Stevens, you suggest that any legislation authorizing
online gambling should allow tribal governments' early entry
with a period of exclusivity. Can you explain the rationale for
your position?
Mr. Stevens. Yes, I can. You know, I think it is important
to understand and appreciate what tribes have been through and
the history with the United States Government. You know, if I
could speak just quickly about my grandmother. She is 101 years
old and she lives in her own apartment independently in an
apartment that is assisted but not a nursing home. And she
lives in that apartment at 101 independently. She started out
her life going to boarding schools and working and wearing a
uniform and disciplined for being left-handed like my friend
next to me and speaking her language, you know, and, you know,
leaving her family. The family would go by the boarding school
and not even be able to wave or visit or look at your children.
And again as we approach a little bit emotional to bring it up
because even though my grandma is doing fine and if you called
her apartment on the reservation in Oneida, Wisconsin, you
would probably find that she is not home. So she is involved in
activities which she is a retired schoolteacher. She spent her
whole life teaching the language and the culture that was
attempted to be taken from her.
And again, that is a success story, but really if you look
at the way her life was, her grandfather who raised her was a
Civil War veteran and he used to ride by the boarding school
and throw candy but he would never look because the government
said you couldn't even look at your kids. And again, that is a
mild story about what our people have been through. Millions
and millions of Indian folks when our first European contact,
in spite of all those struggles and challenges that we have
been through, we have been able to persevere and survive and
fight back. And if anybody deserves to be at the front line in
this industry, it is Native American people.
Mrs. Bono Mack. OK.
Mr. Stevens. And at the very least equal footing, Madam
Chair.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Well, why is it important that legislation
permit tribes to operate Internet gaming without renegotiating
their tribal state compacts? What is the concern?
Mr. Stevens. Well, I believe that that is a new industry
and I believe that they shouldn't undo or attempt to amend the
current law in order to accomplish that.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Can you please clarify your principle
regarding the preservation of tribal regulatory authority?
Should we actually legalize online gaming? Can you speak to
that and how do you see that authority affected by Federal
legislation to legalize online gaming?
Mr. Stevens. OK, I am sorry, Madam Chair. I misunderstood
you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I actually think I missed a comma in there.
So could you please clarify your principle regarding the
preservation of tribal regulatory authority should Federal
legislation legalize online gaming?
Mr. Stevens. I think that I spoke briefly to that in my
testimony and quite extensively on it in my written testimony.
The regulators in Indian Country have analyzed this and they
are the ones responsible. The National Indian Gaming Commission
is the only Federal authority that has experience in gaming, so
we feel like that in order to oversee this element of it, we
should utilize experienced folks.
Now, just by coincidence I have my--it is the nicest one I
got but it is the National Tribal Gaming Commission and
Regulators. It is a national association independent of NIGA
and independent of the tribes that have worked to analyze the
expertise and the important aspects of tribal regulation to
make a stronger and able to adhere to the responsibilities to
our constituents.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I am sorry. I hate to cut you off but my
time is up if you can wrap up in 5 seconds.
Mr. Stevens. My bottom line is that we have asked these
regulators nationwide if they are prepared to regulate this
industry and they assured us that they are in strong
preparation to do so.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you.
All right. Again, my time has expired and I am pleased to
recognize Mr. Butterfield for 5 minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. I thank the chairman.
Madam Chairman, I am among those who is beginning to
understand I would say online gambling. I am beginning to
understand that it could provide a great boost to our national
economy and it could provide a boost for Federal and State
coffers. And so I am beginning to connect the dots and
understand what this is about. Today should be the beginning of
a robust discussion and this conversation certainly should be
expanded as we go forward.
As the chair pointed out, online gambling is a very
complicated issue. I am beginning to see that. Other issues
still warrant discussion. For example, the great State of
California with 53 Representatives and the District of Columbia
with a nonvoting Representative are already moving forward with
intrastate online gaming even though its legal status is
unclear given that the U.S. Justice Department believes the
Wire Act prohibits all online gambling. I have to wonder,
therefore, under the current state of play, is Justice going to
shut these operations down once they are up and running? And
there are other critical questions that need to be answered.
We need to hear from California and D.C.; we need to hear
from the Justice Department; we need to hear from other State
and Federal regulators who would be tasked with implementing
and enforcing inter-regulatory framework regarding online
gaming. This is an issue that warrants further review before
this subcommittee. We have jurisdiction and we need to
certainly inquire into that.
In his testimony, Mr. Whyte notes that among the groups at
high risk for gambling addiction are racial and ethnic
minorities. I want to talk about that for a minute. He
specifically identifies African Americans, among others, as
being at high risk. Earlier this month, this subcommittee held
a hearing on revisions to the Children's Online Privacy
Protection Act Rule. The testimony of one of the witnesses for
that hearing contained references to a study by the Sesame
Workshop that included some interesting insights into the
online habits of minority children. According to that study,
African Americans and Hispanic children have less home Internet
access, but those that have access use the Internet more than
white children. African American children between the ages of 5
and 9 spend 41 minutes online per session. White children in
contrast spend 27 minutes online per session. Hispanic children
between ages 8 and 14 spend almost 2 hours online each day, 40
minutes more than white children. The study also pointed out
that children from low income and ethnic minority homes were
less likely to have adult guidance when accessing the Internet.
As a result, they were spending more time on lower-quality Web
sites or on activities that wouldn't help them develop school-
based skills.
Now, Dr. Romer, let me try you, sir. I know your own work
has focused on the prevalence of gambling among high school and
college youth. However, I don't think it would be too much of a
leap to assume that this tendency by younger minority children
to use the Internet more and to spend more time on lower-
quality Web sites persists into high school and college. Given
all of this, I am wondering whether you can speak to whether
you have seen differences along racial and ethnic lines?
Mr. Romer. There are racial and ethnic differences in
gambling. We haven't seen it in terms of Internet use partly
because it has still been kind of small in our survey so I
can't really talk to it. But from what you have said if there
are these disparities that occur for kids who are online, I
would fully expect that those kids to then make the same----
Mr. Butterfield. The data seems to suggest that.
Mr. Romer. Yes.
Mr. Butterfield. Yes. Do you have any thoughts about
whether there might be particular implications for young
minorities from online gambling that should be taken into
account in the discussion about whether and how to go about
recognizing some forms of online gambling as legal?
Mr. Romer. Well, I mean are you saying----
Mr. Butterfield. Is there anything in particular we could
write into the law that would try to safeguard against this?
Mr. Romer. Well, I don't know that you could write a law
that would, you know, safeguard against particular people other
than people who are prone to, you know, lack of control. So I
think the thing you want to prevent is people from using online
gambling sites who can't control their gambling. And anything
you can do to warn them, to remind them, to keep them aware of
the fact that they may be spending more than they have I think
would be valuable. And you need to explain I think, as Kurt
Eggert has said, people need to know what they are going to win
on a site. I think that is a valuable thing to tell people at
any age. But we don't want kids on there at all. I mean that is
the goal. We don't want kids.
Mr. Whyte. Another important aspect is to make sure that
there are health services available if kids do get into
trouble. And I think that is where, again, the impact on the
minority community is disproportionate. There is less access to
health services. We also understand that there is less access
to, for example, services in Spanish and in other culturally
specific services for Native Americans, Asian Americans, and
others. So on the health side, regulation alone cannot
adequately protect people from an addiction as we have known
from drugs and alcohol and tobacco. You must have health
services and we must have within those health services
dedicated, culturally specific services available for both
youth and adults to prevent, educate, treat, and research. That
is the way that we are going to make the progress that gets to
public health disorders.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman.
And chair would remind people that we have a 5-minute rule
on questioning and answering as well if we can try to stick
close to it. We will have a second round of questioning that
way.
The chair is happy to recognize Mr. Bass for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bass. I thank the chairman. And I also want to thank my
friend from Texas, Mr. Barton, for his courtesy. I have to
preside at noon and the House is not in session now, and when
you don't show up at noon, people get uptight very quickly.
I am also quite perplexed by some of this discussion about
this money that could be lost in Internet poker. I know quite a
few people who have played poker and I haven't met one yet that
admits to ever losing anything. I will also point out that New
Hampshire is, as we all know, first in the Nation presidential
primary and it will remain so. It also happens to the first
State to adopt a statewide lottery in 1964. It has raised over
$4 billion and provided about $1.3 billion for public education
in the State.
My question and only question is for my former colleague
from New York, Senator D'Amato. Senator, representing the poker
players, in your organization's opinion, what impact would the
passage of legislation permitting Internet gambling have on
State lotteries? And secondly, would your organization have any
objection to allowing or giving the State lotteries the
opportunity to also compete if you will in the Internet poker
business?
Mr. D'Amato. Congressman, let me answer the second question
first because that is an easier one to answer. We would have no
objection whatsoever. As it relates to whether or not there has
been an impact, we believe that the people who buy lottery
tickets are generally not the same people and we don't believe
they really compete. We believe that many will continue. If you
look at the lottery tickets and their purchases, you will find
that while the Internet does play a role, most of it is at your
commercial establishments. And so we don't see a conflict and
we certainly have no objection to lottery tickets and the
scrape-off tickets that the States put out there having that
ability.
I would also note that in New York, you presently have a
situation where the revenues from the lotteries--I am very
conscious of this--play a very substantial part in our State's
economy and budget, and we want to protect that. I am certainly
not advocating that we cut into that.
But I make one other point. And the ranking member brought
up the fact that there is a disparate impact and it would seem
that the young minority children are addicted to a greater
extent to the Internet and to programs which are not those kind
that you would generally want to encourage them is going to
help them in school. And I hope I am paraphrasing your
sentiments correctly. More reason to see to it that there is
good, tight regulation as it relates to using the Internet and
poker in particular. There is no regulation now. There is
nothing to stop these kids from getting on. If we want to
eliminate those who unfortunately become involved at a young
age, there is no verification required by these offsite groups.
There is no way to stop or prevent them.
And so I think it makes abundant sense if we want to do
something to curtail this, the misuse by youngsters to have
strong, tough regulations protecting the consumers, protecting
the young people, seeing to it--I would like to hear some of
Mr. Eggert's suggestions because we are certainly not opposed--
to how do we give the kind of information so that players have
a better playing field. So I think for all of those reasons
that it is important that we move forward with this kind of
legislation.
Mr. Bass. Thank you very much, Senator. I appreciate your
addressing my question as well as Mr. Butterfield's and Mr.
Eggert's.
Mr. D'Amato. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Bass. And I yield back to the chairlady.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Bass.
The chair recognizes Mr. Towns for 5 minutes.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Madam Chair and of course
the ranking member, Mr. Butterfield, for having this hearing. I
think this is a very, very important hearing.
The question before this committee is what if any forms of
online gaming should Congress consider? Over the course of the
next several weeks, Congress will decide on how our Nation will
begin to put its fiscal house in order. And this seems to be a
way to get revenue. One of the many proposals that Congress
will consider is easing the current restriction of online
gamine. Currently under the Wire Act, online gaming is illegal.
However, that has not stopped offshore gaming, Web sites from
profiting off of the United States. Gaming industry experts
have estimated that United States spent over $16 billion in
2010 online poker alone. Some experts also suggest that
revenues generated by online gaming would bring in significant
tax revenues to the Federal Government that currently are
directed to non-U.S. gaming companies. This additional revenue
could be used to help balance our growing Federal deficit
without causing drastic cuts to entitlement programs that so
many Americans rely on.
While I am sympathetic to the view that more revenue is
needed to help balance the Federal budget, I am concerned with
the unintended consequences of this proposal. So first I want
to begin by asking you, Mr. Stevens, you know, I am not sure in
terms of your real reasons for opposing any kind of change,
what are your real reasons? Could you be very specific?
Mr. Stevens. I don't think I understood your question, sir.
Mr. Towns. I understand that you oppose this, right, and
you mentioned the fact that there were certain agencies that
were not involved in it, you know. What are the reasons as to
why you might oppose it?
Mr. Stevens. And again, Representative Towns, we had
several, as much as 12-plus meetings on this issue, and the
Indian tribes are opposed to this discussion based on 6 points.
Indian tribes are sovereign governments with a right to
operate, regulate, tax, and license Internet gaming and those
rights must not be subordinated to any non-Federal authority.
Internet gaming as authorized by Indian tribes must be
available to customers in any locale where Internet gaming is
not prohibited. Consistent with long-held Federal policy,
tribal revenues must not be subject to tax. Existing tribal
government rights under the tribal state compacts and Indian
Gaming Regulatory Act must be respected. The legislation must
not open up any gaming regulatory act and Federal legislation
of Internet gaming must provide positive economic benefits for
Indian Country. Those are the 6 points that were developed in a
series of meetings with tribal leaders from throughout the
country.
Mr. Towns. You know, this committee must ensure that, you
know, all the stakeholders involved are able to benefit from
any legislation that may take shape over the coming weeks and
months. You know, so we are very sensitive to that as well. But
you know, my concern would be the fact that the oversight and
the fact that we make certain that, you know, it is being done
fairly. And of course that would be a real concern because I
think that we have to look at ways to be able to deal with the
deficit. And based on what everybody is saying, this is a way
to attract revenue.
Now, I am also concerned about youth and all of that but I
think that based on programs that are in place that we can sort
of look at that and be able to make certain that they are safe
and that they are not involved in any way. And any time you
have anything, you are always going to have some folks that
take it to the extreme. I think that what we need to do is to
make certain if they do, that there is something in place, you
know, for them. I mean so you can name almost anything and I
can tell you, you know, how someone has gone and taken it to
the extreme. You name it. I think the main thing, though, is to
try to put safeguards in place. And I think that is an issue
that we need to talk about as to safeguards that we can put in
place, programs that we can put in place that will make it
possible for people to continue to function without destroying
families.
So I want to thank all of you for your testimony and I am
going to respect the 5 minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Towns. I will remember you
at Christmas for that.
And I am pleased to recognize I think the best poker player
in Congress, Mr. Barton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Well, I don't know about that. I haven't got
some bills passed through the Senate yet. That is where you
play real poker up here is when you play with the Senate at the
end of the year on getting your bills through.
Mr. Butterfield. Mr. Engle wouldn't like that, either.
Mr. Barton. That is exactly right.
Mr. Butterfield. He considers himself world-class.
Mr. Barton. First of all, Madam Chairwoman, I would ask
unanimous consent to put into the record a letter to you from
Frank Fahrenkopf, who is the president of the American Gaming
Association, and written testimony that he was prepared to give
had there been room on the panel. I am told this has been
cleared by your staff and the minority staff and that it is not
a problem.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.097

Mr. Barton. OK, thank you.
My first question to the distinguished panel: Is there any
one of you who believes that millions of Americans are not
playing poker for money on the Internet right now? Let the
record show that they all are staring. So is there any of you
that believe it would be possible to prevent American citizens
who wish to play poker for money on the Internet from doing so?
The gentlelady with Fair Play.
Ms. Aftab. Underage gamblers we would be able to deal with.
I was part of the Berkman Center, the Harvard Center Age
Verification Group, the Internet Safety Technology Taskforce,
and although you can't prove for the purposes of COPPA who is
under the age of 13, you certainly can prove who is over the
age of 21. So we would be able with the right things in place--
--
Mr. Barton. I will stipulate that whatever we can do if the
bill moves to prevent underage poker players, you tell me how
to do it, and we will put it in the bill.
Ms. Aftab. We actually had a study that was done at the
Kennedy School at Harvard with Dr. Sparrow, and it was
presented last year at the hearings with Barney Frank. And if
anyone on the subcommittee would like that, I am happy to enter
that into additional testimony----
Mr. Barton. As the chief sponsor of the bill, I can assure
you that I don't want underage poker players, so we will work
with you on that.
I want to ask the gentleman who is representing the Indian
tribes, under the proposed legislation that I have introduced,
a State that wishes not to allow its citizens to play poker for
money on the Internet simply opts out. We give that same option
to the tribes. Why would that not protect your sovereignty? If
you don't want your citizens in the Indian Nation to play, all
you have to do is send a letter to the Secretary of Commerce
that you don't want them to play.
Mr. Stevens. I am sorry. Could you restate that question,
sir?
Mr. Barton. Well, we respect sovereignty. We respect State
sovereignty and we respect the Indian Nation's sovereignty, so
the bill that I have introduced, it gives the governor of a
State--I would have to check what it does for the Indian
tribes. I would assume it would give the chief or the tribal
council the same right that we give a governor. If you don't
want to let the citizens within your boundaries play poker for
money on the Internet, you simply opt out so they can't play.
So we treat the Indian tribes the same as we treat the States.
That seems pretty fair to me.
On the other hand, if you think it is OK for them to play,
then you play by the same rules that everybody else plays by in
terms of regulating poker players for money on the Internet. I
mean that seems to me to be a very fair position. We are not
anti-Indian; we are not pro-Indian. We are fair to all
concerned.
Mr. Stevens. I think in the States on behalf of the tribes,
I think that covers it, but we want to be recognized as tribal
governments appropriately under the law.
Mr. Barton. Well, that is beyond the scope of the poker
bill I think. I played poker at an Indian casino in Oklahoma so
I am with you and I am 1/32nd Cherokee. So I am 1/32nd with you
there on that.
Mr. Stevens. Well, sir, I am a full-blooded Oneida from
Wisconsin who used to engage in New York State. And under the
Jay Treaty, you know, we are encouraged to do commerce for not
just with other Indian tribes but other regions and even across
into our friends in the First Nations in Canada.
Mr. Barton. Well, that may be larger than the scope of this
bill, but we are not trying to treat Indian tribes for poker
playing any differently than anybody else.
Senator D'Amato, do you think there are any technical
issues in terms of addressing problem poker players and
underage poker players that couldn't be addressed in this
legislation?
Mr. D'Amato. We definitely have the technology now, Mr.
Congressman, to deal certainly with problem gamblers where
there is nothing now restraining them. There is no impact.
There is no one out there looking. And we can build into the
system the kind of program that can identify or they can be
placed on a list where they will be not allowed in if they go
over a certain amount of money to participate. Is this going to
solve all the problems? No. But it certainly will eliminate and
curtail what is taking place now--no protection for the kids or
the problem gamblers.
Mr. Barton. My time is expiring. Let me simply say to Mr.
Eggert before I yield back, this issue of the bots, these
mechanical or automatic players, whatever needs to be done to
prohibit that and outlaw it, if you have got proposed language,
if you will give it to the committee staff. We absolutely don't
want to set up a system where somebody in this audience can
play poker online for money if their governor says it is OK and
play against a computer. That is not what we are trying to do.
So if you have got a program that can prevent it or language to
prohibit, we will certainly look at it positively.
With that, I yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman. And the chair
recognizes Mr. Lance for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Madam Chair, and good morning to you
all. This is a subject that interests me greatly, last term on
the Financial Services Committee and this term on the Energy
and Commerce Committee.
Louis Freeh could not be here today, Madam Chair. He has a
statement that states in part, ``addressing a growing threat
that can mutate as rapidly as illegal Internet-based gambling
operated outside of the country is challenging in and of itself
for Federal law enforcement.'' And he goes on to say, ``online
poker stands apart because it is a game that millions of
Americans play at home with friends and family or even at
charity fundraisers. Unlike most games played against other
players rather than against the house and relies on a set of
practiced skills, unlike most other games, it is also not
defined as illegal in other statutes. Clarifying which online
games are illegal also creates an opportunity to establish a
strict and transparent regulatory regime for online poker that
allows adult consumers to play safely and securely while
ensuring accountability to tax and law enforcement
authorities.''
Madam Chair, I would request unanimous consent to introduce
Mr. Freeh's statement into the record.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74869.099

Mr. Lance. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Ms. Aftab referenced a wonderful study in my judgment from
Malcolm Sparrow at the Kennedy School of Government up at
Harvard titled, ``Can Internet Gambling be Effectively
Regulated: Managing the Risks.'' And while I will not ask that
the whole study be placed into the record, I would read a
pertinent part that ``notwithstanding the current
prohibitionist legal and regulatory approach, millions of U.S.
residents gamble online through offshore gambling sites. The
establishment of a well regulated industry under U.S.
jurisdiction would offer far better protection against online
gambling's potential social harms than outright prohibition.''
That is my considered view and certainly those who are
interested in reviewing the full study can contact my office or
I am sure Ms. Aftab.
To Mr. Stevens, good morning to you. And sir, I certainly
respect your opinions and I recognize your sovereignty and
honor your sovereignty. You mentioned that tribes should not be
subject to tax or third-party regulation based on their
sovereign status. I respect the status of Indian tribes but
isn't it true that tribes in gaming and other businesses can
make a sovereign decision to do business in the 50 States
outside of their reservation lands and subject themselves to
State and Federal regulation? For example, Mohican Sun is
licensed in Pennsylvania with a casino, although Mohican Sun is
obviously in Connecticut, and the Florida Seminoles purchased
Hard Rock. If tribal gaming is to be expanded beyond the
borders of the reservation through the Internet, isn't it
inevitable that tribes will have to submit to some sort of
regulation other than that of their own tribal governments?
Mr. Stevens. You know, I think that our regulation is
established and prepared for to deal with this type of
situation. I think that dealing with sovereign governments
doing business from their sovereign territories are different
than some of the areas where they have branched out and again
appropriately games and other economic endeavors to reach
beyond gaming as far as building our future.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. Certain Indian tribes have been
pushing the idea of regulating Internet gaming at the State
level, I think that this might mean a challenge for tribes in
small States. In poker, for example, where you need a critical
mass of players to operate a site, how could a tribe in Rhode
Island or South Dakota or even Connecticut hope to participate?
It seems to me that this would only benefit a small number of
tribes in California and the other larger States.
Mr. Stevens. Yes, I think that we have tried to analyze
where tribes are working through coalitions and working within
their State organizations, and so we have yielded to the State
tribal authorities to handle those types of situations.
Mr. Lance. Thank you for your response.
And finally--and my time is about to expire--let me say it
is an honor for me, Madam Chair, to be in the same committee
hearing room with Senator D'Amato. I was rooting for his
election as a graduate student at Princeton in 1980, and as I
recall, Senator D'Amato, I wagered $10 you would win your
primary and another $10 that you would win the general
election. This was not on the Internet because, of course, it
hadn't been----
Mr. D'Amato. You should have gotten some good odds.
Mr. Lance. I was confident in your public service, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman and now recognize Mr.
Harper for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I welcome each of you here today and appreciate you taking
time out of your schedule, and it has been interesting to hear
the input from each of you and the concerns well noted of what
do you do about preventing or reducing the possibility of
problem gamblers. You know, that is something we would all
agree that there are certain people that shouldn't gamble.
There are some that gamble that maybe need to have limits on
them. And it is one thing with the physical location where you
can do that, but to have it online with the anonymity, with all
of the concerns that can go on is that I have not been given
any real comfort here that since it can't be regulated offshore
or in illegal sites how we are actually going to be able to do
that if this takes what appears to be an interest in another
step.
So I know we have heard different opinions here, some that
are trying to decide. The idea of online gambling, legal or
illegal, gives me great concern. But with that, I do thank you
for your time here.
And I guess one question I would have for each of you is do
any of your organizations receive any money from offshore
casinos? Does your organization receive any funds or
contributions from offshore casinos? And I will start with Mrs.
Aftab.
Ms. Aftab. Fair Play USA does not accept any money from
offline casinos. And if I could address just for a moment
unlike other aspects of the Internet where you are looking for
anonymity, when you are dealing with online gambling, you need
to look for authentication and verification of identity.
Mr. Harper. Sure.
Ms. Aftab. And that, given your expertise already in the
subcommittee, you will understand that it will allow you to
track problem gamblers and allow them to opt into programs to
protect them. So this is the one area where we are not looking
for anonymity.
Mr. Harper. All right.
Ms. Aftab. But Fair Play USA does not accept money to my
knowledge from anyone offshore.
Mr. Harper. Thank you. Mr. Stevens?
Mr. Stevens. Not to my knowledge, sir.
Mr. Harper. Mr. Whyte?
Mr. Whyte. We have received a donation from companies that
operate offshore. We accept no restrictions on those donations,
but yes, we have received some money.
Mr. Harper. And how many different entities?
Mr. Whyte. I think just one. We have a long tradition of
encouraging that anybody that operates gambling should
contribute to responsible gambling, so Mississippi Casinos have
donated to our organization. We accept again no restrictions on
any money we receive from any source, especially from the
gaming industry.
Mr. Harper. But you have received funds from offshore
sources?
Mr. Whyte. Yes.
Mr. Harper. OK. Senator D'Amato?
Mr. D'Amato. Yes, we have. And I would note, though, we
encourage this legislation so that we will permit onshore
activities and we say it should not be just offshore.
Mr. Harper. OK.
Mr. D'Amato. And to your question, Congressman, as it
relates to being able to ensure the age, right now there is
nothing that restricts youngsters basically and requires age
identification. We would say that we have the technology that
is developed that is used today in banking, online banking, as
it relates to the kinds of proofs necessary for people to
conduct banking activities. And it is that same process that we
would utilize here.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Senator.
Mr. D'Amato. Thank you.
Mr. Harper. Professor Eggert?
Mr. Eggert. I work for Chapman University. I have no idea
who their donors are.
Mr. Harper. Sure.
Mr. Egger. I hope there are many, though.
Mr. Harper. Dr. Romer?
Mr. Romer. Yes, so the Annenberg Public Policy Center
doesn't accept money from any commercial----
Mr. Harper. I think it is important that we just kind of
know where we are on this, but it doesn't appear to me that
there are really being any real steps taken that are being used
to block--perhaps the way to deal with the offshore or the
illegal casinos is to come up with ways to block payment to
those sites. That is something that I think we could develop
more. But, you know, we certainly have some that have argued
that we should develop legalized online gambling in this
country much the same way that we have heard others argue that
we should legalize certain drugs. So I think, you know, this is
something that I think we need much more to look at. I am not
confident at all that we have the tools in place to do what we
need to do.
And the question in looking back and preparing for this,
Senator D'Amato, I know in September of this year, the U.S.
Attorney in New York referred to Full Tilt Poker as a global
Ponzi scheme and, you know, apparently thousands of online
poker players out about $300 million, Ultimate Bet, another
organization that I believe you represent--does Poker Players
Alliance receive dues or contributions from either Full Tilt
Poker or Ultimate Bet?
Mr. D'Amato. No, we don't.
Mr. Harper. OK.
Mr. D'Amato. And again, Congressman, I don't mean to beat a
dead horse to death, it is already killed, but the one way to
deal with Full Tilt and people like that who have taken
advantage of the system is to provide a tough, strong,
enforceable licensing bill. And I mean tough.
Mr. Harper. Um-hum.
Mr. D'Amato. There should be a requirement as there has
been for Poker Stars--I mention them because they are the
largest offshore--where those dollars are segregated and placed
in a special account so that these kinds of things can't take
place. Had we had legislation, we could have prevented players
from being taken advantage of and that is why it cries out for
regulation.
Mr. Harper. And Senator D'Amato, with all due respect,
perhaps it is better that we not go down this road, we work on
ways to protect people against offshore sources. And with that
I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair recognizes Ms. Blackburn for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you all for being here. I will have
to admit this is a feisty debate and a wonderful conversation
and I think many of our Members are like me. We have got
friends that are for it and friends that are against it. And it
is good to have you all here and to listen to what you have to
say.
Mr. Whyte, I want to come to you and, Senator D'Amato, I am
glad that the two of you are sitting there in the center, kind
of like these debates. I have got the two people I want to talk
to right in the middle.
Now, Mr. Whyte, you said that you didn't think that having
online poker would expand the use and so that is curious to me.
I would like for you to talk about if there is something in the
American culture that is different about our addictive
behavior? And then I would like to know if it is not going to
increase participation, then why are entities so anxious to
offer online gambling? Mr. Whyte first.
Mr. Whyte. Thank you very much. That is a great question.
It does seem that right now the participation in poker is
generally very low. You know, whether or not legalization would
dramatically increase that is an open question. In the U.K.,
for example, it has not except among young men. Young men do
seem to show in replication surveys in the United Kingdom more
propensity to gamble online. So there may be----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Now, let me interrupt you right there.
And then, Mr. D'Amato, I want you to weigh in on this. You
mentioned the U.K.
Mr. D'Amato. Yes.
Mrs. Blackburn. So what are the successes of the European
jurisdictions that have licensed and regulated Internet
gambling and what are their mistakes? So the lessons learned,
basically.
Mr. Whyte. Sure. The lessons that we take away from the
European experience is that you have to have a balanced
approach with both regulation and public health protections.
Obviously, in a country like the U.K., there is an extensive
social welfare, a health system to make sure that if people do
get into trouble, they have resources to go.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. So they have got a safety net.
Mr. Whyte. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Blackburn. Senator D'Amato?
Mr. D'Amato. Well, I think that Mr. Whyte has touched on
it. Number one, we can and should provide revenues and I think
$50 million that he has mentioned that should be there to treat
youngsters, to treat addicted people, to deal with their
problem, easily could be made available with the revenues that
would be generated from online poker players.
Robust verification, we can do that today so that we know
who it is that is playing and we can keep that youngster off.
We have learned that. Seeing to it that funds are utilized and
segregated as they have in Europe to keep the kind of thing
that Full Tilt engaged in where they took monies that belonged
to the players and distributed them out. So there are those
things that we have learned that they have done well and we can
expand upon them. We can build on them and bring those
protections here.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. If I may interrupt you right there and
I have got 1-1/2 minutes left, and I want to start with Ms.
Aftab and work down. I would like to have each of you answer.
Looking at brick-and-mortar gambling and the rules and
regulations that apply in a brick-and-mortar sense, should
those same rules and regulations apply in the online sense and
should those two be paired up? And just one right after
another.
Ms. Aftab. Yes, plus more. Because of the nature of the
technology, we can do a lot more with authentication, controls,
verification----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Ms. Aftab [continuing]. So at least that much.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK, Mr. Stevens?
Mr. Stevens. Yes, we believe not, two different forms of
gaming----
Mrs. Blackburn. Two completely different forms?
Mr. Stevens. Yes, and our folks are working on that, our
national--our regulators----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Mr. Whyte?
Mr. Whyte. Yes, but more. I agree with Parry.
Mrs. Blackburn. Yes, but more. Senator?
Mr. D'Amato. Well, I think you have the opportunity to be
much more vigilant as it relates to the utilization of
technology and knowing who the people are, verification, et
cetera. It is easier to do.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Mr. Eggert?
Mr. Eggert. I think you need more in the Internet sense,
especially given the problem of bots, which I think you can't
just ban. And if that is not dealt with, the Internet poker is
going to have huge problems.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Doctor?
Mr. Romer. Yes, I think I mentioned some thoughts about how
you can put things online that you typically wouldn't have in a
casino, you know, a clock, wins, losses, that kind of thing----
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you.
Mr. Romer [continuing]. That would remind people that they
are going over their limit.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you. My time has expired. I yield
back.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentlelady.
And the chair recognizes Mr. Stearns for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Whyte, is Internet gambling allowed for blackjack,
poker, roulette, and other things in the European Union?
Mr. Whyte. It depends on the State. The regulation is quite
broad, but in general what we see is a lot of poker and sports
gambling. Sports gambling in particular is a big driver of
gambling on the Internet in Europe.
Mr. Stearns. But they also have poker?
Mr. Whyte. Yes. Yes, sir.
Mr. Stearns. Now, if I go to the 27 countries in the
European Union, would all of them have poker?
Mr. Whyte. The law in the European Union is very complex.
They are trying to harmonize that right now. It is not my
understanding that poker is universally available across the
European Union.
Mr. Stearns. Is blackjack universally available?
Mr. Whyte. I believe that is far less available.
Mr. Stearns. And what about roulette or slot machines on
the Internet?
Mr. Whyte. They certainly exist both in the legalized,
regulated framework in the EU and also, of course, on, you
know, the second tier of unregulated Web sites that always seem
to flourish regardless of legality.
Mr. Stearns. Ms. Arab?
Ms. Aftab. Aftab.
Mr. Stearns. Aftab. How do you do identification with
children? You know, with pornography, you can't stop it because
they just ask are you over 18? They say yes and away they go. I
mean how would you do this to protect the family and the
children--or even children that are latchkey that are home and
their parents aren't there--from gambling?
Ms. Aftab. Well, we don't age verify children. We age
verify adults so that if the age is set at 21 and older, there
are many indicators we have of somebody being the age of 21.
They may be registered voters, they may have drivers' licenses,
they may have bank accounts that have already been
authenticated, they may be holding jobs. There are many other
ways where they can be authenticated.
Mr. Stearns. How would you authenticate in this case if we
made poker legal?
Ms. Aftab. What I would do is set a goal and the goal is we
authenticate that they are 21 and older using the best methods
that are available at the time, as opposed to locking into a
technology that is improving all the time.
Mr. Stearns. So you have sort of a voter ID?
Ms. Aftab. You may use a voter ID, you may use----
Mr. Stearns. License?
Ms. Aftab [continuing]. Homeownership, you may be using
rental records. There are so many----
Mr. Stearns. And who would keep that and who would verify
and keep the record up to date?
Ms. Aftab. There would be a third-party verification system
that would be built in and required or at least those standards
that are applied. And the benefit of this is once you get the
professionals who have a financial stake in this, you are going
to get the best practices and the best that you can get because
they don't want kids on there.
Mr. Stearns. No, I know but just----
Ms. Aftab. And by putting----
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. Like we have an e-verify program
that we, you know, took a long time to get that working and in
some cases it is not accurate, so you have confidence that we
could set up a third-party verification for children----
Ms. Aftab. Yes, but not of children.
Mr. Stearns. I mean for adults.
Ms. Aftab. Of adults, absolutely. And there is a large
Federal----
Mr. Stearns. So if a 17-year-old is working or a 19-year-
old is working----
Ms. Aftab. Well, they may but we know that they are 17.
Mr. Stearns. What?
Ms. Aftab. So we know that they are 17 years old. So we
would require--whatever technology at the time would let us
know that that person has been verified of being 21 and older,
not just a credit card. This is not COPPA. This is something
far more that would require several levels of authentication
that this person is 21 and older. And there are a lot of those
technologies out there now. And actually, the Federal
Government is now looking at--in addition to Congress we are
seeing it out of the White House and a lot of other departments
that are looking at verification authentication methods to
identify who people are, how old they are, and where they are
really from.
Mr. Stearns. I understand that you can't do Internet
gambling because we passed the law here in Congress, but in
Nevada aren't they doing it on Blackberrys right now, so you
can gamble intrastate? In other words, if I am in Nevada today,
can't I gamble off my Blackberry today?
Mr. Whyte. Yes, sir. It is called remote gambling and it is
almost a wireless form of gambling. It is allowed within----
Mr. Stearns. And bet money?
Mr. Whyte. Yes.
Mr. Stearns. Since the law says you can't use your credit
card, you can't use deposits, you can't use money transfers,
how can Nevada----
Mr. Whyte. Think of it a little bit like off-track betting
or even more so like having a telephone account for a State
that allows horse racing where you can call in your bets. This
is essentially the same sort of system where it is regulated
within a State or within a property but you are able to use a
wireless device to access your account and place a wager there
from within that property.
Mr. Stearns. Now, how do the authorities in Nevada protect
children from picking up their parents' Blackberry and gamble?
Mr. Whyte. Well, it is not Blackberry. It is a specific
custom device that is available. It is treated almost like a
gaming device----
Mr. Stearns. Well, let us say the parents have that
device----
Mr. Whyte. Right.
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. Leave it on the dining room
table--what she indicated is this identification program. Do
they have that in place now?
Mr. Whyte. I am not an expert on this but again I think----
Mr. Stearns. Do you care to comment?
Mr. Whyte [continuing]. You have to use both enforcement
and prevention that----
Ms. Aftab. Yes, to my knowledge, States do not have an age
verification system in place, which is one of the reasons we
need this. We have a problem that I believe only you can solve
because there is nothing out there now. There are no systems,
there are no best practices, there is no baseline to keep kids
off, to help parents with this, to deal with senior citizens
and scams, helping law enforcement do what they need to do.
Right now there is nothing.
Mr. Stearns. Yes.
Ms. Aftab. We need to do something and with due respect,
when we are looking at ways to control what money is being
spent, that is what UIGEA is all about. And unfortunately, in
the same way kids can get around all these issues, a lot of the
people who are trying to gamble can, too. They pretend they buy
towels, they miscode it and they are able to use the financial
systems to do this.
Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman and now recognize Dr.
Cassidy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you. And may I begin by wishing Madam
Chair a happy 29th birthday.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman very much.
Mr. Cassidy. Mr. Whyte, did I hear you say that you don't
think that if this law passes that there would be an increase
in Internet gambling in the United States?
Mr. Whyte. Well, not necessarily significant increase.
Mr. Cassidy. Well, now, I got to wonder why Google ads are
even purchased. I would just say recently I was looking at the
Minnesota Vikings football team and all of a sudden on my
sidebar I had all sorts of things about Minnesota. Do I want to
take a vacation, did I want to do this, did I want to do that?
Now, why is somebody buying that, number one; and number two,
my intuition is to think you are wrong. There is a large
settlement recently in which Google is paying the Federal
Government for running advertisements for overseas pharmacies.
Mr. Whyte. Um-hum.
Mr. Cassidy. So that tells me that somebody thought Google
was an effective enough advertiser to purchase for overseas
pharmacies. Why would that not yield a significant increase in
gambling?
Mr. Whyte. Well, certainly, we may very well be wrong, and
I think that is one the reasons why we are calling certainly
for health-based research because it is very unclear. But the
experience in other jurisdictions seems to suggest that those
people that gamble online who are prone to and want to gamble
online are already doing so regardless of the legality of the
law. But certainly, yes, we have grave concerns that----
Mr. Cassidy. Just because I have limited time, it reminds
me of blue laws. I think I know from my medical training that
if a county has a blue law, it still has alcoholics but it has
fewer drinkers and therefore fewer alcoholics. In effect, this
is a blue law, correct?
Mr. Whyte. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cassidy. Ms. Aftab, do we have data on the prevalence
of underage gambling in countries--I don't know; I am asking. I
am not advocating or challenging--prevalence of underage
gambling in jurisdictions in which they do require the sort of
verification you are describing?
Ms. Aftab. Yes, and it is in the report that we put
together with Dr. Sparrow, so to the extent that is entered
into the record, we have it there.
There are certain countries, in particular in the U.K.,
that have looked at the capability of locking kids out by
requiring age verification systems that work and they have been
very, very effective. So it is out there and it is getting
better by the minute.
Mr. Cassidy. Mr. Eggert, I really liked your testimony,
man. I kept on reading your testimony thinking if we think we
can restrict any sort of super bot or some smart kid from
gaming--excuse the pun--system, your testimony suggests to me
that we cannot. There is going to be some kid who has got his
buddy right there and the buddy is going to be typing in what
all the cards are. And so even if the bot is not resident upon
the computer which is accessing the Internet, it is nonetheless
telling him what bet to place. Reasonably speaking, is there
any way to restrict data mining to find weaker players, super
bots to play, et cetera?
Mr. Eggert. Well, that is an interesting question. The
recent American Gambling Association White Paper addresses that
very question, and in the text of the paper it says, you know,
sites can ban bots. But there is a footnote that says if
somebody is using a bot to guide them so the bot isn't playing
but it is somebody playing with the bot given them advice,
there is no way to restrict that. I know of no way to prevent
somebody from having a bot on one computer telling him what to
play on another computer. And so this is a huge problem for the
industry to the extent that legal industry or illegal in that
recreational gamblers don't want to go on their poker site and
get killed by somebody using a bot. And that is going to happen
more and more as bots get smarter and smarter. There are
international competitions now to design the best poker-playing
bot. And they are doing a darn good job, and they are just
going to get better and better until they can beat anybody in
this room or almost anybody----
Mr. Cassidy. Even Joe Barton?
Mr. Eggert. Even him.
Mr. Cassidy. So once we put the imprimatur of government
that this is an OK activity and therefore Google can run a
sidebar when I say I am going to go visit Nevada to see Yucca
Mountain and instead I got a lot of places to go gamble on the
Internet. How would you address what Mr. Eggert just spoke of,
how these bots are going to be basically ripping people off
legally? Yes, ma'am?
Ms. Aftab. Well, right now on brick-and-mortar casinos, you
have card counters.
Mr. Cassidy. Yes, but the house watches for those and
throws them out.
Ms. Aftab. The house watches but the online sites, if they
are well done and operated correctly, can watch for a lot of
that as well.
Mr. Cassidy. But if I were designing such a super bot, I
would get it so it would win only 90 percent of the time. Every
now and then it would fold on a full house or something such as
that.
Ms. Aftab. But once you are dealing with full
authentication and you know who everyone is, it allows you to
start tracking patterns. And what will happen is part of what
we are doing now on the Homeland Security grid, the energy
grid, we start sharing the information scrubbed of where the
problem occurred with other companies across it so that you can
improve your skills in that way.
Mr. Cassidy. So before we pass this bill, do we need to
have the permissive legislation to allow that data sharing?
Ms. Aftab. I don't think you need permissive legislation. I
think it is a matter of what the privacy policies say and what
the expectations of the users are. And I think if you say that
it is scrubbed of certain things and you are looking at people
who are violating the law or violating the terms, I think that
that can be done with privacy policies and so forth.
Mr. Cassidy. I am out of time. And I love Mr. Eggert's
opinion on the doability of that. But that said, we are out of
time and I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Barton. Would the gentleman yield the time he doesn't
have?
Mrs. Bono Mack. With negative time. We will have a second
round of questions if we can do it through that means.
And with that, I am happy to recognize myself for 5 minutes
and just say that as I listen to the testimony, I am reminded a
lot about what we saw with the content industry--music and film
and television that they stood in the way of the Internet and
were bowled over by it not exclusive to that content. And I
believe if we are going to do this, then the rising tide has to
lift all boats, including Indian Country.
Senator D'Amato, do you take any issue with any of the
principles advanced by Mr. Stevens on behalf of the National
Indian Gaming Association? Most specifically, do you agree that
the tribal governments should be allowed early entrance and a
period of exclusivity? And do you agree that tribal Internet
operations should be open to customers wherever legal?
Mr. D'Amato. Madam Chairman, I think we want a competitive
marketplace for everyone, for casinos, for our Indian brothers.
The fact of the matter is it doesn't exist today. The fact of
the matter is what we have is old operators. None of the
legitimate houses that we have in this country are going to go
forward and risk the loss of their licenses, et cetera, until
or unless we change the law. And so we are going to continue to
have all of the problems that we have heard about. They will be
exacerbated as it relate to young people, as it relates to
having a fair game so that people have a fair opportunity
whether they use the super bots or not. There will be no
opportunity to control that. And you are not going to be able
to stop the advertising because they will still advertise on
Google; they will advertise all over.
So the problem we have now is one that it seems to me is
very parallel to what we had in prohibition. We know that
people who overindulge--it was terrible. We know that the cost
to society was ruinous. And so with all good intent we passed
the Volstead Act. And what happened? We had the very people who
we didn't want to get into the distribution and sale of
alcohol, some that was killing people, got in. Government lost
revenue. It didn't cut down on all of the problems, the family
abuse, the drunkenness, et cetera, and I would suggest that
here we are 50 years later, we are well behind the times to say
that you shouldn't use the Internet for commerce. But whether
you like poker or not, that is nonsense to say, ``Oh, our
little kiddies.'' Did we ever hear about parental
responsibility as well?
Now, let me tell you what moved the gambling--and there did
come a time when youngsters wanted to play Texas Hold'em. They
want to say Texas Hold'em, Congressman Barton, the State has
got the Texas Hold'em. Why? It became famous because of
television. The third most watched sport--first, NFL, then
NASCAR and then, yes, poker on the television. Are we going to
ban that? Are we going to ban showing that at the casinos? What
do you think created this impetus and a huge surge in that game
in particular of poker----
Mrs. Bono Mack. Senator, let me just jump in here if I
might because as you know better than anybody here our problem
is to try to advance technological problems at the same time as
legislative hurdles. And Professor Eggert spoke eloquently I
think about bots and as Dr. Cassidy and the fear that can we
actually protect some people. Is this entirely new version the
wild, wild west? Is this entirely a buyer beware? Professor
Eggert in his testimony talked about artificial intelligence
and I feel like I should ask Seary on here if she is capable of
gambling.
Mr. D'Amato. But Madam Chairman, if we do nothing, that
problem will grow with no opportunity to interdict, no
opportunity of having people who will have the skills and have
the wherewithal because they want to protect their business. So
as the professor indicated, one of the things they are going to
be looking to do is to reduce that. He knows of no system to
eliminate it but to reduce it. And you can identify----
Mrs. Bono Mack. Little questions, though, that we do--I
don't know if you all can answer and I have 30 seconds left--
and I think Professor Eggert's testimony again, how do you
handle something as innocent as losing Internet service in the
middle of a hand.
Mr. D'Amato. I didn't quite get that. How do I handle
something as innocent as----
Mrs. Bono Mack. Your Internet service just goes out and you
are in the middle of a big hand and you lose Internet
connectivity. What happens?
Mr. D'Amato. You know, Congresswoman----
Mrs. Bono Mack. Do I win if I just flip off my modem?
Mr. D'Amato. I have to tell you this legislation can't
protect everybody at every time in every instance but it can go
a long way to protecting people who have no protections at all,
whether it is the bots, whether it is the problem gambling,
whether it is the youngsters, no one can promise 100 percent
certainty. When it comes to identification and verification,
certainly we should be able to use the most robust technologies
that have been developed and will continue to be developed. But
there is nothing perfect about this legislation. It will be
imperfect but a heck of a lot better than doing nothing.
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. I thank you and my time has
expired. And I am pleased to recognize Mr. Butterfield for 5
minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you.
Technological advances have allowed manufacturers to create
ever-more enticing products. But I am not concerned about the
flashing lights and the funny noises or a game's appearance; I
am only interested in game attributes or marketing practices
that have the potential to mislead, deceive, or confuse.
Mr. Eggert, I think I will try you on this one. You
discussed slot machines that intentionally give the game player
a large number of near misses complete with a counter on the
side of the screen letting them know exactly how many they have
had. This is a manipulation of consumers that inhibits their
ability to understand how the game works and makes the game
seem easier to win than it actually is. You may agree or
disagree with that, but briefly, what are the most egregious
examples of misleading or deceptive tactics that we should be
aware of in the online gambling world, those worse practices
that should be carefully monitored or restricted?
Mr. Eggert. Well, in the online world, we have heard some
of the worst practices are online poker sites not having the
money that the gamblers have put--have drained the money out so
if the gamblers try to get their money out, they can't. That is
a very bad practice. Another bad practice is insiders being
able to see the whole cards of their opponents so that they can
win much more easily because they are playing against. That is
another really bad thing. But another really bad thing is not
being able to tell what the hold percentage of a slot machine
you are playing is. I think that is an important thing for any
slot player is to say, you know, am I going to lose on average
2 percent, which is a good machine or am I going to lose 15
percent, which is a much more expensive and much worse machine.
That is an incredibly bad practice and it exists in Internet
slots; it exists in land-based slots. That is something that
should be addressed. It is an important part of consumer
protection.
Mr. Butterfield. What kind of expertise and authorities
should an enforcing agency have in order to keep up with the
misleading or deceptive tactics of an industry's bad actors?
Mr. Eggert. Well, that is actually an interesting question.
I do a lot of work in the financial services community, and
regulators are doing a better job now of actually experimenting
to see what consumers understand and what they don't
understand. And so what we should have is a regulatory agency
that focuses on consumer protection and really tries to figure
out what can consumers understand as far as disclosure is? What
information do they want? How much information can they use?
And so I would assert that we should have a Federal regulator
who does that kind of investigation to see what works best for
gambling consumers.
Mr. Butterfield. Can you tell me how vendors describe their
games when they do it in writing to their consumers?
Mr. Eggert. Well, typically for slot machines they say that
they are either loose or they are looser or they are the
loosest, but often they don't give much detail as to what that
means.
Mr. Butterfield. Is there room for improvement?
Mr. Eggert. There is incredible room for improvement.
Mr. Butterfield. What about misleading tactics or
deceptions by other players, for example, when a poker game is
infiltrated by predatory professional players or algorithm-
driven bots that are impossible to beat? In a case like this,
is an empowered, knowledgeable consumer even enough?
Mr. Eggert. Well, the problem consumers have is they often
don't know if they are playing against somebody who is using a
computer assist or computer bot to help guide the game. And so
you might have some, you know, 21-year-old who is playing their
first game of poker online facing, you know, somebody who with
the computer algorithms is, you know, really a top poker
player. It would be as if you go to the neighborhood to have a
pickup game and unbeknownst to you, you are playing against an
NBA player. I don't think you can prevent people from using
bots because I think that is just impossible.
For me, the solution would be to have a rating system
whereby if you want to play against people and know whether
they are good or bad, everybody has a rating like in the chess
world. Better players have higher ratings; worse players have
lower ratings. I know if I play against somebody with a 1,000-
point higher rating than me, I am going to get beat but it
might be fun. The same thing should happen in the gambling
world where if you go online playing poker and you have a 1,400
rating and you are playing against somebody who has a 2,100
rating, most likely they are going to beat you but you might
learn something.
Mr. Butterfield. Very informative. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Butterfield.
And the chair recognizes Mr. Barton for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I was going to
leave and then we were told we were going to have a second
round so I decided to stick around. But my stomach is starting
to growl, so let us don't have 3 rounds even though I asked for
the hearing.
I want to refocus. You know, we are kind of letting the
tail wag the dog here. We are having a hearing as to whether it
is acceptable, appropriate to allow those citizens of the
United States that live in States that the States want them to
play poker for money online to do so, and we are getting into
some pretty esoteric areas about underage and problem gambling
and now we are into this issue of computer gamblers. I will
acknowledge that it is technically possible to set up some
elaborate scheme using these computer bots against people, but
we can always guarantee that somebody is a live body at the
table, right, even if they have a computer. That is doable, and
if you have that, you know, you are not going to set up an
elaborate computer scheme to play in a 1-cent, 2-cent limit
online poker game. There is just enough money. And the higher
you go in these games--I have never played money online. I have
played poker online and I have got play money out the kazoo. I
have got $10, $15 million of play money, but that and 75 cents
gets you a coke. I mean it just doesn't help you a lot.
But when I look at the for-money sites, most of them are
less than $100. Now, you can get 1,000, 2,000, so anybody with
any sense at all who--to use your term, Professor--a
recreational poker player, you are going to be an absolute
idiot to go online and get into a high-dollar poker game. I
mean just you go into that game knowing that everybody else at
that table is really good and unless you are an heir to the
Rockefeller family or the Perot family or Bill Gates or
somebody like that, you don't in your wildest dreams want to be
playing poker in that game. You just don't want to do it.
So if we can verify that they are adults and maybe even
require people to stipulate that they are not using computer
ability when they play, even though they can cheat, if they
cheat you can catch them. Do you agree with that, Professor?
Mr. Eggert. I don't think you can catch poker players who
are using a computer to guide them. I think as long as they
make sure that they don't win too often, that they screw up
once in a while, that they can fly under the radar and make
good money. You don't have to be playing $300-a-bet games to
make a decent living. People can make 60, $100,000 playing
professional poker with bots----
Mr. Barton. Well, all of the information in your written
testimony about data manipulation and data statistical analysis
I can get. I can get myself right now if I want to take the
time to do it. It doesn't mean I understand it, it doesn't mean
I will benefit by it, but I have the ability if I want to
really find out what is out there, I can do that without too
much trouble. That information is fairly transparent.
What we want to prevent is somebody using it unfairly, and
in a real-world situation when you walk into the casino, you
can't take a pocket computer with you. You know, you can't have
somebody behind you saying the probability on this hand 33
percent, that that guy over there has got pocket aces or
whatever. You have got to know it. On the computer, you can get
access to it, but there should be ways to verify with the
current technology is somebody is routinely beating the system,
we can flag that and then we can outlaw them. We can put
penalties into the bill that if I use computer analysis at all,
I can be banned from that site, I can be penalized, and I guess
if the committee wants to, we can throw them in jail.
So that is not a reason not to do it. It is something we
need to work on, it is something we need to be aware of, but
because some computer whiz kid at MIT develops a problem that
they think can beat the system, if we are aware that they have
got that program, eventually we are going to catch them. Do you
agree or disagree with that?
Mr. Eggert. I disagree with that. Think of the chess world.
You know, if----
Mr. Barton. No, no, chess is perfect knowledge. Everybody
knows on the chess board where the pieces are. When I sit down
at a poker table, I know my cards, I know the cards on the
table, and if I am really, really smart, I might be able to
infer what Senator D'Amato has and you have based on the way
you bet, but I don't have perfect knowledge. That is why poker
is such a great game. It is a game of skill, it is bluffing, it
is probability, and it is reading people, but it is not poker
knowledge. This is not chess.
Mr. Eggert. But if you have a poker program that plays as
well as some of the best players in the world and I use it, how
do you tell if I am using a program----
Mr. Barton. Well, within an hour, everybody at the table is
going to know that----
Mr. Eggert. How will you know----
Mr. Barton [continuing]. And if you use it for a week, the
people that are monitoring the site, if it is legalized and
regulated are going to know it and you are going to be banned.
Mr. Eggert. How would you distinguish between me and a
really good player who is not using the program?
Mr. Barton. I would call you up and talk to you about 15
minutes on the phone if I am the regulator and ask you a few
basic questions. I would find out pretty quick what kind of a
poker player you are. I could do that right now actually.
Mr. Eggert. I think that your----
Mr. Barton. And I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman and recognize Mr.
Kinzinger for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kinzinger. Well, thank you, Madam Chairman, for putting
this on.
Just a few questions to start with, Ms. Aftab. Let us talk
a little bit about the offshore gambling industry, and I
apologize if you have been asked this already. But can you tell
me a little bit about it, just how it exists today?
Specifically, you know, where is most of it located at? What
kind of gambling, you know, for the most part is occurring on
these offshore sites? And what kind of protections do these
offshore sites have for players and particularly for minors? If
you just want to talk in general about it and then we will go
from there.
Ms. Aftab. Thank you very much. I hate to keep referring to
our report from the Kennedy Center at Harvard, but it does
address these things.
Offshore we are dealing with sites that are legal under the
jurisdiction where they are regulated--Gibraltar, the U.K. A
lot of the different foreign jurisdictions have regulatory
schemes that allow online gambling under certain circumstances
with checks and balances. And then the vast majority of the
sites we are seeing are unregulated. They are in places that
have no regulations in place and no checks and balances.
So when you are looking at a well regulated scheme, they
keep kids out by requiring adult verification and
authentication. They have trust systems that money needs to be
put into trust accounts and kept distinct so that a payment is
made on winnings. They have checks and balances on money
laundering to make sure that they know who they are dealing
with and you are seeing patterns of behavior. They are using
artificial intelligence, Symantec web that Representative
Barton was talking about. From his perspective, it is the good
side of the bots to look at certain patterns of behavior. They
have audits of who is employed, where the money came from----
Mr. Kinzinger. And again, we are talking about regulated
sites right now, correct?
Ms. Aftab. I am sorry?
Mr. Kinzinger. We are talking about the regulated----
Ms. Aftab. The regulated sites as opposed to the other ones
that may be run by terrorist organizations, they could be run
by underworld criminal activity, they could be run by somebody
out of their garage. You don't know and, you know, you never
know who is a dog on the Internet and it is pretty hard to
figure out who you are gambling with. So there are ways of
doing this and I think what we need to do is cherry-pick the
best that we see out there and then Americanize it and make it
even better.
Mr. Kinzinger. So on the unregulated sites, basically it
really is anything can go. I mean you could have 12-year-olds
on there betting----
Ms. Aftab. You could have 12-year-olds on it, you will have
collusion among gamblers, you are going to have people who
aren't paying you on bets, they are taking your money, it is
not even real. Anything that could possibly go wrong does go
wrong.
Mr. Kinzinger. Do we have any idea approximately how much
American money is being bet on those sites?
Ms. Aftab. The numbers are huge. The 4 to $6 billion a year
of U.S. gambling is the estimate that we are seeing offshore.
That is a lot of money that people are spending not in the
United States, maybe they shouldn't be spending it, and they
are not spending it fairly. So it is money that could be
brought back here and help us and be done better.
Mr. Kinzinger. And ultimately, you know, if it is
unregulated, it is almost impossible to put them out of
business. I mean we can't----
Ms. Aftab. It is really impossible to put them out of
business, and the problem I have been seeing is consumers here
don't know where to go because if they think that what they are
doing is illegal because they are gambling online and they are
scammed, they are afraid to call the police because they think
they might be arrested. So we are finding consumers who have no
place to go, no recourse in law enforcement but doesn't know
what to do and how to do it effectively.
Mr. Kinzinger. And just one more question for you, too.
Operator fraud and theft from players, you touched on that with
these companies that are--has any of this happened in companies
regulated in EU-member states? I mean have you been seeing that
or is that mostly on the unregulated sites I guess?
Ms. Aftab. Well, every once in a while you are going to see
somebody in a regulated scheme that is violating the laws and
they police those very carefully.
Mr. Kinzinger. Right.
Ms. Aftab. And that is the difference. People will always
break the law, but if you have laws in place and law
enforcement skills and the tools are there, then you can put
them out of business and----
Mr. Kinzinger. You can prosecute it and go after it.
Ms. Aftab [continuing]. Put them behind bars.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK. Great. Well, that is all I have. Thank
you for your patience. And I yield back.
Ms. Aftab. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. And Mr. Harper, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Madam Chair.
You know, there are so many things going through my mind as
we listen to the different witnesses and the input on this. You
know, right now if we have offshore online Internet casinos,
whatever we want to call them, and they are receiving funds
illegally from U.S. citizens, would you support legislation
that would say that those companies that are knowingly right
now violating our law that would ban them from ever opening up
and being a part of legal U.S. Internet gambling?
Ms. Aftab. I will answer for myself but not necessarily for
Fair Play USA because I don't know what the answer is. And as
far as I am concerned, if you are violating the law, you
shouldn't be allowed to engage in a licensed and regulated
regime----
Mr. Harper. OK, thank you.
Ms. Aftab [continuing]. In the same way you couldn't open a
brick-and-mortar casino if you are a criminal. You shouldn't be
able to do this, either.
Mr. Harper. Mr. Stevens?
Mr. Stevens. Yes, sir, we would be supportive. Absolutely.
Mr. Harper. OK. Mr. Whyte?
Mr. Whyte. We don't have a dog in this fight. We are
neutral on legalized gambling so our organization has no
opinion on that.
Mr. Harper. Well, then I will ask you personally.
Mr. Whyte. Personally, yes.
Mr. Harper. Do you have an opinion personally as to whether
or not a company that has been conducting technically illegal
activity offshore is now going to want to come in and be
licensed to do this in the United States?
Mr. Whyte. Yes, if they are breaking the law, it certainly
seems that they would be unfit to receive licensure under the
general gaming statutes that we have.
Mr. Harper. Thank you. Senator D'Amato?
Mr. D'Amato. If you violated the law, you should not be
permitted to have a license.
Mr. Harper. OK. Mr. Eggert?
Mr. Eggert. I also agree that if a company has been
intentionally violating the law, I don't see them as a fit
gambling operator here.
Mr. Harper. Dr. Romer?
Mr. Romer. Well, I mean all of them are violating the law
as far as I can tell. So I think there have been some
agreements with some of these companies to acquire, you know,
back taxes and so forth that might work.
Mr. Harper. Thank you.
Mr. D'Amato. I might, Congressman----
Mr. Harper. Yes, sir, Senator?
Mr. D'Amato. They are not really all violating the law.
That is a very real question. And indeed I think the 5th
Circuit indicated that the Wire Act----
Mr. Harper. Sure.
Mr. D'Amato [continuing]. Which really creates the
violation has not been violated as it relates to playing poker
but rather that Wire Act was intended for sports gambling. So I
think, you know, there is a legal distinction. Now, some are
still battling that out. It hasn't gone up to the Supreme
Court, but that is the highest ruling to date.
Mr. Harper. And I am certainly aware of that conflict that
is there.
Professor Eggert, if I may ask this, and I will just read a
little something here and then get your thoughts on it. In
2007, Jeff Schmidt, CEO of Authis, provider of identity- and
security-related products, testified before our committee. Mr.
Schmidt certainly is recognized as an expert on these issues on
online identification and authentication. In his testimony he
stated, ``age verification and determination of geographical
location simply cannot be done reliably over the Internet.''
And I would ask has technology changed and improved to the
point where that has drastically changed since '07 and do you
agree with Mr. Schmidt's assertion regarding age and
geolocation verification?
Mr. Eggert. Well, that is actually a good question. I am
not sure I am the proper person to answer that because I
haven't really studied age verification and Internet search. I
wouldn't want to hazard an opinion without doing more reading
on that.
Mr. Harper. And I know that, Ms. Aftab, you would agree
that it has changed or has improved, would you not?
Ms. Aftab. Yes, it is changing radically and very quickly
and all of us are now carrying around devices with GPS
capability on them all the time so that it has changed greatly.
And I was part of the taskforce that said you can't
authenticate kids but you can authenticate adults, so that
question needs to be asked in the right way when we ask about
age verification of adults.
Mr. Harper. But if you are doing that, can a person still
not sell their information or share that with someone else or
it be stolen?
Ms. Aftab. They could but if you are using biometrics along
with it that would require that when you log in you are
authenticated as you and that has been verified through some
regimen that has been approved, I think we can really get
there. And we are getting there across the board on a lot of
other areas.
Mr. Harper. If we legalize Internet gambling in the United
States, there will be obviously costs associated with that. So
what will prevent someone from saying, well, you know, it cost
me more to use what is the legal Internet gambling here; I want
to still go offshore? What is going to prevent them from still
doing what they are doing now?
Ms. Aftab. Well, now you are going to have a lot of big
players in the fence. So right now everybody is outside of the
fence, but when you get a lot of the players who know what they
are doing, they understand the technology, they understand the
patterns of play, they understand all of these things who now
have a vested stake inside, they can turn around and blow the
whistle on everybody else and help you get the ones who are the
outliers because they are competing unfairly. You will have
some good allies.
Mr. Harper. My time is up. I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. And Dr. Cassidy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cassidy. Mr. Whyte, again, as I think about, OK, we
have a subset of people; let me just accept what you say
earlier--again, not to challenge just to learn--that you will
not significantly increase the risk, there is a possibility
that those that do gamble will significantly increase their
gambling.
Mr. Whyte. Absolutely. We covered that in our written
statement.
Mr. Cassidy. So let me----
Mr. Whyte. Sorry.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, I have learned when gambling was
introduced in Louisiana, the problem gambling increased
dramatically, as well as did theft from businesses as people
financed their habit if you will. Have you learned in these
jurisdictions that legalized Internet gambling that problem
gambling increases and that the incidents of theft associated
with such increases?
Mr. Whyte. That is a great question. In the jurisdictions
we have looked at to date without exception the rate of problem
gambling has not exploded. It has not exploded in proportion to
the----
Mr. Cassidy. Now, exploded is a subjective term.
Mr. Whyte. Exactly. But still what we do see--and I think
to the point of your question--is that there are subtle
increases in perhaps severity of problems especially among
certain groups like, for example, young men who tend to be very
heavy gamblers, who tend to be high adopters of Internet
gambling. So I think Louisiana's example is the same. There are
at-risk groups that when gambling is made legalized, more
accessible, more available, more acceptable, they may shift in
their patterns of gaming. They may either start gambling or
take their existing----
Mr. Cassidy. Now, when you say that exploded is objective,
20 percent is a definite, can you give me a percent, say,
across all jurisdictions we see a 5 to 20 percent increase in
problem gambling?
Mr. Whyte. No, sir, we have not seen that.
Mr. Cassidy. Do you have a percent I am asking? I am making
up a number.
Mr. Whyte. Absolutely. I apologize. Yes, in the United
States it has gone roughly from .5 percent to around 1 percent
over the last 30 years----
Mr. Cassidy. Problem gambling?
Mr. Whyte [continuing]. Pathological gambling. So that is a
large percentage increase, certainly----
Mr. Cassidy. See, my local DA told me that the amount of
theft associated with it had increased significantly, not a
definite number, but after gambling was legalized, the amount
of theft--in fact they stopped investigating it because it was,
you know, so much of a problem.
Mr. Whyte. That is absolutely--60 percent of problem
gamblers will commit a white collar crime to finance their
gambling.
Mr. Cassidy. OK.
Mr. Whyte. And as more and higher-stakes forms of gambling
are available, they may be driven to more severe crimes because
they are chasing more and more money to----
Mr. Cassidy. OK. Let me ask Dr. Romer and Mr. Eggert, first
you, Mr. Eggert. If I would say that my goal is to limit the
amount of problem gambling, to limit the amount of the number
of adolescents who enter into a lifestyle which is destructive,
but to allow people like Mr. Barton if you will to pursue his
pastime, Mr. Eggert, do you think that this legislation is a
positive in terms of pursuing that goal or do you think it is a
negative?
Mr. Eggert. Well, first of all, I am not a problem gambling
expert. I am a consumer protection expert. I think that there
are good things about Internet gambling where you can put in
harm minimization strategies. I don't think that there is a
good study out there that shows whether that has a net benefit
or a net----
Mr. Cassidy. So what about consumer protection? Do you feel
like this legislation is a negative or a positive for consumer
protection?
Mr. Eggert. Well, I haven't seen any legislation yet that
has what I consider strong consumer protection. I think if we
had legislation with strong consumer protection, that could be
a net positive.
Mr. Cassidy. And then the very fact of legalization which
some folks suggest will allow it to be increased consumer
protection, you are not convinced of?
Mr. Eggert. I am sorry, could you----
Mr. Cassidy. So some folks I am hearing say just legalize
it and inherent in legalization will come consumer protection.
Mr. Eggert. I think that you have to build in strong
consumer protections.
Mr. Cassidy. Dr. Romer, again, let me ask you. Do you think
this legislation in particular--I gather from your testimony
you actually think this legislation or some legalization would
be beneficial in terms of the problem of adolescent gambling.
Mr. Romer. I think it would if certain, you know,
safeguards were put in place, the kinds that have been
suggested, because the Internet is a place where you can alert
people to problems while they are gambling, you could cut them
off, and we could also examine--I think the bill that is
currently proposed suggests that we could make public the
records of these gambling companies so that we could see are
they making disproportionate profits from----
Mr. Cassidy. To go back to Mr. Eggert's comment, he wants
to see that sort of thing on the front end, not kind of
retrofitted on the back end. Do you think that such legislation
should have that sort of transparency built into it on the
front end?
Mr. Romer. Yes, I think consumers ought to know what their
chances are of winning on a particular site, and if it is very
difficult, they ought to know that. Yes. They ought to know the
odds.
Mr. Cassidy. OK. And I haven't read this legislation so
critically. You may not be an attorney. I hope you are not.
Mr. D'Amato. Congressman, we would have no problem
supporting legislation that clearly called for the kind of
thing that Kurt Eggert suggested and that is that there be
identified what percentage does the house keep? If it is 3
percent on a game, 2 percent, whatever it is, no problem in
establishing that. That is great consumer protection and
putting it out there before they pull that slot, if it is not a
slot, but before they deal those cards.
Mr. Cassidy. OK. I am out of time. Thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman. And I would like to
thank our panel very much for being here today. You have been
very gracious with your time and helpful and enlightening with
your answers. I look forward to working with all of you again
as we continue to explore the issue of Internet gambling.
As chairman of the subcommittee, let me be clear about two
things: First, we are going to be very thorough in examining a
wide range of issues related to Internet gambling before coming
to any conclusions; and secondly, at the end of the day, we are
going to do what is best for American consumers.
I remind members that they have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record and ask the witnesses to please
respond promptly to any questions they might receive. The
hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:00 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


