- FDA USER FEES 2012: ISSUES RELATED TO ACCELERATED APPROVAL, MEDICAL GAS, ANTIBIOTIC DEVELOPMENT, AND DOWNSTREAM PHARMACEUTICAL SUPPLY CHAIN

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FDA USER FEES 2012: ISSUES RELATED TO ACCELERATED APPROVAL, MEDICAL

GAS, ANTIBIOTIC DEVELOPMENT, AND DOWNSTREAM PHARMACEUTICAL SUPPLY CHAIN
=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 8, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-126

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
81-518                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JIM MATHESON, Utah
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  officio)
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     5
Hon. Phil Gingrey, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Georgia, opening statement.....................................     6
Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, opening statement...........................     8
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     9
Hon. Leonard Lance, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New Jersey, prepared statement..............................    40

Witnesses

Janet Woodcock, Director, Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research, Food and Drug Administration.........................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Answers to submitted questions...............................   192
John Maraganore, Chief Executive Officer, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals    44
Prepared statement...........................................    46
Jeff Allen, Executive Director, Friends of Cancer Research.......    57
Prepared statement...........................................    59
Barry I. Eisenstein, Senior Vice President, Scientific Affairs,
Cubist Pharmaceuticals.........................................    68
Prepared statement...........................................    70
John H. Powers, Associate Professor of Medicine, George
Washington University School of Medicine.......................    79
Prepared statement...........................................    81
Michael Walsh, President, LifeGas, on Behalf of Compressed Gas
Association....................................................    86
Prepared statement...........................................    88
Shawn M. Brown, Vice President, State Government Affairs, Generic
Pharmaceutical Association.....................................   143
Prepared statement...........................................   146
Answers to submitted questions...............................   199
Elizabeth A. Gallenagh, Vice President, Government Affairs, and
General Counsel, Healthcare Distribution Management Association   158
Prepared statement...........................................   160
Timothy Davis, Owner, Beaver Health Mart Pharmacy, on Behalf of
National Community Pharmacists Association.....................   169
Prepared statement...........................................   172
Allan Coukell, Director, Medical Progams, Pew Health Group, The
Pew Charitable Trusts..........................................   177
Prepared statement...........................................   179
Answers to submitted questions...............................   206

Submitted Material

Statement, dated March 8, 2012, of the Infectious Diseases
Society of America, submitted by Mr. Pallone...................    97
Letter, dated December 12, 2011, from Michael Tiller, President,
Compressed Gas Association, to Mr. Lance, submitted by Mr.
Lance..........................................................   120
Letter, dated January 9, 2012, from Joseph M. Pietrantonio, Vice
President, Global Operations, Air Products and Chemicals, Inc.,
to Mr. Lance, submitted by Mr. Lance...........................   122
Letter, dated December 29, 2011, from Thomas S. Thoman, Division
President, Gas Production, Airgas, Inc., to Mr. Lance,
submitted by Mr. Lance.........................................   123
Letter, dated December 28, 2011, from Ted Schwarzbach, Executive
Vice President Risk Management, Matheson Tri-Gas, Inc., to Mr.
Lance, submitted by Mr. Lance..................................   125
Statement, dated March 6, 2012, of California Healthcare
Institute, submitted by Mr. Gingrey............................   130
Statement, dated March 8, 2012,of the National Association of
Chain Drug Stores, submitted by Mr. Pitts......................   133
Statement, dated March 8, 2012, of the Pharmaceutical Research
and Manufacturers of America, submitted by Mr. Pitts...........   141

FDA USER FEES 2012: ISSUES RELATED TO ACCELERATED APPROVAL, MEDICAL
GAS, ANTIBIOTIC DEVELOPMENT, AND DOWNSTREAM PHARMACEUTICAL SUPPLY CHAIN

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 8, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:16 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joe Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Burgess, Shimkus,
Murphy, Gingrey, Latta, Lance, Cassidy, Pallone, Dingell,
Townes, Schakowsky, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Clay Alspach, Counsel, Health; Andy
Duberstein, Deputy Press Secretary; Nancy Dunlap, Health
Fellow; Paul Edattel, Professional Staff Member, Health; Debbee
Keller, Press Secretary; Ryan Long, Chief Counsel, Health;
Carly McWilliams, Legislative Clerk; Chris Sarley, Policy
Coordinator, Environment and Economy; Brett Scott, Staff
Assistant; Heidi Stirrup, Health Policy Coordinator; Alli Corr,
Democratic Policy Analyst; Eric Flamm, FDA Detailee; Karen
Lightfoot, Democratic Communications Director and Senior Policy
Advisor; Karen Nelson, Democratic Deputy Committee Staff
Director for Health; and Rachel Sher, Democratic Senior
Counsel.
Mr. Pitts. This subcommittee will come to order.
The Chair recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Today we are taking a more in-depth look at several issues
related to the FDA user fee programs. First, we will hear about
FDA's Accelerated Approval process for certain new drugs that
treat serious or life-threatening illnesses and provide a
greater therapeutic benefit over existing drugs and therapies.
Accelerated Approval has been successful in speeding cancer and
HIV/AIDS drugs to market, and I am particularly interested in
how the process can be better utilized for rare diseases.
Earlier this week, Representative Stearns, along with
Representatives Bilbray and Towns, introduced the Faster Access
to Specialized Treatments, the FAST Act, to help expedite new
drugs through the approval process.
We will also hear about FDA's regulation of medical gas and
the need for targeted regulations for these substances, due to
their differences from most drugs.
Representative Lance has introduced H.R. 2227, the Medical
Gas Safety Act, which would reform the current FDA regulation
of medical gases to create an appropriate process for medical
gases to be approved. It would also remove the current
regulatory uncertainty for medical gases by establishing
targeted regulations that take into account the unique
characteristics of medical gases. Representative Lance's bill
is bipartisan. It is cosponsored by members of the full
committee from both sides of the aisle.
Next, we will address the lack of new antibiotics in the
pipeline and how Congress and FDA can act to incentivize new
antibiotic development.
Dr. Gingrey's Generating Antibiotic Incentives Now Act, or
the GAIN Act, H.R. 2182, targets this problem. This bill would
extend the exclusivity period for new prescription antibiotics
and add an additional 6-month period of exclusivity for a
manufacturer if the new antibiotic identifies a companion
diagnostic test. The GAIN Act also has bipartisan support,
including eight Democrats and 15 Republicans from the full
committee.
Finally, the subcommittee will hear about the dangers and
weaknesses to the current pharmaceutical supply chain from
manufacturers, to distributors, to pharmacies, and how best to
ensure that counterfeit, adulterated or stolen drugs do not end
up in the hands of patients.
Representative Bilbray and Representative Matheson are
currently working in this area, and Dr. Cassidy's Online
Pharmacy Safety Act, H.R. 4095, aims to educate the public
about which Internet pharmacies are known to be safe and
legitimate.
We have three panels today. I would like to thank all of
our witnesses for being here. I look forward to their
testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.002

Mr. Pitts. So at this time I recognize the ranking member
of the Subcommittee on Health, Mr. Pallone, for 1 minute--oh, 5
minutes. I am sorry.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Pitts.
Today we are holding another hearing to examine important
FDA-related issues that could be considered as a part of the
user fee agreements, or the UFA legislation. These include
changes to the current expedited approval process for new
drugs, the regulation of medical gases, antibiotic drug
development, and the downstream pharmaceutical supply chain. It
is my hope that our witnesses that will help the subcommittee
examine the ways in which these issues can be or should be
addressed in our upcoming legislation.
Accelerated Approval is one of the processes by which the
FDA approves certain New Drug Applications that offer
meaningful therapeutic benefit over existing treatments for
serious or life-threatening diseases. This process has been
responsible for the great strides in medicine to treat HIV and
cancer, and has provided patients with speedier access to
important new medicines.
According to the FDA, over 80 new products have been
approved under Accelerated Approval since the program was
established including 29 drugs to treat cancer, 32 to treat
HIV, and 20 to treat various other conditions. There are also
two other programs that help expedite the approval of certain
promising investigational drugs known as Fast Track and
Priority Review.
Some have stated the accelerated approvals may be working
for certain conditions but it had limited success in developing
medicines to treat other rare diseases. As such, we will
examine different proposals today that would clarify and
improve some of FDA's authorities. While I am open to such
proposals, it is important to note that any changes we make
must not lower the safety of effectiveness standards by which
FDA approves new medicines.
Today we will also discuss the regulation of medical gases.
Medical gases are among some of the most widely prescribed
drugs and have been in use since before the enactment of the
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act in 1938. Many of these, for
example, oxygen, are often used with other medical products
such as a device. As I understand it, most of these core gases
have been marketed for many years without an approved New Drug
Application. According to the industry, medical gases are
different than other traditional drugs and should be treated as
such. Therefore, they have proposed a new regulatory system for
dealing with medical gases that would cover things like good
manufacturing practices, labeling, distribution, registration,
listing and product tracking requirements. I believe there is a
great value to this conversation so that members can understand
the issues involved. However, I wonder whether an entirely new
regulatory system is the answer.
Development of antibiotic drugs is a critical public health
issue. As chairman of this subcommittee last Congress, we held
a hearing on the increasing of antibiotic resistance and its
threat to public health. Unfortunately, the Nation's ability to
counter this threat could be limited because of the lack of
antibiotics being developed. Antibiotics were among the most
impactful medical innovations of the 20th century. A routine
treatment to combat bacterial infections, they are one of the
main contributors in the decline of infectious diseases. But
bacteria are living organisms, and as such, as they can and
will mutate with time to be able to resist the drugs that have
been developed to combat them. We now find ourselves in a
situation where our triumph over infectious disease is in
jeopardy. More and more bacteria are proving to be resistant to
the antibiotics currently on the market.
I am eager to hear from FDA and witnesses today about the
proposed legislation that would create financial incentives for
companies to develop more antibiotics drugs and spur
advancement of these products, particularly whether that
approach will help solve the issues our system faces but also
what would be the shortfalls of that approach. For example, how
do we limit the uses of these new antibiotics so that we don't
see the same type of resistance we are seeing now with old
medicines?
And one of the more complicated but critical issues is the
downstream safety of the U.S. drug supply chain. In order to
ensure that we do not have counterfeit stolen drugs entering
the supply chain and harming patients, this committee has heard
for a long time about the call for greater oversight of the
drug supply chain. The need to set up a system that would track
and trace the movement of drugs once they enter the marketplace
has been the common theme. Just last month, we saw a
counterfeit version of the cancer drug Avastin found in the
United States. The counterfeit did not contain the medicine's
active ingredient, proving to be ineffective, and this is
dangerous and in some cases life threatening.
I think we can all agree that Congress needs to get serious
about securing the supply chain and that a national system is
necessary to prevent these drugs from reaching patients. Some
States are beginning to pass their own laws. California, for
example, has a law that will go into effect in 2015.
I am interested to hear about the different approaches
being proposed, specifically, the positives, negatives and
feasibility of each. However, as we contemplate moving forward,
we must not rush to legislation. These are really complicated
and dense processes, and if we are looking at setting a
national standard, it is critical that it be a strong, robust
standard that is most beneficial to the consumer.
So just let me close, Mr. Chairman, by thanking everyone. I
look forward to our panels today. Your testimony and insight
will remain useful in the months ahead. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and yields 5
minutes to Dr. Gingrey from Georgia.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PHIL GINGREY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF GEORGIA

Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you for yielding to me. I
am going to confine my remarks to the shortages of antibiotics,
and of course, that is the bill that the chairman referred to.
Mr. Chairman, again, I appreciate you holding this hearing
and the three panels of witnesses. The need for new antibiotics
is well established and beyond question. Antibiotic resistance
is a threat to global public health as well as United States
national security. Drug-resistant bacteria like those featured
in the movie Contagion threaten American patients and troops in
much the same way. Whether transmitted from person to person or
contracted from biological weapons, the overall threat is the
same. As a physician, I understand how important it is that
medical providers use antibiotics judiciously, but no matter
how judiciously we use the current supply of drugs we have or
will have in the coming years, we need more. To quote the
testimony of Dr. Janet Woodcock of the FDA, the United States
is, and I quote her, ``at a critical juncture with regards to
drug development. We are in urgent need of new therapeutic
options to treat the resistant bacteria that we currently face
and we will need new therapeutic options in the future.'' This
critical juncture requires immediate action if we are to
prevent a public health disaster from hitting our shores in the
next decade.
I want to thank Dr. Woodcock for being here today, and I
personally thank Dr. Margaret Hamburg for her leadership on
this important issue as the Director of the FDA.
To Dr. Woodcock's testimony, antibiotic resistance cannot
be solely solved by the development of new drugs but it also be
solved without them. In fact, we can answer every other problem
with regard to antibiotic resistance, but if we fail to address
the lack of incentives for drug companies and research and
development experts and new antibiotic drug development, let me
say this emphatically, we will lose this fight.
As a group of bipartisan Members of Congress, my coauthors
and I have forwarded H.R. 2182, the Generating Antibiotic
Incentives Now, or GAIN Act, to encourage new drug development.
The legislation is product of years of thoughtful
consideration, and it strikes a balance between the need for
drug companies' incentives and the needs and requirements of
good public health policy. That balance is attested to in the
nearly 50 organizations that currently support our effort.
Their testimonials, which I will be entering into the record
shortly, underscore the potential that the GAIN Act holds to
ensure patients will continue to have the lifesaving
medications that they need. Among those we count public health
leaders like the Pew Charitable Trust, patient organizations
including Kids v. Cancer, medical providers like St. Jude's
Children's Hospital in Tennessee, and organizations
representing 2.5 million veterans and wounded warriors, among
others.
The legislation as drafted focuses incentives on a list of
unmet needs and life-threatening pathogens from which
infections arise. These pathogens were identified by the
Infectious Disease Society of America as looming threats to
public health because little or no treatment currently exists
to combat the infections that they cause. The legislation also
includes, and this is most important, Mr. Chairman. The
legislation also includes the ability for the FDA to update
this list to meet new and emerging threats so that we continue
to encourage the therapeutic options that FDA will testify are
needed.
To be clear, drug researchers and manufacturers in early
development focus their efforts on identifying products that
work against as an identified pathogen as an example including
their ability to kill a specific or variety of deadly bacteria.
Only after a compound is identified as working against a
specific pathogen do the societies then focus on infection
sites in the body in order to measure the efficacy of that
potential drug.
Some have questioned the need to be so specific with
regards to the types of killer bacteria that we are focusing on
in the GAIN Act. To that issue, let me read to you a sentence
from one of the many support letters we have received. ``The
GAIN Act definition ensures that unmet medical needs get the
attention they deserve in an industry where other therapeutic
areas often hold greater commercial promise.'' However, the
incentives for development decrease dramatically if we are
unable to know with a high degree of certainty that a product
would qualify for the incentives in the GAIN Act in early phase
development. In short, our ability to demonstrate to companies
the incentives in the GAIN Act as early in the drug development
process as possible is the foundation upon which our efforts
rest.
Mr. Chairman, I have gone over time. I will go ahead and
submit the rest of my comments for the record, and I look
forward to the testimony of the three panels of witnesses.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, for 5 minutes for
an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Ms. Schakowsky. I really have just about a minute to say
this, but I wanted to put it on the record.
I wanted to say that I strongly support the development of
drugs to enhance therapeutic options for patients with rare
diseases. There is no question that both patients and their
families must cope with unusual and unique issues when they
have a rare disease. I can appreciate the desire on the part of
patient groups and their families as well as industry to create
an accelerated approval for drugs to treat rare diseases. I
both understand and support that goal, but I also want to
ensure that in seeking to accelerate drug approval that we do
not expose patients to unnecessary and unacceptable risks.
While I am committed to efforts to accelerate the development
of rare-disease drugs, I want to make sure we maximize drug
safety efforts and that we do not encourage expedited FDA
approval if doing so would jeopardize that goal.
So I am looking forward to hearing you, Dr. Woodcock, on
how best to address this issue, and I will yield back my time.
Mr. Waxman. Will the gentlelady yield to me?
Ms. Schakowsky. Of course.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much for yielding to me. We have
all the subcommittees scheduled at the same time, and I was
trying to get up here as quickly as possible. I am pleased to
have this opportunity to make an opening statement because we
are going to be looking at some important proposals today. We
haven't yet seen the legislative text, but the proposed list of
user fee add-ons is long, and as each day passes I am
increasingly concerned about whether we will have time to get
to a bipartisan agreement on such an ambitious package of
bills.
The policies we will be discussing today involve complex
public health issues. For us to do a responsible job on these
proposals, we need time and we need bipartisan agreement. We
should not rush this work. We should prioritize getting it
right, not just getting it done, and if we are able to come to
a bipartisan agreement in the time available, it makes sense to
move them along with the other bills. Otherwise, I hope we can
all agree it will be better to wait so that we do not
jeopardize the passage of the underlying user fee bills.
Let me turn to some specific proposals. We have learned in
a series of hearings this subcommittee held in 2010 that the
problem of antibiotic resistance is a dire public health threat
and our arsenal of effective antibiotics is running dangerously
low. So clearly we need to look at ways to incentivize the
development of new antibiotics. The GAIN Act is a good first
step at achieving this goal. However, we should ensure that the
bill is narrowly tailored to drugs that treat dangerous
infections for which we don't have adequate treatments.
Otherwise, we risk worsening the problem of resistance. We also
need to ensure that the bill mandates that FDA and other
agencies involved take steps to ensure that the efficacy of
these newly developed antibiotics is preserved once they are on
the market.
We will also hear today about FDA's Accelerated Approval
system. We can all agree that we want the most effective,
innovative medicines to be available at the earliest possible
time. So if there are improvements that could be made in the
way FDA reviews these medicines, we should consider them. But I
am concerned that some of these proposals are driven by
unsubstantiated claims that FDA has become too demanding of
drug companies, requiring too much data, and thereby allegedly
keeping drugs from patients and driving innovation and jobs
abroad.
As we have heard at previous hearings, there is apparently
no reliable data to back up these claims. To the contrary, as
the testimony of Friends of Cancer Research and FDA has shown,
FDA actually approves novel drugs faster than its counterparts
in Europe or anywhere else in the world. In the past, the
National Organization for Rare Disorders has also testified
about its study showing that FDA is quite flexible in its
requirements for approving orphan drugs.
We want drugs approved as quickly as possible but we want
the FDA to do its job, and it is a difficult one. We want to
give you the tools and we want you to have the flexibility to
do that job as quickly as possible while meeting the
requirements of the law.
I am open to considering whether legislation can help FDA
work with companies to get more breakthrough medicines to
patients more quickly. However, we need to ensure that any
adjustments don't alter FDA's approval standards.
Today's hearing will also examine efforts to improve the
integrity of our drug supply chain. This is an important issue.
There is a regulatory void at the Federal level because the
United States does not currently have laws requiring the
tracking and tracing of pharmaceuticals. Consequently, some
States have stepped in and enacted their own laws, and we are
going to hear today about California, which currently has a law
that would mandate one of the most robust pedigree systems in
the country. Many have suggested that there is a need for a
single Federal system that would preempt these State laws. I
believe having a system at the Federal level could make sense
if done correctly but I would have grave concerns about
preempting a strong State law, especially in California.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
our opening statements.
Our first panel will have just one witness, Dr. Janet
Woodcock, Director of the Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research at the FDA. We are happy to have you with us today,
Dr. Woodcock. You are recognized for 5 minutes for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF JANET WOODCOCK, DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR DRUG
EVALUATION AND RESEARCH, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION

Ms. Woodcock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning.
Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, I am Janet
Woodcock. I am Director of the Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research at the FDA, and I really appreciate the opportunity to
testify on these important issues that are before the panel.
The mission of the drug program at FDA is to make sure that
medicines are of high quality, safe, effective and available.
The quality of the United States drug supply has long been
taken for granted by, I think, the health care community but
the drug supply can be threatened by poor manufacturing
practices, by economically motivated substitute, as we saw in
the heparin problem, and by counterfeit drugs, all problems
that we have observed in the last several years and that are
increasingly. The FDA must continue to be vigilant to maintain
the quality of drugs in this country, and we must have the
property tools to maintain a high-quality medicine supply.
At the same time, health professionals and patients
continue to rely on FDA standards for safety and efficacy so
that the benefits and risks of medicines are studied and that
they are described in the drug label at the time of approval
and that we remain vigilant for unexpected side effects once
the drugs are marketed. In considering new steps to enhance FDA
regulations, we should not diminish the historic protective
standards for safety and efficacy that have served our patients
so well.
And finally, drugs should be available. The current drug
shortage crisis has highlighted how important a reliable drug
supply really is. The drug user fee proposals FDA has delivered
to Congress are targeted to strengthen the availability of
drugs for Americans.
The prescription drug user fee program that Congress has
authorized four times already has really assured that the
United States is the leader in developing and introducing new
important drugs to the public so that Americans have access to
that cutting-edge science and to drugs that will treat life-
threatening conditions.
The new generic drug user fee proposal is intended to
strengthen our generic drug review program that provides access
to affordable, high-quality drugs and also addresses FDA
oversight of drug quality around the world. And FDA's
biosimilars program is intended to provide access to more
affordable biologic drugs.
While these FDA programs are strong and successful, it is
clear there are continuing challenges in drug regulation, many
of which will be discussed at this hearing. I look forward to
working with you to find solutions that will benefit our public
that we serve mutually. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Woodcock follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.014

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady, and I will
begin the questioning and recognize myself 5 minutes for that
purpose.
Dr. Woodcock, what can we do to expand Accelerated Approval
to further help patients including those with rare diseases?
Ms. Woodcock. First, let me say that the Accelerated
Approval program has been very successful and has brought
access, early access to lifesaving drugs to patients with HIV,
patients with cancer, and to many patients with orphan and rare
diseases. However, we believe more could be done as far as
clarity of use of this proposal. We have found that both in the
industry, in the academic community and even sometimes within
the FDA itself there is confusion about the use of Accelerated
Approval. So we believe that additional clarity in the use of
this would be very beneficial. We also plan to issue guidance
that will also clarify the use of Accelerated Approval and will
explain our evidence standards more clear.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. Despite the success of Accelerated
Approval for cancer drugs, I have talked with patients and
innovators and investors, and they indicate that some in FDA
intend to limit the use of the Accelerated Approval pathway for
cancer drugs. This is very concerning to me. As you know, if
FDA goes down this path, patient access to important new cancer
drugs will be decreased. Investment in new cancer therapies
will continue to drop. That would be unacceptable. Rather than
limiting the use of Accelerated Approval in cancer, shouldn't
we be looking for ways to expand it? Would you please comment
on this?
Ms. Woodcock. Certainly, and I believe we are looking for
ways to expand the use of Accelerated Approval in cancer. For
example, we will soon issue a draft guidance on the use of a
new surrogate called pathologic complete response, which would
be used in high-risk breast cancer as a mechanism to do
Accelerated Approval. So I believe that we have been successful
in cancer, and in fact, over the last year we have approved
cancer drugs using Accelerated Approval, sometimes using what
are called historical controls, which means that the drug is
treated in patients and their response is compared to what
would have happened if they had had standard therapy.
So we are not really backing away from that. However, we
have had discussions about the magnitude of the response. What
does that mean? That means that if you see in a historically
controlled trial, maybe you see a 5 percent response rate or a
10 percent response rate, you really don't know the amount of
benefit to the patients, and so that is the level of
disagreement that is going on. It is very technical and it is
within the oncology community. But please be assured, we are
not backing off with Accelerated Approval for cancer. In fact,
we would like to find more endpoints we could use for
Accelerated Approval.
Mr. Pitts. OK. Thank you. We all agree that it is important
to prevent counterfeit drugs from reaching our Nation's
patients. What steps is the agency taking to prevent this?
Ms. Woodcock. We have for a long time had extensive effort
on counterfeits. We are working with our foreign counterparts
around the globe to try and identify gaps in the supply chain
and inspection coverage and so forth, have early notification
between all regulatory authorities when counterfeits are
discovered. Our Office of Criminal Investigations also handles
a lot of investigations into counterfeit drugs. However, we do
believe that additional authorities are necessary for us to be
able to stem this tide.
Mr. Pitts. All right. Now, you mention in your testimony
that a system to track and trace prescription drugs through the
supply chain would help ensure the integrity of our drug
supply. Do you believe the most effective track-and-trace
system would involve a uniform standard throughout the country,
and what are the elements of a cost-effective system?
Ms. Woodcock. Because drugs are shipped all around the
country and across State lines, we believe uniform standards
are important and we are developing elements of standards that
we would publish suggested standards that could be used. The
most important features of track and trace are the following.
Number one, that you can identify the product as it moves
through the supply chain and particularly in real time so that
patients aren't being exposed to counterfeits before you
discover that they have entered the system, so that is one
point. Another point is that modern drug manufacturing makes
lots of drugs, in other words, batches, but it isn't like you
might think of, you know, what you might compound or whatever.
A batch may be a million pills or tablets or more. And so
instead of a batch moving through the supply chain on a pallet,
OK, a batch would be a lot, would be broken up and go all over
the country in different--so a lot--tracking to the lot level
is not that helpful, would not be that helpful if we wanted
real-time detection, say, drugs that have been stolen from that
lot and then diverted and reentering the supply chain or a copy
had made of that lot number and then put back into the supply
chain at some point. We would not be able to detect that unless
we are tracking that lot as it goes along by unit, not by whole
lot.
So we recognize that there are tradeoffs between cost of
these systems and the benefits that they would provide, but if
we want out patients not to get counterfeit drugs, which has
happened even recently--they have been administered to cancer
patients--we are going to need a system that tracks to the unit
level and identifies the movement of the drugs in real time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
The Chair recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Pallone, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Woodcock, I wanted to ask you a question about the GAIN
Act and then a couple of questions about medical gases. I think
we can all agree that we need to find ways to encourage and
facilitate development and approval of important new
antibiotics. The GAIN Act is one attempt to achieve that goal.
However, I know FDA and others have had concerns about the
current definition of which drugs would be eligible for the
incentive. I believe that IDSA and others have suggested that
GAIN should be limited to new antibiotic for treating serious
infections for which there is an unmet medical need. I think
the focus on treating serious infections has not been
controversial but I wanted to know your views on the other two
components, that the antibiotics should be a new chemical or
molecular entity and that it should meet an unmet medical need,
if you could just tell me your views on that, and then I am
going to get to the medical gases. Go ahead.
Ms. Woodcock. A new chemical entity is simply an attempt to
make sure that this incentive applies to new drugs that are
being developed and not to re-studying older drugs. So I think
that particular provision is really up to Congress as far as
how that--but what we really need is new molecular entities or
new chemical entities that have new mechanisms of action that
will be put against these threats.
Now, the second question?
Mr. Pallone. The other one is that it should meet an unmet
medical need.
Ms. Woodcock. By definition, we would want it to meet an
unmet medical need. People who are facing infections where
there is no current satisfactory treatment would meet the
definition of an unmet medical need.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Let me get to the gases, and that is the
H.R. 2227. From what I understand, medical gases are regulated
by the FDA as drugs. However, because they differ in some ways
from most other drugs, FDA has tried to adjust its requirements
to fit them and has taken a risk-based approach to enforcement.
However, the Compressed Gas Association believes that medical
gases are different enough from other drugs that they warrant a
new set of regulations. So my questions relate to that. Can you
explain how FDA regulates gases now, in particular, the
commonalities and differences between your regulation of gases
and your regulation of other drugs and the safety profile of
gases? And then, you know, as I said, this bill provides for a
streamlined process that would deem certain gases approved if
the applicant submits a certification that the gas is among
certain designated gases that are considered to be well
understood and safe. So what is your view on that? And then
last, what do you think about establishing a separate
regulatory system for gases that covers things like good
manufacturing practices, labeling, distribution? Do you think
we should have a separate system? I am throwing these all in
because we only have 2 minutes, so try to cover it if you can.
Ms. Woodcock. Number one, for designation, certain uses of
medical gases have been used so long in medicine that they
actually didn't fall under the FDA review process that was
instituted when the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act was passed and
so technically those uses are unapproved because no
applications have been submitted, and so we feel for those
traditional medical gases for traditional uses that a
designation process would be useful.
As far as a whole new regulatory regime for medical gases
on manufacturing, we believe that might not be necessary. We
believe we could work with the manufacturers and actually I
would commit to working with the manufacturers to develop an
appropriate and flexible interpretation of our regulations and
their application to medical gases for traditional uses that I
think would be mutually satisfactory.
Mr. Pallone. Obviously, one of the things that they have
said to me is if there was some way that you could meet with
the Compressed Gas Association to see if there is some way to
accommodate their needs and eliminate the need for legislative
action. You seem to be suggesting that. Is that fine?
Ms. Woodcock. I would be happy to meet with them
personally.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Let me just ask one thing. Did you
respond to the question about the streamlined approval process?
Ms. Woodcock. What I said was that some designation process
would probably be most satisfactory. These oxygen----
Mr. Pallone. These are streamlined for the ones that have
been around for a while?
Ms. Woodcock. Exactly. For all medical gases, we could
conceive of high-tech new uses that actually should be studied,
but traditionally, giving someone oxygen because they have low
blood oxygen, it is really not that controversial.
Mr. Pallone. So the streamlined would be for the one that
have been around?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from Texas, vice chairman of the subcommittee,
Dr. Burgess, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the chairman for the recognition.
Dr. Woodcock, always good to see you. The last time we were
together, we talked a little bit about drug shortages, and in
fact, in October, the President put out an executive order, and
you were kind enough to receive myself and my staff out at the
FDA about a week or so later. We talked about this. This was
early November. Then you came to the committee a few weeks ago
and we talked extensively about a particular shortage called
Doxil, or doxorubicin. I think sterile methotrexate came up in
the discussions as well, and of course, I was very glad to see
then shortly thereafter we found a way to circumvent some of
the problems with Doxil. There was difficulty in establishing
bioequivalency because in order to do the studies to establish
bioequivalency meant that the drug had to be taken away from
patients who were dependent upon it for therapy, those patients
suffering from ovarian cancer who really couldn't afford a
lapse in therapy and the FDA didn't really provide a way out of
that. So now you have, and I am grateful for that, and that
involved actually I guess the use of some of the same compound
or similar compound that was available overseas. I am not quite
sure how the methotrexate got resolved but I am glad to see
that it did.
But you provided us with a really extensive list of drugs
that were in shortage, and of course, some of them were sterile
injectables, the cancer drugs which are clearly pretty
important stuff. So I guess my question to you is--and you have
also testified, if I remember correctly, that this is a complex
problem. It is not the same thing causing the shortages across
the board. So we look at it and say we are going to draft
legislation, we are going to fix this problem, we are going to
stop it, but it is difficult to do because the problems are so
complex and yet your agency had the ability to reach out
somewhere and solve these two very serious problems for
patients across the country. So I guess my question to you is,
what can you do as a regulatory agency to go down that list? Do
you have a task force that is trying to identify the most
critical needs, the most critical shortages, get those things,
whatever we need to do to get them through the regulatory hoops
in a safe and efficient manner and get them delivered to
patients of this country?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes. We certainly have a shortage team who is
really working overtime, and we have augmented that team with
additional people. We have looked at every one of the drugs on
the shortage list, and if we have had a generic applicant that
is pending, we jump the queue. We expedite the review of that
application and try to get that approved as soon as possible so
that additional sources could be on the market.
In addition, even when a shortage is impending, we think
there is an impending shortage, we will start looking at
alternative supply? Can other manufacturers in the United
States ramp us their production? We contact them, we talk to
them. Are there X U.S. manufacturers with acceptable facilities
and product that could increase their production and thus cover
the U.S. drug supply as well? So we do all this. Despite this,
we are still experiencing shortages, primarily because a lot of
facilities in the United States making sterile injectables have
been experiencing manufacturing problems.
Mr. Burgess. Yes, let me ask you about that because some of
the manufacturing problems actually relate to the company's
ability to get a return on investment or even break even in the
process, and they say look, it is not worth it to us to revamp
our manufacturing line for this product. Is there anything you
can do at the FDA as far as providing the incentives so that
company will stay in the business because then they don't have
to go through the whole reapplication and all of the approval
process again?
Ms. Woodcock. We have very little to do with the economic
side of drug production and reimbursement. We focus on making
sure that the facilities and processes are in place to make a
reliable drug product. I don't think that cutting corners in
manufacturing sterile drug products is the answer because the
problems that these facilities have experienced are
significant. They include endotoxin contamination, bacterial
contamination and particulates in injectables, and these types
of problems do not result in useable sterile injectables.
Mr. Burgess. I need to interrupt you because time is
running short. I have some things I am going to submit in
writing about conflicts of interest, stuff we have covered
before to some degree and I have got some new questions. But
can you update us on--the New England Journal of Medicine had
an article probably back in 2010 or maybe 2009 on the curious
case of colchicine, and colchicine is a drug that has been
around for 3,000 years to treat gout and familial Mediterranean
fever, as I recall, and because of some things that happened at
the FDA, suddenly this drug spiked in price and was becoming
more difficult for patients to receive.
Ms. Woodcock. That situation still continues. The FDA has
something called an Unapproved Drugs Initiative, and we are
trying to get drugs that are not approved by--there is no
approved version by the FDA into the fold of proper drugs in
the United States, and sometimes these efforts do have
unintended consequences and I certainly I have heard--I am a
rheumatologist. I certainly have had from a large amount of the
community and patients about this particular issue of
affordability of this medicine. We are trying to make the
balance between availability and affordability and the ability
to assure a reliable supply of a drug. When drugs are not FDA
approved and they are simply on the market, there are many
opportunities for problems. So we try to walk this path, but
believe me, we are very aware of the problems that have been
created for patients.
Mr. Burgess. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and yields to the
ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Woodcock, I want to ask you about Accelerated Approval.
There is a bill by Mr. Towns and Mr. Stearns, and Dr.
Maraganore will discuss this on our second panel. The act would
clarify and improve FDA's ability to use surrogate and clinical
markers for the Accelerated Approval pathway. Dr. Allen, also
on our second panel, describes in his testimony another
approach for breakthrough products. This approach would ensure
that the FDA works closely with companies in helping them
develop clinical trial designs that would expedite approval of
important drugs showing promise in early trials. And then we
also have the Infectious Disease Society of America, and they
submitted testimony for the record that discusses yet another
approach, and this one is focused on facilitating approval of
drugs that would treat serious diseases in limited populations.
My biggest concern in looking at these proposals is whether
they do or have the potential to change the approval standard,
which is something I hope we can all agree we don't want to do.
Can you briefly, because I have another set of questions,
describe for us what you see as any benefits of these proposals
as well as any concerns you have with any of them?
Ms. Woodcock. On Accelerated Approval, as I said earlier, I
think the main point is a clarity of our ability to approve
drugs on an early clinical endpoint or a surrogate endpoint
that is reasonably likely to predict clinical benefit. But I do
not believe that changing the standards for safety and
effectiveness would be a benefit to patients. So it is more
about clarifying what approval mechanism we can use but not
changing the evidentiary standard.
As far as breakthrough therapies, I have had several people
who are involved in the AIDS epidemic and the development of
drugs to address that epidemic say to me if we had treated that
as business as usual, we would never have solved this epidemic,
we would have never gotten effective drugs available. And HIV
is not the only terrible, life-threatening problem that people
face. So breakthrough therapy is not about the approval
standard. It is about getting all hands on deck when we find--
when early in development a product is found to potentially
have a tremendous benefit, a life-changing benefit in a serious
disease. And we all should get together at that point--this is
my professional opinion--and figure out the most effective and
efficient way to evaluate that therapy to see if it really has
the promise that it appears to have, so if it does, patients
will not have to wait years to have that therapy.
Mr. Waxman. Do we need legislation to do that?
Ms. Woodcock. No. However, I believe that designating that
as a very important process that the agency would have would
provide benefit.
Mr. Waxman. I want to ask you about the integrity of our
drug supply chain and preventing safety crises. You have
already indicated you think that we ought to require drugs to
be tracked all the way down to the unit level, not only require
that supply chain entities track a lot number of the product. I
want to ask you about the question of the pharmacies because in
the coalition bill, the pharmacies are essentially excluded
from that proposal, and I am concerned about preempting State
laws as strong as California's. So I would like to know FDA's
views of the importance of the differences between the two
models. You have already talked about the supply chain. You
might just repeat it again, but what do you think about
excluding the pharmacies? And if we have a single Federal
system, how important do you think it is that pharmacies be
included and that drugs are traced to the unit level instead of
the lot level?
Ms. Woodcock. If our goal is to prevent our patients from
receiving counterfeit drugs before they receive them rather
than going back and trying to reconstruct what happens after
they have received counterfeit drugs and we have detected them,
then we are going to have to have a system that is a real-time
system that tracks the drugs through the system down to the
pharmacy level. Why? Because diversion and insertion of
counterfeits can occur at any point during the drug
distribution chain and you leave a big gap there for the
criminals, and we know there are a lot of criminals out there
outside of our country who want to make profit by putting
counterfeit drugs into our distribution chain or by stealing
drugs, perhaps adulterating them and then reinserting them
back.
Mr. Waxman. You would include pharmacists and pharmacies?
Ms. Woodcock. We have had some cases like that.
Mr. Waxman. This is going to be expensive, and I suppose
that the technology advances quickly and gets cheaper over
time, so we need to work as robust a system as possible but
realize that we have to phase it in, I suppose.
Ms. Woodcock. Right. I think that there are costs,
significant costs, associated with it. You have to balance the
costs against the potential benefits, and I think we have to
ask ourselves, are we going to wait until we have a mass sort
of poisoning from insertion of counterfeit drugs or when we
assume those costs, is the benefit worth the costs. There is no
doubt that there will be costs to all members in the supply
chain to do this.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Dr.
Woodcock.
My first question is kind of really a response to an answer
you gave to Congressman Pallone on the discussion on the GAIN
Act. I am an original sponsor on Dr. Gingrey's bill along with
Dianna DeGette, Anna Eshoo, Gene Green and other members, and
we have been working a long time. The intent is to list the
biggest unmet needs, the pathogens, and then allow you all to
add new pathogens.
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. I think in the question-and-answer period, the
concern was removal and flooding of the market with ones that
aren't needed. We have concerns about that, and let me address
the concerns. The intent is not obviously to try to remove
folks. First of all, there is really not a market unless there
is something that really happens bad. So our concern is someone
developing an antibiotic to meet a specific pathogen that is on
the list and then all of a sudden they get pulled off the list.
Now, what incentive would that be for anyone, really, anyone,
to go in and try to take advantage of this process?
Ms. Woodcock. Well, I would say that the FDA has various
processes such as orphan drug designation and other designation
processes now that we operate, and generally the simpler the
rules, the easier these are to operate administratively. We
also have a process that was established under the user fee----
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, and I was real involved with the orphan
drug provisions, but really, the question still is, there will
be a debate, it sounds like, on both sides on the ability to
remove. I think our basic analysis is, one, there is no need to
remove; two, it is really a disincentive. And I would ask you
to look at that provision from the folks who want to innovate,
those who may have already spent a lot of money and then all of
a sudden it is off the list.
Let me go to my other questions. As Dr. Frieden of the CDC
testified in 2010, antibiotic resistance is a public health
problem of increasing magnitude and finding effective solutions
to address this problem is a critical focus of the CDC
activities. Is it safe to say that you feel similarly that
finding solutions to addressing this problem is a critical
focus of your activities?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And how important is new drug development in
the fight against this public health threat?
Ms. Woodcock. It is crucial.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. It kind into this whole obviously
the GAIN Act in which we are focused on today, part of it we
are focused on today.
One of the issues is on the ventilator-assisted pneumonia
example where our rules are that it can't be tested if the
population has already received antibiotics so a lot of this
testing occurs overseas, and then as I have stated numerous
times, there is a concern with that because you are there, you
are testing, you are spending money. You may segue into the
E.U. system and then we may lose that population. How do we get
around, or is that exclusion of testing a population that has
never received antibiotics, is that really a hurdle that we
can't overcome in our testing aspects here in the United
States?
Ms. Woodcock. We are currently in discussions both with the
industry and the Infectious Disease Society of America and
other interested parties about what the drug development
paradigm should be for multi-drug-resistant organisms, and we
actually feel that a much abbreviated development program, a
very small development program which would be an incentive for
developing these types of antibiotics would be highly feasible
if in fact it were linked to the concept of good antibiotic
stewardship post market.
Mr. Shimkus. So there is hope?
Ms. Woodcock. Absolutely, but I think that is something
that we need to discuss more as far as the good antibiotic
stewardship aspect of this.
Mr. Shimkus. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back
my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the Ranking Member Emeritus, Mr. Dingell, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy.
Dr. Woodcock, welcome.
Ms. Woodcock. Thank you.
Mr. Dingell. One way to address the threats in a supply
chain is to know who is responsible for the pharmaceutical
product at each point in the supply chain. I am sure you agree
with that. Yes or no?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. As you know, the PDSA proposal would provide
for lot-level traceability. Would lot-level traceability be
helpful in identifying where in the supply chain a violation
occurred?
Ms. Woodcock. It might be difficult due to the size of
lots.
Mr. Dingell. But you would be better off than you are now?
Ms. Woodcock. I think the benefits of doing that would have
to be balanced against the costs of even enacting such a
system.
Mr. Dingell. Now, some have advocated for unit-level
traceability over lot level so that you could track individual
products and identify threats before incidents occur. Would
unit-level traceability be helpful in the instance of
contamination or entry of a counterfeit product? Yes or no.
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, one concern I continue to have is
contamination or diversion of prescription drugs by persons
outside the supply chain. Would lot-level traceability help the
FDA to identify the path of a contaminated product as it
traveled through domestic distribution?
Ms. Woodcock. Only partially, and would have to be
reconstructed I think after the fact.
Mr. Dingell. What would be the obstacles or the
difficulties there?
Ms. Woodcock. Because large numbers of any given lot are
manufactured, then determining if some counterfeits of that lot
were added at some point would be difficult unless you had
real-time tracking and you kept account of the volume.
Mr. Dingell. Now, in the instance of contamination or
diversion, would lot numbers be helpful if a particular lot of
drugs traveled through multiple distributors and reached
multiple pharmacies?
Ms. Woodcock. It would be helpful in retrospectively
determining perhaps the point of entry of the contaminated
version but it would not be helpful, I don't think, in real
time.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you. Now, I happen to believe that
manufacturers, distributors and dispensers should keep accurate
and thorough records detailing who is buying and selling a drug
throughout the distribution chain. I am sure you agree with
that.
Ms. Woodcock. I agree.
Mr. Dingell. Would it be helpful to FDA to have each entity
in the supply chain--manufacturers, wholesale distributors,
dispensers--accountable for the authenticity of their product
here?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, again, I want to commend the industry for
their work on the Rx proposal. Traceability is a vitally
important tool in securing our drug supply and one I believe
would complement the drug safety proposal that I have been
pushing. I look forward to working with industries and my
friends on the committee to ensure that traceability proposals
move through this committee in a way that will best achieve the
mutual goal of preventing counterfeit and contaminated products
from entering our drug supply.
Doctor, thank you for your presence.
Ms. Woodcock. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and yields to Dr.
Gingrey from Georgia for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Dr. Woodcock, thank you. The GAIN Act is squarely focused
on serious bacterial pathogens with equally serious unmet
medical need including Gram-negative bacteria, a specific one
that was dubbed Iraqibacter due to the propensity of infections
among our wounded soldiers in Iraq. It is an increasing cause
of hospital-acquired infections in intensive care units leading
to tens of billions of dollars in expenses and it is
increasingly resistant to numerous drugs, leading to a high
number of fatalities. It can show up as pneumonias, complicated
skin infections, tissue infections, and indeed even septicemia,
which is better known in common parlance as bloodstream
infections. Most worrisome, Doctor, the pipeline for novel
therapies against something like Iraqibacter is slim to
virtually nonexistence. Now, Dr. Fauci, the Director of the
CDC, testified before this committee in April of 2010 that our
focus should be on infections derived from problematic
pathogens like this Gram-negative bacteria Iraqibacter. Dr.
Woodcock, do you agree with Dr. Fauci that encouraging drug
development to combat infections that arise from Gram-negative
pathogens like Iraqibacter is an appropriate role for Congress
and the FDA?
Ms. Woodcock. Absolutely.
Mr. Gingrey. According to the Web site of the FDA, you have
launched several initiatives to combat antibiotic resistance
including encouragement of the development of new drugs,
vaccines and improved tests for infectious diseases. Yet many
public health organizations, patient groups and drug companies
have stated that greater incentives are needed if we hope to
increase new antibiotic drug development. Do you believe that
current FDA actions are enough to encourage the numbers of new
antibiotics we need to meet the growing public health threat
that antibiotic resistance poses?
Ms. Woodcock. No, clearly it is not enough.
Mr. Gingrey. So the provisions in the GAIN Act, very
specifically, Dr. Woodcock, like increasing the time of
exclusivity from 10 to 15 years and to be very specific in
regard to the pharmaceutical community that are developing
these new drugs and biologics, do you agree that they need to
know ahead of time that all of this cost and expense and
innovation and research and development that literally the rug
is not going to be pulled out from under them by some
indiscriminate decision after the fact that the FDA might make
in regard to a list of pathogens that we already know are
causing serious medical illnesses no matter where they might
strike, whether it is in the bloodstream or in the lungs
causing pneumonia or in the skin causing things like
necrotizing disease, which indeed can be deadly. So my question
in regard to all of this is, don't you agree, or do you
disagree that being very specific about the pathogens and
things like MRSA, methicillin-resistant staph aureus, and a lot
of these Gram-negative bacteria, enterococcus and things like
that, these need to be designated on the front end, and of
course, the Director of the FDA has the opportunity or the
Secretary of HHS, you know, to add additional things to the
list. So comment on that for us.
Ms. Woodcock. Certainly. It is obvious, and we know from
experience that industry needs, because of the cost and the
risk, a very clear pathway to market, and that is a big
incentive if that is very clear and laid out, so that is
extremely important. I agree with that.
As far as how to do this in this specific instance I think
we are more administratively looking at how administratively
you would set such an incentive up, and because antibiotic
resistance evolves rapidly and this is a dynamic field and
actually many organisms are implicated in this, it would seem
that in general for Congress to set up some more general
criteria and then have FDA designate that way. We then could
make agreements with companies about the designation at the
time they come and talk to us about their development program
and what the pathway would be. So it just seems that
stipulating in the statute certain things rather than what the
criteria might be, maybe setting the criteria would be a better
way to go.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, I realize I am over time, but
let me just conclude here.
Dr. Woodcock, I think you answered my question or my
premise in the affirmative, and this is sort of what I think
Mr. Shimkus was getting at in regard to the ability to add to,
and you have that in the GAIN Act. You have that ability as
things develop to be able to add to the list but I think the
list at the outset in the law should be very specific.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back, and thank you for
your patience.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As I said in my opening statement, I am interested in the
balance between hurrying the drugs that we need to market and
making sure that we protect safety. It seems to me that most of
the claims about FDA's poor performance have in fact been
disproved, and you described quite powerfully how effective FDA
has been at using its current Accelerated Approval authorities.
So it is surprising to me that we are still talking about the
need for yet another accelerated approval pathway, and I hope
we can all agree that we have to be somewhat cautious in this
area. At the very least, we need to ensure that we don't force
FDA into a position where its approval standards are lowered
and the agency ends up force to approve ineffective or unsafe
drugs, which is in no one's interest.
So let me just ask you this. Does the FDA have concerns
about H.R. 4132, the FAST Act, for example, having the
potential to lower the approval standards?
Ms. Woodcock. Well, we would look forward to working with
Congress and the committee on any given language and providing
technical assistance. I think it is important to not lower the
standards for safety and efficacy and to be clear in the
language while we do support the idea of clarifying what can be
used as the basis for Accelerated Approval.
Ms. Schakowsky. And do you take into account the fact that
people who are gravely ill are in fact willing to take more
risks, and what is the mechanism for doing that, for separating
out those individuals who in fact willing to take some more
risks?
Ms. Woodcock. Well, we always balance benefit and risk.
Obviously, cancer drugs aren't as safe as headache drugs, and
so we are taking that into account. The user fee program, the
prescription drug user fee program that is before Congress now,
will have as part of it a formal mechanism where we go out and
solicit patient input into these tradeoffs, especially for
diseases that aren't well understood and so that we can
understand how much risk people are willing to take for a
certain amount of benefit. And then after marketing, typically
there is patient information and we are moving toward getting
uniform patient information in the United States so that when
people get a prescription drug, they understand the benefits
and the risks and they can make that tradeoff for themselves
because individual values differ.
Ms. Schakowsky. And do we distinguish between people who
are pretty desperate to try things as opposed to sort of for
the general population? I mean, is there any flexibility in
that way?
Ms. Woodcock. Well, what we typically do is have--the drug
is studied and so understand the magnitude of the benefit and
then all the risks are described, and then it is determined
between the patient and the physician when that treatment
decision is being considered that they would discuss both the
upsides and downsides of the therapy so the patient can make an
informed choice.
Ms. Schakowsky. So the obligation then of the FDA is to
just make sure that there is complete disclosure of the--let me
ask you this. Do you need more authorities to speed new
therapies to market?
Ms. Woodcock. No, we don't think that new authorities are
needed. Perhaps some clarification might be useful but, no, we
feel that we can get safe and effective drugs, that more risk
is tolerated for cancer, for life-threatening diseases and so
forth. We can get these therapies to the patients with an
appropriate balance of benefit and risk.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. Unless someone wants my time, I
yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady and recognizes
the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Dr. Murphy, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you for being here, Dr. Woodcock. I
always appreciate your testimony and find you to be a very
trustworthy source, and thank you for your leadership.
I want to ask you about drug shortages in particular. From
what I understand, many of these are cancer drugs. Can you
explain why we are facing shortages in cancer drugs?
Ms. Woodcock. I think the HHS Assistant Secretary for
Planning and Evaluation report has the best explanation of what
happened. Most of these cancer drugs are off-patent sterile
injectable drugs and they were very few manufacturers in the
United States making them, sometimes only one manufacturer.
They were making a large list of sterile injectables also. And
they developed some manufacturing problems. Multiple
manufacturers developed problems making the drugs and had to
shut down their lines or interrupt production, and this, as I
said last time, is a perfect storm where this all sort of came
together. Multiple manufacturers of the few that existed in the
United States for sterile injectables all developed problems.
As the report shows, many manufacturers had added newer
injectable drugs that probably had increased profit margins as
they came off patent, added them to their list and so they were
producing a very extensive list of products, and when they
ceased production or had to restrict their production, then
there were other places to turn in the United States.
Mr. Murphy. Is the FDA taking any steps to change some of
these things to address the shortage issue?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes. The steps we take, number one, we work
with the manufacturers. We do everything we can to keep these
particular shortage drugs in production. We have even gone to
the lengths of testing the drugs, see if the particles could be
filtered out and allowing them to be shipped to the patients,
to the doctors if they would filter them at the time of use.
OK. That isn't what you would want of a drug supply but it is
better than not having those drugs available. We also expedite
any applications for making additional sites or additional
manufacturers who want to make these drugs, we expect their
generic drug applications. If we have to, we work with foreign
suppliers who may be making these drugs and see if they can
ramp up their production and import temporarily into the United
States to cover the shortage situation, and we have some of
that happening right now.
Mr. Murphy. Let me ask about another area. I am a
psychologist by training and worked in pediatrics also. I
served in the Navy and worked with PTSD and TBI veterans. And
one of my concerns is also the abuse of drugs. It is a sad
story that we have to address, and of course, the abuse of
drugs also is associated with some shortages. Some of the
stimulant medications used for attention disorder, for example,
have shortages. That hurts those who really need them but there
is also people using that shouldn't be having them and other
class II and III drugs that are being used too, and I wonder
about addressing these as other issues of taking care of the
shortages by doing such things on a Federal level, an issue I
am working on legislation much like a couple of States have
done, and that is, requiring a photo ID when people pick up
some of these drugs. It is not difficult and it is not a secret
that someone could take a Medicare patient's prescription, take
it to the drugstore, fill it for Vicodin or something else, and
next you see Grandpa can't find his prescription, the doctor
writes another one, and these things go on. It is similar for
abuse of some of the drugs used by children which they may sell
or they may redistribute, and I get particularly concerned when
we have so many veterans who end up self-medicating themselves
out of their pain. So I wondered if this is something that in
terms of States, I think Maine and North Carolina have put in
some laws in effect requiring a photo ID or a designated person
to pick up the drug when that person can't do it. If you know
of any research in terms of, is this addressing some of the
issues with regard to reduction of abuse or at least helping a
situation where drugstores are not put in the middle of
basically becoming suppliers to drug abuse networks?
Ms. Woodcock. Thank you. We are doing quite a bit in this
area. The Administration last year announced an initiative to
try to combat the epidemic of prescription drug abuse in the
United States, and we have multiple efforts that we are working
on. I am not familiar with the results of the research on photo
ID and what impact that might have on decreasing diversion to
people who are not supposed to get the prescriptions, but it is
clear that we need to take additional measures to control this
epidemic. It is ravaging some communities.
Mr. Murphy. I appreciate that. I am aware of one chain,
CVS, requires on their own a photo ID, contacting the
physician, asking for the diagnosis to verify a number of these
steps in that process, and that helps, and I certainly know
when I have talked to some pharmacists and they languish with
this idea that say someone shows up with a prescription, we are
filling it but worried that it is actually being abused, so I
would love to be able to with you more in addressing this, and
I do appreciate your dedication to this. Thank you so much.
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from Louisiana, Dr. Cassidy, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Cassidy. Hi, Dr. Woodcock. How are you?
Ms. Woodcock. I am fine. Thanks.
Mr. Cassidy. I have concerns about online pharmacies. As I
gather, they are unregulated. It is kind of a Wild West out
there and lots of issues associated with them. The latest
article in the Wall Street Journal of course is on online
pharmacies. Now, we have heard testimony recently about abuse
potential drugs and the problems of prescription drug abuse. So
both adulterated and abuse potential. Can you comment on the
role of online pharmacies in these two issues?
Ms. Woodcock. It is clear that online pharmacies can be----
Mr. Cassidy. By the way, just to be clear, there are
legitimate and illegitimate pharmacies, so I am sorry,
continue.
Ms. Woodcock. No, I agree with that. There are obviously
sites around the world that can pose as pharmacies and are
distributors and may introduce improper drugs or provide drugs
without a prescription or sometimes provide drugs that are
counterfeit to people. The VIPPS program, which certifies
certain Internet pharmacies as appropriate and has criteria, is
one guide to consumers. We have educational material that we
have tried to put out and tried to educate patients and
consumers on what proper procedures might be for ordering drugs
over the Internet because unguided they may well run into harm.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, is it fair to say, though, that--now,
first, I am a physician who happens to be a Congressman who is
married to a doctor, and I had never heard of the VIPPS program
until today, which is not a criticism of FDA. Frankly, it is a
criticism of my wife. Just kidding. But that said, is it fair
to say that the current mechanism has some inadequacy if even
someone who theoretically would be educated such as I does not
know?
Ms. Woodcock. I think it is a very difficult problem. The
whole system was set up for brick-and-mortar pharmacies. Our
whole control system was set up that way. Now we have the
Internet. As you said, it is the Wild West, and definitely it
is putting American patients and consumers in harm's way.
Mr. Cassidy. I am struck that as we speak about unit-level
tracking, really, that doesn't mean anything if I am buying
online from something which I think is legitimate but which is
illegitimate and I am getting an adulterated drug from another
country. Is that a fair statement too?
Ms. Woodcock. Absolutely.
Mr. Cassidy. So until we can actually do something about
the online pharmacies, we are going to continue to have a leaky
bucket allowing things to come in which should not?
Ms. Woodcock. That is correct.
Mr. Cassidy. Any sense of how much of the drugs that are
abuse potential being used here would come in through online
pharmacies? Do we have a sense of the scope of the issue?
Ms. Woodcock. We do not.
Mr. Cassidy. And do we have a sense of how many of the
online pharmacies are legitimate versus illegitimate?
Ms. Woodcock. Again, the Internet is a very rapidly
changing and evolving----
Mr. Cassidy. Fair answer. Now, let me ask you again, I am
aware of the issue of valid prescriptions versus invalid and
would just like your comments upon that.
Ms. Woodcock. Well, I think the definition of a valid
prescription is an important keystone of any efforts and we
have to do that in light of, you know, now the electronic
prescribing and phone prescribing and so forth, but I think
that is a very important component.
Mr. Cassidy. So the valid prescription, just for those who
may not be familiar with it, currently pertains to a controlled
substance but not to an uncontrolled substance. So I can get an
antihypertensive, which doesn't require a valid prescription,
but the Vicodin, I would, but the absence of the requirement of
a valid prescription for the antihypertensive may mean I get an
adulterated drug. Fair statement?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes, if you happen to order from an
inappropriate pharmacy on the Internet.
Mr. Cassidy. So ideally, we would come up with--we apply
the definition of valid prescription--I am just saying this to
see if you would agree--the definition of a valid prescription
which would apply both to controlled and non-controlled
substances?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes.
Mr. Cassidy. I know we are about to vote and so I yield
back to other members. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Lance, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
respectfully request my opening statement be placed into the
record.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lance follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.015

Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to follow up on questioning from Congressman Pallone
regarding medical gases, and I know that you are working on
this issue. As I understand it, the six medical gases that make
up 99 percent of the prescriptions in the United States--
oxygen, nitrogen, nitrous oxide, carbon dioxide, helium and
medical air--are mostly derived from the air that we breathe.
The FDA has a long history of using its enforcement discretion
in exempting medical gases from its New Drug Application
process but recent changes to Federal policy, I believe, have
left both manufacturers and patients uncertain of the future of
FDA-approved medical gases.
The legislation that Congressman Pallone referenced,
legislation I have introduced, the Medical Gas Safety Act,
which is bipartisan in nature--I have introduced it with my
colleague, Congressman Murphy, Chris Murphy--tries to address
this situation in a bipartisan capacity. I want to work with
you in this regard. Can you comment on where you might be going
regarding this issue?
Ms. Woodcock. Certainly. We feel also that there are long-
recognized and medically acceptable uses of these traditional
medical gases and that some designation would be very useful
rather than having an application process, approve something we
already know, all right?
Mr. Lance. Yes.
Ms. Woodcock. But as far as some of the other issues
relating to the manufacturing process and so forth, we believe
that our regulations are sufficiently flexible that we can work
out an approach without additional legislation that would be
mutually satisfactory to the industry and to the FDA.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Doctor. I know that your staff has
some reservations about developing separate, current good
manufacturing practice regulations for the medical gases.
Codifying current regulatory experience with medical gases is,
in my judgment, the best way to resolve some of the confusion,
and the Compressed Gas Association, which is the safety-
standard-setting organization for the industry, has offered its
full resources to assist in the rulemaking process. I want to
thank you for your willingness to meet and work with the
association, with the staff here on this committee, with my
staff on this issue.
I do not necessarily think that guidance can remove the
requirements from existing regulations, so I do think that some
changes in the regulations are necessary, and I respectfully
request that we continue to work together on this issue as
PDUFA is reauthorized.
Ms. Woodcock. We will be happy to work with you.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I yield
back the balance of my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Dr. Woodcock,
thanks for being with us today. If I could just kind of go back
to a question that was asked by Dr. Burgess and one also that
was asked by Dr. Murphy. One of the questions that Dr. Burgess
asked, and I want to make sure that I wrote it down correctly
when you said that, that he asked what can the FDA do to help
incentivize businesses to stay in business in the manufacturing
process, and your answer was at the time that, you know, your
focus is really on that reliability. And Dr. Murphy then had
asked a question in the same vein because there is a lot of
questions about there on the drug shortages, that the question
as to manufacturing problems and that you had stated that in
trying to address that problem you would work with the
manufacturer. Is there a difference between trying to keep
people in business and those companies out there that are
manufacturing right now?
Ms. Woodcock. Can you rephrase the question?
Mr. Latta. Well, the first part of the question is that you
had said that as Dr. Burgess had asked the question, he asked
what can the FDA do to help incentivize businesses sustain
manufacturing processes of producing the product, and you had
said in response to his question that your only focus is really
on the reliability end and not on trying to keep them in
business. So that would be a company out there that, you know,
might be trying to incentivize somebody to stay in that type of
a process in manufacturing but Dr. Murphy had asked the
question as to if there are manufacturing problems and keeping
pills out there or other drugs in the manufacturing stream to
get to the patients and that you would say that you would work
with those manufacturers. I am just trying to figure out what
the difference between the two is on the reliability and
working with them.
Ms. Woodcock. My understanding of Dr. Burgess's question
was, did we help with the economic incentives, and we don't
have really any role in the economic aspects of drug production
and marketing and so forth. We do work with manufacturers to
try to keep them manufacturing shortage drugs or any other
drugs and we try to work with manufacturers to keep them
manufacturing a reliable supply of the medicines that they
produce. I do believe that the generic drug proposal that is
before Congress right now will help with this because it will
help us clear out our backlog of generic drug applications that
have decreased the predictability of a generic drug review
process and hopefully we may encourage more entrants into that
process. So we do work with them but we are not involved in the
marketing and reimbursement or any of those aspects.
Mr. Latta. And also in answer to some of Dr. Murphy's
questions, could you define when you say you would help filter?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes. Manufacturers of sterile products--that
would be that go into your vein--we are finding they had
particles in their products. That is bad. That is very bad but
they can go into your lungs and get stuck and so forth, so it
is not acceptable. So when those were in shortage, rather than
say you can't send them out, we tested to make sure that a
filter would take out the particles and not take out the drug,
and then we let the drugs be shipped with a filter so that at
the point of delivery, they could be filtered and get the
particles out and the patient would still get that drug rather
than have it be in shortage. So I think that is an illustration
that we try to work with the manufacturers to keep these drugs
out there.
Mr. Latta. And also, other countries that are out there
that have experienced drug shortages, how have they met the
shortages like say in Europe?
Ms. Woodcock. They work much the same way that we do, and
we work with the European regulatory authorities to try to make
sure the international drug supply remains robust. So they take
the same sorts of actions we do.
Mr. Latta. Again, just one last question, if I may. With
the 1981 flu pandemic that might have killed between 25 to 75
million individuals, it is being pretty much attributed now not
to the flu but to tuberculosis, and in January of this year, a
completely 100 percent drug-resistant form of TB was identified
in India that would not be treatable with any known antibiotic.
What is the FDA doing right now to try to prevent that from
getting to these shores?
Ms. Woodcock. Yes. Well, we certainly are working with the
coalition that is working on developing new drugs for multi-
drug-resistant tuberculosis. This is a serious threat. We
recognize it and we are doing everything we can. Our
combination investigational drug guidance, which is realize is
very technical, that we put out that showed how you could
develop several investigational drugs together to deal with a
threat such as this I think is helpful in this effort. And as I
said earlier, we believe that if provisions for good antibiotic
stewardship were able to be instituted and we were sure that
such a drug would only be used only for drug-resistant
tuberculosis, we could have a very small development program
that would allow that drug to get on the market. That would
provide, I think, a tremendous incentive to manufacturers to
get into this space and develop drugs for multi-drug-resistant
TB.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Dr. Woodcock.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
the questions. Go ahead, Dr. Cassidy, for one follow-up.
Mr. Cassidy. Mr. Lance brought up H.R. 2227, medical gas.
Just to confirm that this would not apply to already approved
substances, correct?
Ms. Woodcock. Correct.
Mr. Cassidy. They would continue to be regulated as they
currently are?
Ms. Woodcock. That is my understanding.
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Dr. Woodcock, for appearing before
the subcommittee this morning. We really appreciate your
testimony and answering all of our questions. That concludes
panel one.
Ms. Woodcock. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. We will now call panel two to the witness table,
and I would like to thank all of these witnesses for agreeing
to testify before the subcommittee today. I would like to
quickly introduce our expert panel. First of all, Dr. John
Maraganore is CEO of Alnylam Pharmaceuticals. Dr. Jeff Allen is
the Executive Director of Friends of Cancer Research. Dr. Barry
Eisenstein is Senior Vice President of Science Affairs at
Cubist Pharmaceuticals. Dr. John Powers is the Assistant
Clinical Professor of Medicine at George Washington School of
Medicine. And Mr. Michael Walsh is the President of LifeGas.
Mr. Walsh is appearing on behalf of the Compressed Gas
Association.
Again, we thank all of you for coming this morning. We have
your prepared statements. Dr. Maraganore, we will begin with
you. You are recognized for 5 minutes to summarize your
testimony.

STATEMENTS OF JOHN MARAGANORE, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, ALNYLAM
PHARMACEUTICALS; JEFF ALLEN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, FRIENDS OF
CANCER RESEARCH; BARRY I. EISENSTEIN, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS, CUBIST PHARMACEUTICALS; JOHN H. POWERS,
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE, GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
SCHOOL OF MEDICINE; AND MICHAEL WALSH, PRESIDENT, LIFEGAS, ON
BEHALF OF COMPRESSED GAS ASSOCIATION

STATEMENT OF JOHN MARAGANORE

Mr. Maraganore. Thank you, Chairmen Upton and Pitts and
Ranking Members Waxman and Pallone. It is my privilege to
provide testimony before the subcommittee today. My name is
John Maraganore and I am the Chief Executive Officer of Alnylam
Pharmaceuticals.
As a scientist and a businessman, I have over 25 years of
experience in biopharmaceutical research and development. I
serve on the board of several biotechnology companies and I am
also an advisor to Third Rock Ventures and a member of the
Biotech Industry Organization Governing Board.
Founded in 2002, Alnylam is a small, nonprofitable
biotechnology company located in Cambridge, Massachusetts. We
are developing new medicines based on the science of RNA
interference, or RNAi, which is a major breakthrough in biology
that was recognized by the award of the 2006 Nobel Prize for
Medicine or Physiology.
Today our company has 120 employees who are working on a
pipeline of innovative medicines that could truly be
transformative in the lives of patients afflicted with a number
of genetic diseases including diseases such as systemic
amyloidosis, hemophilia, sickle cell anemia, severe
hypercholesterolemia, Huntingdon's disease, liver cancer and
also respiratory syncytial virus. If we are successful in our
efforts, we can create a whole new class of medicines and treat
disease in a fundamentally different way.
I am here today to discuss the importance and the benefits
of Congressman Stearns' and Towns' Faster Access to Specialized
Therapies, or the FAST bill, which would modernize the
Accelerated Approval pathway at the Food and Drug
Administration. The Accelerated Approval pathway, implemented
in 1992 by the FDA and codified by the Congress in 1997, has
indeed been a great success story but only in part. While its
applicability has been largely limited to certain disease
areas, mainly cancer and HIV/AIDS and certain situations, the
pathway has stimulated an explosion of investment and
innovation in those diseases and has brought immense benefit to
patients suffering from those diseases. There are several
reasons why the Accelerated Approval pathway should be expanded
and in fact modernized.
First, as I just mentioned, the Accelerated Approval
pathway has worked but only in part. That is, it has been
largely limited in practice to drugs that treat cancer and HIV/
AIDS along with a handful of other situations. While this is
great news for patients afflicted with cancer and HIV/AIDS, it
is not good news for patients suffering from other serious and
life-threatening diseases. Nothing in the words of the current
statute limits the Accelerated Approval pathway to just
oncology and HIV/AIDS. In fact, the statute is worded broadly
but the current FDA practice leaves many other treatments for
rare and serious conditions effectively excluded from the
pathway. We need certainty about how the FDA can apply
Accelerated Approval in the future by ensuring that the pathway
is available for all therapies which treat serious or life-
threatening conditions by enacting the FAST Act.
Second, it is important that the ability to utilize the
Accelerated Approval pathway is both better understood by
sponsors and more consistently applied by the FDA. This is
especially true when it comes to FDA-accepted clinical
endpoints including those that could be measured earlier than
irreversible morbidity or mortality to demonstrate a reasonable
likelihood of overall clinical benefit. While the pathway
allows for approval based upon effects on clinical endpoints
that are reasonably likely to predict clinical benefit, in
practice, the lack of clarity surrounding such approval options
has led to a very limited use of Accelerated Approval by
sponsors and the FDA.
Third, it is time to have an expanded and modernized
Accelerated Approval pathway that incorporates the remarkable
advances in the life sciences that have and will provide an
unprecedented understanding of the underlying biological
mechanisms and disease pathogenesis. These advances can enable
novel drug development strategies that employ leading-edge
methodologies and tools such as biomarkers and novel clinical
trial designs that can overall improve how we implement
Accelerated Approval. The FAST bill would achieve all of these
objectives described above by expressing the sense of Congress
that the FDA should utilize the Accelerated Approval pathway as
fully and as frequently as possible while maintaining, very
importantly, FDA's safety and effectiveness standards and by
codifying, modernizing and expanding FDA's Accelerated Approval
pathway with four targeted revisions.
I thank you very much for your time and attention and I
urge Congress to consider the FAST Act.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Maraganore follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.026

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
We are presently voting on the floor. We are going to try
to get through a couple more of you. Dr. Allen, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JEFF ALLEN

Mr. Allen. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Pitts, Ranking
Member Pallone and members of the subcommittee. I am Jeff
Allen, Executive Director of Friends of Cancer Research, a
think tank and advocacy organization based here in Washington.
I would like to thank the staff of the committee who have
worked very hard in putting together this important hearing. It
is an honor to be here today.
While compelling progress continues to be made within the
field of oncology, there is much more to be done. This year,
cancer will claim the lives of over 570,000 Americans. This,
Mr. Chairman, is roughly equivalent to every citizen in your
home county of Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
With such a profound toll, improved ways to combat cancer
and other diseases are desperately needed. While there are many
factors that make development of new drugs complex, assessments
of the process often focus on the FDA. Critics have frequently
portrayed the FDA as slow and inefficient compared to other
countries. However, our research reveals that FDA is approving
anticancer drugs in a more timely fashion than the European
counterpart. In fact, since 2003, FDA has approved 42 new
cancer medicines versus just 32 by the EMA. Of the 28 common
approvals, all were available to U.S. patients first.
A cornerstone of the FDA's standard for approvals was
established in 1962 by Congress requiring that all new drugs
demonstrate not only their safety but also efficacy. Without
this requirement, American patients would have continued to
have been given medicines that actually provided no improvement
to their health. As this committee seeks to optimize and
improve FDA practices and maintain its standing as the global
leader, the requirement that new drugs demonstrate both safety
and efficacy must be upheld. While the need for new treatments
is immense and the challenge is significant, the solution is
not to arbitrarily lower this important standard that has been
in place for 50 years.
In 1992, as science progressed, and in acknowledgement of
an increased public health need, regulations were developed to
establish the Accelerated Approval mechanism. This is shown to
be an important tool used by the FDA to uphold the rigorous
scientific standards while facilitating timely access to
lifesaving treatments. For example, in oncology, Accelerated
Approval has been used for over a third of new cancer drug
approvals since 1999. However, since 2007, the number of
oncology drugs approved through this mechanism has decreased.
In order to optimize the use of this tool, Congress should
take action to enhance Accelerated Approval to ensure that it
is applied consistently, efficiently and effectively. This is
not to suggest in any way that the standards of safety of
efficacy should be altered but rather to examine additional
opportunities in which Accelerated Approval is the optimal
approach.
Today, much like at important times throughout recent
history, the FDA needs an updated mechanism to respond to the
rapid advancement of science. With the expansion of knowledge
about the biological basis of complex disease, new targeted
therapies are being developed. For these new treatments that
show remarkable benefit early in development, the traditional
approach may not be appropriate. Currently, there are no clear
guidelines to expedite subsequent studies that would generate
the needed evidence and minimize the number of patients who
would need to be assigned to the current standard of care.
In order to address this, Congress should establish a
mechanism that would allow the FDA to designate a new compound
that shows substantial clinical activity in early-phase trials
as a breakthrough product. Upon designation, the sponsor,
working closely with FDA, would develop trial designs to
abbreviate or combine traditional phases of development. This
would avoid giving larger numbers of patients a potentially
harmful or ineffective drug as part of a control arm while
maintaining current safety and efficacy standards. This
establishment of this new designation would help FDA respond to
highly innovative new medicines quickly and consistently across
the agency as well as to communicate and encourage drug
developers to pursue trial designs that are able to show
potential benefit earlier in development.
I conclude my remarks today by reiterating that rigorous
FDA standards cannot be compromised. The FDA should be given
the ability to respond to cutting-edge science and the most
promising therapies through an enhanced Accelerated Approval
mechanism and a breakthrough product designation.
I thank you for your time and I am happy to answer any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Allen follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.035

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
The ranking member and I have consulted. The last time we
did this, we missed a vote, so we had better break at this
point. We will recess and come back to the panel as soon as the
last vote of the series is over. The subcommittee stands in
recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Pitts. Time of recess having expired, we will
reconvene, and the Chair recognizes Dr. Eisenstein for 5
minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF BARRY I. EISENSTEIN

Mr. Eisenstein. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on the urgent need to spur greater innovation and
accelerate the development of new antibiotics to combat the
threat of drug-resistant pathogens. I am Dr. Barry Eisenstein,
Senior Vice President of Scientific Affairs, Cubist
Pharmaceuticals, a company focused on the research and
commercialization of antibiotics. Headquartered in Lexington,
Massachusetts, we currently market Cubicin, a first-line
intravenous antibiotic for the treatment of methicillin-
resistant staphylococcus aureus, better known as MRSA.
Mr. Chairman, on behalf of patients and health care experts
alike, I wish to commend the subcommittee for holding this
hearing and for the leadership of Congressmen Gingrey and Green
and others for the introduction of the Generating Antibiotic
Incentives Now, or GAIN Act of 2011. The bipartisan GAIN Act
would directly promote the research and commercialization of
new drugs and diagnostics against resistant pathogens. It
offers our best hope to stimulate American innovation,
particularly within small and mid-market companies, and
strengthen the hand of clinicians and scientists in the fight
against drug-resistant pathogens both here and abroad.
Annually, at least 1.7 million Americans acquire a
bacterial infection in the hospital and nearly 100,000 of them
die, and we have heard the heartbreaking stories. A young high
school football player loses his life to a bathe with MRSA, the
woman who just had mastectomy surgery acquires a resistant
post-op infection and goes into kidney failure. ICU patients in
American hospitals and our troops in the Middle East alike are
suffering untreatable Acinetobacter infections at alarming
rates, referred to earlier as Iraqibacter. Two years ago, the
U.S. Air Force testified on the challenging epidemic of multi-
drug-resistant infections that has resulted in a shortage of
safe and effective antibiotics.
Just as antimicrobial resistance is rising, we are faced
with a disturbing and dangerous lack of new antibiotic drugs,
particularly against Gram-negative bacteria. The Pew Charitable
Trust warns us that the antibiotic pipeline is dwindling and a
global crisis looms. This threatens much of modern medicine
because antibiotics are crucial from surgical recovery to
cancer treatment. As Dr. William Evans, the CEO of St. Jude's
Children's Research Hospital noted, ``We don't want to find
ourselves in a situation in which we have been able to save a
child's life after cancer diagnosis only to lose them to an
untreatable multi-drug-resistant infection.
The antibiotic pipeline is running dry because antibiotics
uniquely are wasting assets. Bacteria evolve so quickly that
the development of resistance is inevitable. Thus, each new
antibiotic has only a finite lifespan. Appropriate stewardship
is an important component of antibiotic use. That said by
itself doesn't increase the supply of new compounds. Because
antibiotics are used for acute conditions and for a short
period, much of the biopharmaceutical industry does not invest
in antimicrobial development and has instead turned its efforts
to products aimed at more chronic diseases.
The GAIN Act is targeted at precisely this problem. By
building on current law and extending the new drug
exclusivities created by the 1984 Hatch-Waxman Amendments only
for urgently needed antibiotics, it would dramatically improve
the prospects for tracking new investments for the development
and approval of new antibiotics so needed by our patients. The
act would send a powerful signal to scientists and investors
exploring new molecules and forming new companies as well as to
large established biopharmaceutical companies that Congress
recognizes the unique challenge in this area and is opening the
door to new innovation, new investigations and greater investor
interest. The enhanced exclusivity for antibiotics as well as
the straightforward designation of qualified infectious disease
products is based on what Dr. Janet Woodcock of the FDA
recently described as the wildly successful Orphan Drug Act.
Mr. Chairman, this committee has a unique opportunity to
take timely action against a serious public health threat. The
market failure that has strained our pipeline of important new
antibiotics remains. I urge the members of the subcommittee to
move the GAIN Act through committee and enact it into law
during this 112th Congress.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Eisenstein follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.044

Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Dr. Eisenstein.
Dr. Powers, you are recognized for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF JOHN H. POWERS

Mr. Powers. Good afternoon. Thank you for inviting me to
testify today. My name is John Powers, and I am a practicing
infectious disease and internal medicine physician and a
medical researcher who actively cares for patients. I was a
scientist at FDA for almost a decade, and while there, I was
one of the co-chairs of the Interagency Task Force on
Antimicrobial Resistance.
I would like to share with you today my perspectives as a
clinician, researcher, and having been a patient myself on
appropriately developing incentives for antibiotics where there
is the greatest need. My remarks are my own views, and I am not
representing any agency or organization, but I am here speaking
on behalf of the patients for whom I care. Several patients and
consumer and public health groups have expressed the same views
as I will present here today.
Government intervention is needed to spur antibiotic
development because antibiotics are less profitable for drug
companies than other therapeutic areas resulting in decreased
investment. The Generating Antibiotic Incentives Now, or GAIN
bill, provides those incentives to develop new antibiotics.
In any policymaking, as in science, one must first outline
the problem, then come up with potential solutions while
minimizing unintended consequences, implement that policy, and
then measure whether it has its intended effects. The problem
of serious diseases for which there are no effective therapies
has been well outlined. The question now is, how best can GAIN
address these problems. If the public to make an investment on
new antibiotics, the public should get something of measurable
value in return while not worsening the problem of antibiotic
resistance. Several changes to GAIN might help it focus to best
address public health needs while limiting potential adverse
consequences.
First, GAIN should focus on patients and their diseases
rather than organisms. I have never had a patient tell me their
E. coli hurts or that their Klebsiella is killing them.
Patients present with disease syndromes like pneumonia, and I
have certainly heard enough people in this room coughing today
to show that symptoms are a problem.
The human body contains more bacterial than human DNA, and
organisms do not cause problems for patients until they cause
disease. In fact, the word ``pathogen'' implies pathology and
disease. Any list of organisms in the bill would be quickly
outdated and hard for FDA to implement. In addition, FDA
regulations appropriately point out that drugs are approved for
recognized diseases or conditions, and organisms are neither.
Use of antibiotics to eliminate organisms in the absence of
disease would paradoxically increase antibiotic resistance.
Second, GAIN should focus on the treatment of serious and
life-threatening diseases where lack of safe and effective
therapies results in death or serious disability. Antibiotic
resistance in the test tube has little effect on patients who
would recover without antibiotics but it is inappropriate use
in these settings that has worsened antibiotic resistance.
Despite efforts by CDC, FDA, and others, a substantial portion
of antibiotic prescriptions are still not warranted, provide no
benefits to patients, and cause the problem of antibiotic
resistance we are trying to control.
Third, there should be valid scientific evidence based on
FDA's standard of substantial evidence from adequate and well-
controlled trials that these drugs actually unmet medical
needs. In a 1979 landmark Supreme Court case, Thurgood Marshall
pointed out that people with terminal diseases should not
receive less protection under the law from unsafe and
ineffective drugs than persons with curable diseases. Test tube
and animal studies are helpful in choosing drugs to study in
people, but people are not rodents. The complexity of the human
body is totally humbling. Three-fourths of antibiotics
submitted to FDA for review with promising test tube and animal
studies ultimately fail to show safety and efficacy in human
disease. Approving antibiotics today hoping for some future
promise makes no sense as resistance is inevitable with all
antibiotics, sometimes occurring before the drug is even
marketed. There is no guarantee that a drug approved today will
address resistance tomorrow. In a study from Boston, almost
half of antibiotics approved since 1980 have disappeared from
the market, either because of safety and efficacy issues or
because of poor sales because they did not address public
health needs. Therefore, numbers of drugs approved is not a
measure of public health benefits.
Fourth, we need new tools to evaluate antibiotics that will
make trials more efficient and less expensive for companies to
perform. Determining who needs and who does not need
antibiotics and developing better outcome measures to evaluate
directly how patients feel and function are urgently needed so
we can get the valid evidence we need to know if the drugs
actually meet unmet medical needs.
Fifth and finally, any incentives should go hand and hand
with programs for appropriate stewardship of antibiotics. For
any scarce resource, conservation should accompany increased
production. Unfortunately, we as physicians have been only
moderately successful at policing ourselves to appropriately
use antibiotics but greater efforts are underway. FDA should be
given the authority to develop strategies to evaluate and
ensure appropriate antibiotics where they are most needed and
to minimize antibiotic resistance. An HHS-level internal group
to address issues related to antibiotic resistance would help
strengthen ongoing efforts of the interagency task force.
Focusing the GAIN bill on the five ways I have just
outlined will result in addressing the goals it sets out to
achieve: developing new and safe antibiotics with an
appropriate evidence base to positively affect patients' lives
while simultaneously limiting antibiotic resistance.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Powers follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.049

Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Dr. Powers.
Mr. Walsh, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL WALSH

Mr. Walsh. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member,
thank you for inviting me to testify today. My name is Mike
Walsh. I am President of LifeGas. This is part of Linde North
America. We are headquartered in New Jersey. We have about
4,500 employees in the United States.
I am here today to testify on behalf of the Compressed Gas
Association, of which we are a member. CGA represents companies
engaged in the manufacture and distribution of compressed gases
including medical gases.
The Compressed Gas Association was founded in 1913 and
currently has more than 120 member companies. CGA serves as a
safety standard-setting organization for the medical gas
industry. The medical gas companies in our coalition employ
about 21,000 employees and have around 4,500 locations, half of
which are small businesses. I personally entered into this
industry, the medical gas industry, as a small business owner.
Linde and other members of the Compressed Gas Association
provide medical gases that are used by doctors, primarily for
respiratory care. You can find our products in hospitals,
clinics, doctors' offices and in homes across the country.
On behalf of the CGA, I want to offer my thanks to
Congressman Leonard Lance and Chris Murphy for introducing the
Medical Gas Safety Act. Your leadership role in this issue has
been pivotal. I also want to thank Chairman Pitts and Ranking
Member Pallone for your willingness to address these issues in
the very important bill you are working on now. Naturally, I
also want to thank Chairman Upton and Ranking Member Waxman of
the full committee as well.
Medical gases, like oxygen, are used by medical
practitioners as prescription drugs every day. We have over a
million patients using it in a variety of conditions. Medical
oxygen has been used for more than a century. Medical gases
were in use for decades before the FDA was created and a New
Drug Application process was initiated. And here is the really
key point. Medical gases have a long, long history of safe and
effective use. The most common ones are derived today, things
we are breathing today. These common medical gases are a unique
class of drug products that are different from traditional
pharmaceuticals in a lot of ways. We have different properties
than pharmaceutical drugs: we have a different delivery method,
we have a different manufacturing process, we have a different
type of container that holds the product. Medical gas
manufacturers make no medical claims for medical gases, which
is very different for traditional prescription drugs.
However, the FDA currently regulates medical gases with the
same regulatory system as traditional pharmaceuticals. This has
created significant and growing regulatory issues. These
practical issues create uncertainty and drive up compliance
costs for our industry. Medical gases need a separate
regulatory system that takes into account these unique
characteristics.
The Medical Gas Safety Act addresses a number of critical
regulatory issues facing the medical gas industry. It
establishes an appropriate approval process for medical gases.
It requires the creation of separate regulations for medical
gases. It ensures that FDA fees do not disproportionately
impact medical gas manufacturers, many of whom are small
businesses. This legislation will create regulatory certainty
for our industry. It will ensure that patients in the medical
community have access to these lifesaving products. It will
remove current uncertainty regarding the Federal regulations of
medical gases for Federal and State inspectors.
The FDA has recognized the unique nature of medical gases
for a very long time. Until now, the FDA has generally used its
enforcement discretion not to require medical gases to go
through the New Drug Application process. Recently, the FDA
began the Unapproved Drugs Initiative, which is intended to
eliminate all unapproved drugs from the marketplace including
medical gases. If the Unapproved Drugs Initiative is applied to
medical gases, this would remove access for patients to gases
as simple as oxygen.
Recent changes in enforcement policies related to the
export of unapproved drugs have also created serious challenges
for our industry. Also, the regulatory system in place for
medical gases does not take into account the unique
characteristics of medical gases. In response to concerns
raised by the Compressed Gas Association, the FDA stated in
1976 in the preamble to the original Current Good Manufacturing
Practices rulemaking that they intend to develop separate
regulations for medical gases. No such regulations have been
developed.
This legislation will provide a clear, targeted regulatory
structure for medical gases, creating a process for medical
gases to become approved drugs and establishing specific
regulations for medical gases which will reduce uncertainty,
improve compliance and improve safety in what is already a very
safe industry.
I applaud all of you again for your willingness to address
these important and longstanding regulatory issues. Thanks
again on behalf of the CGA for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walsh follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.054

Mr. Pitts. Thank you. Thank you for your testimony. The
Chair thanks the panel for being patient waiting while the
members voted. We will now begin questioning, and I will
recognize myself for 5 minutes for that purpose.
Dr. Maraganore, in your testimony, you cite the success of
FDA's Accelerated Approval pathway for HIV and AIDS and cancer
treatments but indicate the Accelerated Approval framework has
done little to help expedite treatments for rare diseases. Can
you elaborate on why the accelerated pathway has not led to
gains in the rare-disease space that you would all like to see?
Mr. Maraganore. Yes. I think it really speaks back to the
comments that Dr. Woodcock in terms of the clarity around the
utility and the usefulness of the Accelerated Approval process
for diseases outside of cancer and HIV/AIDS, and clearly what I
think is being proposed in Congressmen Stearns' and Towns'
proposal is a way of significantly enhancing and modernizing
our understanding of Accelerated Approval to the point where it
will be used more frequently, I would expect, for the purposes
of rare or orphan diseases where there significant unmet
medical need and certainly an important desire I think for
patients and physicians to have access to medicines faster.
Mr. Pitts. Now, some experts believe that FDA is seeking to
limit the use of Accelerated Approval for cancer drugs. Is this
the case? Rather than narrowing the use of Accelerated Approval
in cancer, shouldn't we be looking for ways to expand it, and
what should Congress to prevent FDA from limiting its use?
Mr. Maraganore. I think there has been some concern around
potential changes within the FDA's views on how Accelerated
Approval would be used in cancer based on some hearings that
were held about this time last year. You know, clearly, the FDA
has used this approach for cancer-based medicines. We believe
that the FDA will continue to do so. I think our desire is
really to see it expanded and clarified as a system while very
importantly maintaining the safety and efficacy standards that
exist today for the approval of medicines.
Mr. Pitts. And how would the FAST Act incentivize research
and development of innovative therapies and treatments for
serious diseases?
Mr. Maraganore. Well, clearly, the ability of having a
clear and established framework whereby medicines in the
context of very serious unmet medical needs can be approved
through an Accelerated Approval pathway would certainly
encourage the investment that is needed to ultimately bring
these types of products to the marketplace. Clearly, innovative
medicines are increasingly being discovered by, you know, young
companies like ours, of which there are many in this country,
in a very vibrant industry, but this industry as been
challenged by the increasing time it takes to get drugs to the
marketplace and the increasing costs, and Accelerated Approval
in the context of very serious unmet medical needs would
provide a framework for getting drugs to patients faster in a
way that would be more acceptable to the investors that have to
put capital at risk to ultimately bring these products to
market.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Dr. Eisenstein, while the threat of antibiotic drug
resistance is a looming public health crisis, the drug
development pipeline has not kept pace with this threat. What
can we do to turn this around?
Mr. Eisenstein. Thank you for your question, Mr. Chairman.
I believe that the GAIN Act as presently formulated provides us
with precisely the right tools to provide the incentives
needed. To cite Dr. Woodcock's earlier testimony: ``We need
economic incentives beyond the regulatory ones for these bad
bugs.'' Industry needs a clear pathway to the market. I could
not have said that better myself, and when one looks at the
enormous success of the Orphan Drug Act that was enacted in
1983, the Office of the Inspector General in reviewing that in
2001 declared, A, that it was extraordinarily successful in
enabling at the time over 200 new drugs. We are now over 350
new drugs through the Orphan Drug Act. But I would say equally
importantly, they pointed out that the increased market
exclusivity was the most important determinant of the success
of that program. So I believe we have everything we need in the
GAIN Act as it presently written.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Mr. Walsh, I understand that FDA regulation has caused
problems for many in the medical gas business. Many of these
are small businesses. Can you explain how and why FDA
regulation has caused these problems?
Mr. Walsh. Yes. Thank you. I was one of those small
business owners, and when I had started this business, we were
under the guidelines of a grandfathered product, and if I would
have known today what I had known back then, I would not have
started this business. We went on and created through our
employees a great organization with nearly 1,000 employees but
we are marketing, distributing and selling an unapproved drug,
and so you are asking to invest in that and then the
regulations if we were forced to go under a strict
pharmaceutical standard would be too expensive for the small
companies to follow.
Mr. Pitts. My time is expired. The Chair recognizes the
ranking member for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to ask Dr. Allen a question and then I wanted to
ask Dr. Powers a question. Let me start with Dr. Allen. I think
we all agree that FDA needs to be able to be flexible in
determining approval requirements and we have heard from Dr.
Woodcock and your testimony, there is ample evidence that FDA
does in fact use its authority in a flexible manner, and that
has enabled FDA to get important drugs through the regulatory
process in a timely manner and some circumstances based on
quite limited data. That being said, I recognize there can be
advantages to clarifying and improving some of FDA's
authorities to facilitate its use of Accelerated Approval
pathways, and I think the pathway you propose for breakthrough
therapies deserves serious consideration as does the pathway
put forward in the FAST Act by Representatives Stearns and
Towns and the Special Population Limited Use pathway proposed
by IDSA in its submitted testimony.
My main concern, Dr. Allen, is about any proposal to help
speed new therapies to market is that it doesn't lower the
safety or effectiveness standards by which FDA approves new
medicines. Now, I know you mentioned that you don't want to--I
think you actually said in your testimony ``I don't want to
lower the safety or effectiveness standards.'' But I just
wanted you to basically expand on that a little. Do you agree
that whatever improvements we make--well, you said that you
don't think they should lower the safety and effectiveness
standards but if you would spend a little time just giving me
some more information on that.
Mr. Allen. Well, thank you for the question. First of all,
I absolutely agree that the current standards of safety and
efficacy that have been in place for decades need to continue
to be upheld, first and foremost. I think the difference in
what we are proposing here through the idea of a breakthrough
designation, it is important to distinguish that Accelerated
Approval is an approval mechanism where the breakthrough is a
designation or a process-oriented question, and what we are
seeing, and I am most familiar with oncology, of course, is
that there are new drugs being developed that are highly
targeted and being used in select populations where they
achieve the greatest benefit and the lowest amount of toxicity,
and in those cases, the traditional development plan of a phase
I followed by a phase II followed by a phase III trial may not
always be appropriate, and there may be ways to expedite that,
and we have worked with several expert groups including the
National Cancer Institute, the FDA, the Brookings Institute and
others to look at those strategies, and while it was mentioned
that there may not need to be new law, I think that the 1.5
million Americans that will hear the words ``you have cancer''
this year would appreciate looking at all policies that will
help expedite promising new therapies to them quickly.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you.
Now, Dr. Powers, one of the things you alluded to is the
issue of making sure the use of antibiotics is targeted to
infections for which they are actually useful and making sure
that the patients actually have those infections. One feature
currently included in the GAIN Act is the availability of 6
months of additional exclusivity for an antibiotic if its
manufacturer develops a companion diagnostic test to use with a
new antibiotic. I understand that in order to really accomplish
the goal of directing new antibiotics to the right patients, a
test would have to help identify where in the body an infection
is, what kind of bacteria is causing it, and should suggest or
ensure that the antibiotic in question is an appropriate
treatment for the infection. Did I get that right? Can you tell
me more about whether you think it is possible to develop tests
that accomplish this and how to make sure that we are not
giving additional incentives for tests that may not help us
conserve precious antibiotics?
Mr. Powers. That is correct, and I think it gets back to
the issue of disease versus just harboring an organism in your
body. So if we were to develop diagnostics that merely tell you
that you have an organism on your nose, that wouldn't help us
if we then treat all those people when that treatment wouldn't
help. On the other hand, if we specifically develop diagnostics
to show that people have a disease, that would be more helpful,
and through the current 510(k) process that FDA utilizes for
medical devices, you don't necessarily need to show anything
other than you can detect an organism. So we would need to go
beyond that and actually have helpful information, not only for
clinical trials so we can enroll the right people but also
those could be useful in practice as to who to direct
antibiotics to and who not to treat.
Mr. Pallone. But you think it is possible to develop tests
that accomplish this, right?
Mr. Powers. I think the technology is there, and I think
that is why it is helpful to develop incentives that would help
people to do this.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, if I could ask--I know we gave this to you a
little while ago, ask unanimous consent to include in the
record the statement of the Infectious Diseases Society of
America?
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.073

Mr. Pitts. I thank the gentleman and recognize the
gentleman from Georgia, Dr. Gingrey, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I am going to start
out with Dr. Eisenstein. I almost said Dr. Einstein after
reading his resume, and I am most impressed with that.
Dr. Powers testified that almost half of antibiotics
approved since 1980 have disappeared from the market, either
because of safety and efficacy issues or because of poor sales
because the drug did not address public health needs. This is a
question. Do you agree with Dr. Powers that current FDA
oversight of antibiotics and the reality that market forces
such as poor sales will help ensure generally that only those
drugs that provide an unmet need will ultimately find their way
to the market, or most importantly, be financial wins for the
drug companies? Is that enough?
Mr. Eisenstein. Well, I agree that for a drug to be
successful needs to demonstrate utility with patients. What the
FDA process does is provide evidence of efficacy and safety. It
doesn't translate necessarily to effectiveness, which is what
happens in the broad population. That said, with the enormity
of medical need that we presently have with the enumerated
organisms plus others that I can talk about if you like, there
is clearly a medical need and there is clearly a market failure
in terms of being able to provide the appropriate incentives
for companies to be able to make the investments in
antimicrobials, and it appears that all of my colleagues on
this committee are in complete agreement with that notion. That
is again why I feel the GAIN Act as presently designated does
provide exactly that sort of assistance.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, I thank you for that, and there was one
part of Dr. Powers' testimony, and maybe he will have time, Mr.
Chairman, to respond to this as well, but I want to stay with
Dr. Eisenstein for just a second. In regard to your comments in
your testimony about the GAIN Act, the fact that we have been
working on it for a number of years, it has wide bipartisan
support, especially here on the Health Subcommittee of Energy
and Commerce and listing these pathogens, these known
pathogens, and I reference that in my opening remarks, whether
it is MRSA or whether it is some Gram-negative--we talked about
the Iraqibacter problem with the troops returning from
Operation Iraqi Freedom and other conflicts. It is important, I
think, and I think you pointed it out, that these are known
pathogens.
Now, Dr. Powers is suggesting that nobody comes in and says
oh, this Klebsiella is killing me or I can't stand this
Iraqibacter--you know, they say well, I am coughing and I think
I may have pneumonia or I have got this horrible skin infection
and my skin is sloughing off--to make a case for I guess some
change to this carefully worked on piece of legislation, the
GAIN Act, and to me, if I could make an analogy in the criminal
justice system to say that if you have got a known thief out
there that you don't make every effort to apprehend him or her,
but rather you take all your law enforcement and your security
measure and you pick two or three banks in the local
neighborhood to protect because those are the areas where he
might strike next. I don't know if that is a great analogy but
I hope everybody understands the point I am trying to make.
What say you about that? And then I will go to Dr. Powers and
let him comment on that.
Mr. Eisenstein. It is absolutely true what Dr. Powers says,
that bugs by themselves don't mean that one has disease. If I
were to look around the room here, that may be, what, 50 or 80
folks in the room, probably 20 of us have staph aureus and
maybe 30 of us have staph aureus in our noses right now, and
that about a third of the people that walk in this room have
staph in their noses all the time, and the two-thirds left,
about half of those have staph that come and go at various
times, and we are seeing increasing numbers of those staph
being MRSA staph. So perhaps 10 of us are walking around with
MRSA staph in our noses right now, and yet, as an infectious
disease physician, I wouldn't think about treating any of us
for any of that. One has to have a condition, a disease, that
says I am an infection causing a problem for this patient that
goes along with certain manifestations. If it is pneumonia, the
patient will have cough, will have shortness of breath, will
have chest pain, will have fever. There are a constellation of
methods that one can detect that. You are a physician as well.
You understand that one makes the diagnosis based on what the
patient shows, what the patient is saying, what your own
examination of the patient shows.
That said, if the patient appears to have a pneumonia and
you are able to recover a pure culture of staph aureus from the
expectorated sputum, you know that the patient is suffering
from staphylococcal pneumonia, and every hour that goes by that
you don't treat that patient, the likelihood of the patient
dying goes up significantly, and if we don't get drugs on board
fast enough, we may lose 25 to 30 percent of even relatively
healthy individuals.
Mr. Gingrey. To put it in really simple terms, and I know I
am beyond my time, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it, I will yield
back, but it is like closing the barn door after the horse is
long gone, so I thank you very much for that response.
Dr. Powers, I apologize. I didn't have time to go you.
Mr. Pitts. Dr. Powers, if you would like to respond?
Mr. Powers. Sure, I would. I mean, I understand what you
are saying. To use your thief analogy would be sort of like
saying--and first I want to say, I think everyone is very
appreciative about GAIN because we absolutely need to do
something about this, and I think the question that I tried to
bring up in my testimony is, can we focus the bill so we make
sure that we do what we think we want to do without causing
more harm. So I guess the concern is that, you know, if you see
a bank robber and he is wearing a blue coat and the police say
we are going to go out and arrest everybody who is wearing a
blue coat, and so the thing that Dr. Eisenstein brought up is,
these same organisms can cause less-serious disease and they
can also cause more-serious disease.
And Dr. Gingrey, all the diseases listed when you spoke
earlier to Dr. Woodcock, they are all serious ones, but FDA
actually has approved 64 new drug applications for these same
kinds of organisms for non-serious, non-life-threatening
diseases since 1980. So that is why I think the history shows,
and also those are the more profitable areas to go because
those less-severe infections are more common in patients. So I
think that is the issue of trying to focus it to--we are all
talking about serious and life-threatening diseases here. The
question is if that is what we are talking about, could we
actually focus the bill to that.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Waxman for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Powers, let me pursue that issue with you. The GAIN Act
seeks to create incentives that would prompt drug companies to
develop and market new antibiotics. Specifically, it would give
5 years additional exclusivity if a company gets a new
antibiotic approved. If we are talking about giving such a
generous reward to companies, I think we need to ensure that
two things are in place at a minimum. First, we need to make
sure that we are only providing exclusivity for the kinds of
drugs that will truly benefit the public health. Only
antibiotics to treat dangerous infections for which we do not
already have effective treatment should be covered in my
opinion.
As currently written, the bill would provide exclusivity
for drugs if they are targeted to treat specified bacteria.
Some including you have expressed concern that this kind of
model is both inappropriate and unusual for the FDA, and have
instead suggested that we look at targeting drugs that treat
specific infections instead of just bacterial species. More
significantly, some believe that GAIN should be limited to new
antibiotics for treating serious infections for which there is
an unmet medical need. Can you explain a bit more about why
focusing on specific infections is appropriate and why we
should reserve incentives for drugs that treat serious
infections with unmet medical need?
Mr. Powers. Again, I think the issue is that antibiotics
can be used to treat a wide array of infections caused by the
same exact organism, and I can give an example of when I worked
at FDA, several companies came in asking for indications for
pneumonia that was caused by multi-drug-resistant organisms.
Now, that was completely appropriate. At the same time, they
asked for approval for multi-drug-resistant organisms for sinus
infections and ear infections in kids and other things that
predominantly get better on their own, sometimes even without
antibiotics. So the history of what has happened before shows
that--and in a sense, you can't blame a company for asking. FDA
didn't grant those, though, because they applied the same exact
standard that we are talking about today. It is not clear
whether resistance in the test tube has much of an impact on
patient outcomes in a disease where people will get better
anyway. So it seems to make sense to focus on the areas of
where, when you have a resistant disease, that is what is going
to kill you.
The other thing is that this sort of comports with
everything that FDA has ever done in the past related to
providing incentives. Priority Review, Accelerated Approval
that we are talking about today, and Fast Track designation as
well as subpart E approvals all are based on serious and life-
threatening diseases, unmet medical needs and added benefit
above available therapies. So it fits in with the regulatory
paradigm already, which of course would make it easier to
implement as well.
Mr. Waxman. Well, the second thing I think needs to be in
place is a robust stewardship program. We need to make sure
that any antibiotics that are approved under this kind of new
system are protected once they are on the market. We have seen
far too many antibiotics lose their effectiveness because the
bugs they seek to treat become resistant, and that is a problem
caused in large part by overuse of these drugs. So we need to
make sure that doesn't happen with these new antibiotics that
we have all invested so much in, after all. When extended
exclusivity is granted, we all pay higher drugs for a longer
period of time. Do you agree with that concept?
Mr. Powers. I think that is absolutely key, and they have
to go hand in hand. To pass something about giving incentives
to develop new drugs now hoping that we will approve something
about stewardship later probably doesn't make a whole lot of
sense. These really need to be linked to each other because
developing new drugs without the ability to use them in the
appropriate places they need to be used is really a dangerous
thing. That is kind of how we got to where we are today.
Mr. Waxman. Can you elaborate more on what ideas you have
about stewardship?
Mr. Powers. I think that there is--I put a couple in my
testimony in terms of how I think that allowing FDA to have the
authority to designate where drugs should be used appropriately
is a big step. In the past, FDA has had the authority to
restrict drugs where they weren't safe and effective. Here we
would be saying well, maybe these drugs could be used in less
life-threatening diseases but we really think they ought to be
reserved for these specific serious diseases. That would be
novel. So I think giving FDA the authority to do that would be
really important.
The other thing is, having been on the Interagency Task
Force myself, I know somebody said to me once, you know, it is
different when it is your 25th job at the bottom of your list
of things to do versus you come into work and every day that is
exactly what you have to focus on. So I think developing an
HHS-level internal group that consists of agencies that address
this problem might highlight the issues associated with
antibiotic resistance and allow people to spend their time
focusing on it.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognize the
gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Lance, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to place in the
record letters of support for the Medical Gas Safety Act from
the Compressed Gas Association and three manufacturers: Air
Products, AirGas and Tri-Gas.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.080

Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To Mr. Walsh, can you give the committee a couple examples
of why FDA's current regulations are not a good fit for medical
gases?
Mr. Walsh. Sure. I think first of all, I would like to--
because I don't think I testified for it, we do feel very
fortunate that we have the FDA.
Mr. Lance. Absolutely, and we are working well with the FDA
and it is an excellent agency.
Mr. Walsh. We have existed before the FDA came along and
then the two of us have been working down this precarious path
of discretionary enforcement and we are fortunate that we share
the same principles that we want to send our employees home
safe at night and we want our patients to be safe, so I think
that is critical to say to say that we have been keeping it
together because we are fortunate that the CGA and the FDA work
so closely together.
Having said that, the medical gases fall under a
pharmaceutical standard yet our manufacturing processes are
different, our containers that hold the drugs are different,
and the characteristics of our drugs are different. From a
manufacturing standpoint, a typical pharmaceutical company may
have one plant that distributes their product nationally or
perhaps even globally. We have 4,500 plants in the United
States producing and selling oxygen, which occurs in a very
tight radius of about 100 miles. And in terms of our
containers, many of you probably have loved ones that you have
seen on oxygen. They pull around a cylinder, which is about
2,000 psig under pressure. After it is empty, we pick it up,
bring it back to our location and refill it. If the label, if
you can still see the label and it is still in good working
condition, it stays on there, or in large cases, you might see
it at a hospital, a large cryogenic container where as it gets
low, we come to fill it. You compare that to a typical disposal
pill box that gets thrown away. And then the characteristics,
most of our medical gases are on the periodic table. They never
expire, which is very different from pharmaceuticals.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, and what would the effect, in your
opinion, be on patients if the FDA were to require an NDA, a
New Drug Application, for medical gases?
Mr. Walsh. I think Dr. Woodcock said it very well today in
her goals. It is having a safe, effective and available
product, and what gets me particularly concerned is the
available if we have to go through an NDA process. An NDA is a
long process to go through. We have 2 million patients alone on
oxygen in the homes, not to mention in hospitals and doctor
offices. So it could really have an impact on supply to these
existing patients that we are supplying. And to what safety
benefit? Our products have been used--oxygen we used as an
example has been used for over 100 years. You could Google it
and find physicians talking about oxygen therapy in the 1850s.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. Google it now, not 100 years ago.
Mr. Walsh. Google it now. Do not Google 100 years.
Mr. Lance. Do you see some problems in particular of the
current system for small business medical gas manufacturers?
Mr. Walsh. I do, and I said before, I started from a small
business, and if would have known--I was very young when I
started the business, but if I would have known then what I
know now, I would not have started that business because you
are investing in something that is not approved. It is not
under the approved drug status. Plus, if the FDA chose to
enforce us to a strict pharmaceutical standard, many of the
small companies would get out of the medical gas business.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. I look forward to working with Dr.
Woodcock on this issue and with those on the panel, and with
that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Pitts. Do you have a follow-up?
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, I do, and thank you for
yielding. First I would like to ask unanimous consent to submit
a letter, a statement from the California HealthCare Institute
in support of H.R. 2182, the GAIN Act. Do I have unanimous
consent to submit that for the record, Mr. Chairman? Mr.
Chairman, I thank you for that, and I know the ranking member
would like to look at it, and that is appropriate. I did want
to ask one follow-up question if you will allow.
This issue of stewardship, and again, I will go back to Dr.
Eisenstein. This issue of stewardship, the judicious use of
antibiotics, and this has come up a few times in testimony, and
for members of the panel today and from the committee members,
in fact, the ranking member of the committee. So I want to ask
you this: Dr. Eisenstein, can we solve global resistance
through a Congressionally mandated stewardship program? And I
think Dr. Powers referred to this as well. Are other forms like
maybe the World Health Organization better suited to tackle
this issue of antibiotic resistance from overuse, over-
prescribing, etc.?
Mr. Eisenstein. That is an excellent point. The problem
with drug-resistant organisms, Dr. Gingrey, as you know, is
they know no boundary. So when the New Delhi beta beta-metallo
proteinase was discovered in strains of Klebsiella and other
Gram-negatives in India, within 6 to 12 months we saw patients
infected in the United States, in Canada, in the United
Kingdom, etc. I was at a meeting recently where an individual
went to an unnamed southeastern country in Asia and showed five
different pharmacies, one after another, where any individual
could go into any one of those stores and choose any antibiotic
essentially that they wanted. This is a much broader problem,
and clearly, stewardship must be part of the solution. I would
submit, though, that that is not the place for the GAIN Act.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, I thank you for that, and very quickly,
Mr. Chairman, I will go to Dr. Powers now.
Dr. Powers, you had sort of suggested just a few minutes
ago that maybe there ought to be some Federal mandate in regard
to best practices and how infectious disease specialists such
as yourself should prescribe antibiotics in the most judicious
and efficacious manner. It would seem to me that maybe that
should come from the American Academy of Infectious Disease
Subspecialists and their best practices paradigm, but you seem
to think, if I understand your testimony correctly, that maybe
the Federal Government should do that. Would you suggest that
that would be within the auspices of the FDA or maybe from some
other government bureaucracy such as IPAB?
Mr. Powers. I don't think they are mutually exclusive. To
answer the question you asked to Dr. Eisenstein, resistance is
both global and local, and that is that there have been
countries where their antibiotic usage has decreased, where
they have been able to decrease local resistance. That doesn't
mean that we shouldn't have a global approach. I think what I
was trying to suggest was that FDA should have the authority to
be able to designate drugs for special uses. That doesn't mean
they are regulating the practice of medicine or telling doctors
how to use it, but having worked at FDA, I certainly understand
the importance of giving doctors the information they need to
be able to practice appropriately. That is more of what I was
suggesting, not that FDA should designate who can use what. And
I think that means working with those other outside
organizations and developing stewardship programs at hospitals.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you, Dr. Powers.
And Dr. Eisenstein wanted to make another comment. Is that
OK, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Pitts. Yes.
Mr. Eisenstein. Yes, just to continue on two points that I
would like to make, or actually three points. One of them, in
terms of the FDA being able to approve a drug because it
happens to get a very bad organism, you still have to--the
manufacturer still has to go through normal procedures to
demonstrate efficacy, which means that the drug is better than
placebo and that the agency has got to designate it, therefore
approved on that basis. That is point number one.
Point number two, the practice of medicine, as you know as
a former practicing physician, has changed dramatically over 40
years. I graduated from medical school 40 years ago, and
antibiotics were used essentially willy-nilly at that time. In
the last 10, 15 years, the stewardship that we see already in
place in hospitals is so exact, we could not get our own
antibiotic on formularies anywhere in this country without it
being severely restricted so that only infectious disease
experts were able to give the approval for the use of that
drug, and in part, because of that, we believe Cubicin, the
drug that we now have had approved for 8 \1/2\ years, still has
a 99.9 percent susceptibility rate against MRSA despite 8 \1/2\
years on the market. So we can use drugs appropriately and they
have been used appropriately.
And lastly, I would just like to wholeheartedly agree with
the Society of Infectious Disease Pharmacists who noted that
inclusion of stewardship language in the GAIN Act may broaden
the scope of the act and take the focus away from the
appropriate incentives that we are talking about. If you try to
put too much in the way of disincentives back in this bill, you
are actually creating the same problem that we are trying to
solve.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
The unanimous consent request of Dr. Gingrey with the
letters is approved.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.082

Mr. Pitts. The Chair recognizes the ranking member for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just wanted to ask
Mr. Walsh, you heard Dr. Woodcock, who is still here, on the
first panel say that FDA is concerned with the concept of
creating an entirely new regulatory structure for medical
gases, and she said she would be willing to meet with you
personally to discuss whether there are other ways to addressed
the Compressed Gas Association's concern short of legislation.
So I am trying to get you together here, you see? Would you be
willing to meet with Dr. Woodcock to see if there is a
different solution here?
Mr. Walsh. We definitely have an interest in working
directly with Dr. Woodcock and her staff to come up with the
actual legislation that can give us the guidelines and
regulations specific for medical gases.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Because I think it sounds like you have
some valid concerns but I just hope the FDA can be responsive
and find a way to resolve these issues without actually having
to pass legislation. That is my hope, so we will see if you can
get together. It would be helpful.
Mr. Walsh. I do think legislation is important. We have
been operating under the guidelines for many, many years, and
so I think it is important that we have something very strict
and by law that we can operate off of.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Well, let us see what develops out
of the meeting in any case. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and I would like
unanimous consent to enter into the record statements from the
National Association of Chain Drugstores, and Pharmaceutical
Research and Manufacturers of America. I think you have seen
this. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.092

Mr. Pitts. That concludes panel two. Thank you very much
for your testimony, and we appreciate your patience.
We will now go to panel three, and I would like to call
them to the witness table, and I would like to thank all of you
for agreeing to testifying before the subcommittee today, and I
will quickly introduce our final panel.
First of all, Mr. Shawn Brown is the Vice President of
State Government Affairs at the Generic Pharmaceutical
Association. Then we have Ms. Elizabeth Gallenagh, who is the
Vice President of Government Affairs and General Counsel for
the Healthcare Distribution Management Association. And Mr. Tim
Davis, who is the Owner of the Beaver Health Mart Pharmacy and
representing the National Community Pharmacists Association.
And Mr. Allan Coukell, the Director of Medical Programs at the
Pew Health Group.
Again, we thank all of you for coming. We have your
prepared statements. Mr. Brown, we will begin with you. You are
recognized for 5 minutes to summarize your testimony.

STATEMENTS OF SHAWN M. BROWN, VICE PRESIDENT, STATE GOVERNMENT
AFFAIRS, GENERIC PHARMACEUTICAL ASSOCIATION; ELIZABETH A.
GALLENAGH, VICE PRESIDENT, GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS, AND GENERAL
COUNSEL, HEALTHCARE DISTRIBUTION MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION;
TIMOTHY DAVIS, OWNER, BEAVER HEALTH MART PHARMACY, ON BEHALF OF
NATIONAL COMMUNITY PHARMACISTS ASSOCIATION; AND ALLAN COUKELL,
DIRECTOR, MEDICAL PROGRAMS, PEW HEALTH GROUP, THE PEW
CHARITABLE TRUSTS

STATEMENT OF SHAWN M. BROWN

Mr. Brown. Good morning, Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member
Pallone and members of the House Energy and Commerce
Subcommittee on Health. Thank you for inviting me to testify
before the subcommittee on the important topic of securing our
Nation's pharmaceutical supply chain.
I am Shawn Brown, Vice President of State Affairs at the
Generic Pharmaceutical Association. GPhA represents the
manufacturers and distributors of finished does generic
pharmaceuticals and suppliers of other goods and services to
the generic industry. We appreciate the efforts of members of
this committee particularly Congressmen Matheson and Bilbray,
to address this important issue and we share their goal of
ensuring the security of our supply chain.
For many years, GPhA had worked closely with multiple
stakeholders across the supply chain to ensure U.S. consumers
benefit from the safest and most secure prescription drug
supply in the world. Both industry and FDA are exceptionally
vigilant against the distribution and sale of counterfeit and
adulterated medicines.
GPhA believes the problem of counterfeit medicines raises a
significant public health concern that must be addressed on a
range of levels from local to global and throughout the drug
supply chain. Our commitment to this issue is further evidence
by the Generic Drug User Fee Act, which recognizes that while
providing earlier access to effective medicines is critical,
FDA's central mission is ensuring drug safety. It is worth
noting that generic drugs are rarely, if ever, targeted by
counterfeiters. The primary focus of counterfeiters is on more
profitable and expensive brand name products. GPhA is not aware
of a single instance of a counterfeit generic product occurring
within the normal chain of distribution in the United States.
Nevertheless, the generic industry has been a leader in
supporting numerous anti-counterfeiting efforts and developing
methods to further protect the integrity of the pharmaceutical
supply chain. As these efforts move forward, however, it is
vital to ensure that any system is practical, focused and
uniform across the country. The uniform system, founded on
reliable technology and business practices, would avoid
creating cost barriers to the distribution of safe and
effective medicines.
For example, some anti-counterfeiting efforts such as the
California model taking effect in 2015 would require
implementation of full unit-level track and trace capabilities
where theoretically the entire distribution history and
location of every unit in the supply chain can be determined at
any time. GPhA believes that adoption of the California model
or a similar one would raise the cost of medicine by billions
of dollars over time, would be prone to error, and would have
at best similar results to the less expensive, more efficient
model that we support.
With billions of units moving quickly and efficiently
through the supply chain to fill more than 4 billion
prescriptions per year, the magnitude and complexity of such a
system is not technically feasible. The California law does
include language providing for preemption of its requirements
in the event that Federal legislation is enacted. With
California's initial effectiveness date fast approaching, GPhA
has helped lead an effort to develop a more efficient model.
In partnership with stakeholders from every area of the
pharmaceutical supply chain, the Pharmaceutical Distribution
Security Alliance, or PDSA, has developed a consensus
technological model that we believe will deliver greater
patient safety and help to achieve FDA's stated goals for a
supply chain security system.
The PDSA is a multi-stakeholder initiative whose membership
spans the U.S. pharmaceutical distribution system including
manufacturers, wholesale distributors, third-party logistics
providers, and pharmacies. As a member of the PDSA, GPhA
strongly supports the alliance's proposed electronic
traceability system, known as the Pharmaceutical Traceability
Enhancement code, or RxTEC. This system would increase patient
access to safe medicines while improving the security of our
country's drug distribution system. In addition, the RxTEC
system would aid State and Federal agencies in tracing the
distribution history of suspect products, replace the
inconsistent and inefficient patchwork of State laws, increased
efficiency throughout the drug distribution system, and
establish foundational technology for future enhancements.
The PDSA model is based on technological solutions that are
achievable and scaleable, and unlike a full track and trace
system, which is not technically feasible in the near term, the
RxTEC system would provide immediate measures to increase
supply chain security. The legislation would provide regulators
with new authorities to establish new penalties to address
counterfeit products, cargo theft and illegal online drug
sellers and create new rules regarding e-labeling that will
increase patient safety. It would also improve the efficiency
and effectiveness of drug recalls and returns, and enable
health care providers to leverage technology for recordkeeping
purposes. We urge the inclusion of the proposal in the user fee
package to accomplish these goals.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, GPhA and the industry share
the concerns of the committee with regard to maintaining the
security of our drug supply and preventing the entry of
counterfeit, diverted, stolen or other substandard medicines.
The development of a uniform national system is needed to give
regulatory authorities another tool for enforcement, make it
more difficult for criminals to breach the supply chain, and
enhance the ability of the supply chain to respond quickly when
a breach has occurred. We believe the RxTEC model proposed by
the PDSA achieves all of these goals
Thank you, and I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brown follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.104

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Ms. Gallenagh, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ELIZABETH A. GALLENAGH

Ms. Gallenagh. Good afternoon, Chairman Pitts, Ranking
Member Pallone and members of the Subcommittee on Health, I am
Liz Gallenagh, Vice President of Government Affairs and General
Counsel at HDMA. Thank you for the opportunity to inform the
subcommittee today regarding this critically important issue of
prescription drug pedigree, traceability and pharmaceutical
supply chain safety. I would also like to thank Congressmen
Bilbray and Matheson for their bipartisan leadership in this
area.
The pharmaceutical distribution industry's primary mission
is to operate the safest, most secure and efficient supply
chain in the world. As part of this mission, HDMA's members
work to eliminate counterfeit and diverted medicines by
capitalizing on the technological innovation and constant
improvements in efficiency that are the foundation of our
industry.
Today, I am here to express HDMA's strong support for a
national uniform approach to pedigree and the traceability of
medicines throughout the supply chain. HDMA believes that
reform should have tighter wholesaler licensing standards and a
new Federal ceiling for pedigree requirements to improve safety
and uniformity across the country while establishing targets
and parameters for longer-term electronic traceability
solutions.
In addition to fundamentally addressing counterfeit and
diverted medicines, we also believe that Federal pedigree may
have some potential as a useful tool in discouraging gray-
market activity associated with drug products in short supply.
After many years of debate, 2012 is the best window of
opportunity to enact national pedigree legislation. This is in
large part due to broad consensus among supply chain partners
as well as the possibility of attaching national pedigree and
traceability provisions to PDUFA reauthorization.
Basic guidelines for pedigree were set forth nearly 25
years ago with the enactment of the Federal PDMA. Since that
time, activity at the State level has varied with some enacting
complex electronic pedigree laws and other never going further
than the original 1988 guidelines. Based on our experience, the
complexities of dealing with multiple approaches in the States
will only get worse if we fail to solve this problem now at the
national level.
Since Florida's first foray in raising pedigree and
licensure requirements in 2003, we have seen dramatic variation
across the country in both legislation activity and regulatory
interpretation. This has occurred despite our attempts to work
in every State along with our fellow stakeholders and
interested legislators to achieve more uniformity. Today, for
example, 29 States have acted beyond the Federal PDMA
standards. For instance, the States of California and Florida
are thought to be the most stringent and leaders in this area.
However, they take completely different viewpoints with Florida
considered to the most stringent today and California thought
to be the most complex in the future in 2015 when their law is
implemented.
This patchwork not only creates operational challenges but
also creates openings for bad actors to shop for more lenient
States rules, openings that could mean the difference between a
fake or diverted medicine being dispensed or administered to an
innocent patient in need of treatment. Because of this State-
by-State variation, we believe that pedigree and traceability
should be under the purview of Congress and the FDA.
HDMA is currently a part of an industry alliance, a
consortium of other industry partners called the PDSA. PDSA's
consensus model calls for the following: national requirements
for wholesaler licensing standards and for direct purchase and
standard pedigree upon the effective date of the legislation;
manufacturer serialization at the unit and case levels,
enabling unique identification of prescription drug products
for the first time; the development of electronic systems to
facilitate traceability and transaction data exchange to
provide additional efficiency and safety benefits within the
supply chain; appropriate transition time and development
phases for the migration to traceability for each segment of
the supply chain. Further, Federal legislation must also
preserve the critically important role of the States, for
instance, in the area of wholesaler licensure and enforcement.
There is no single element that will protect the supply chain
from every threat but rather a comprehensive solution should
incorporate each of these elements.
We urge the subcommittee to consider this important issue
for inclusion in PDUFA legislation. Now is the time for
Congress to act to bring cohesion and consistency to our
national drug supply chain. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gallenagh follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.113

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
Dr. Davis, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TIMOTHY DAVIS

Mr. Davis. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for conducting this
hearing and providing me an opportunity to share my views and
my perspective as an independent pharmacist on the issue of
securing the pharmaceutical supply chain.
My name is Tim Davis of Beaver County, Pennsylvania, and I
own the Beaver Health Mart Pharmacy in that town and county. I
have been a practicing pharmacist for 12 years, and I am here
today representing the National Community Pharmacists
Association. It is an association of over 23,000 independent
pharmacists, and we are the pharmacists that represent over 40
percent of the prescriptions dispensed in this country.
It is my belief that the pharmaceutical supply chain in the
United States is largely safe and secure. I believe that today
most practicing pharmacists have a heightened awareness of the
possibility of counterfeit or diverted drugs and therefore
recognize the critical importance of purchasing medications
only from trusted wholesalers or trading partners. In addition,
most pharmacists today make a concerted effort to carefully
examine and make note of drug packaging and the appearance of
the drug itself to make sure that there are no suspicious
anomalies.
It has been my observation that certain types of
prescription medications tend to be the target of
counterfeiters. High-dollar medications that can be easily
produced and readily sold generally enable counterfeiters to
create an attractive profit margin. Presently, generics are not
typically a target for this type of activity. Some drugs that I
have seen are particularly susceptible and are lifestyle drugs
such as Viagra, as well as a number of very expensive
injectable medications, and most recently, Avastin. These are
typically not carried in community pharmacies but rather
dispensed through consolidated specialty pharmacies or directly
through physicians.
In my career, I have seen an example of counterfeiting at
the local level. We received manufacturer information that a
particular drug had entered the drug supply chain in
counterfeit form, and the manufacturer instructed us on how to
recognize the genuine product versus the fake. Upon receipt of
a daily shipment in the morning from our wholesale distributor,
we checked and found that the item we received was indeed one
of the counterfeit products. We immediately contacted and
discussed the situation with the wholesaler. Our answer was to
stop doing business with them due to lack of believable
responses.
That being said, NCPA does believe that there are a number
of different approaches or tactics that could be employed to
provide further confirmation of integrity. These strategies
could include national uniform Federal licensure standards for
wholesale distributors, increased oversight or security
measures to deter pharmaceutical cargo theft and illegitimate
online drug sellers, and lot-level form of tracking for
prescription drugs to assist the FDA or State authorities in
the event of recall or to investigate suspect product.
Raising the standards for wholesaler licensure in a uniform
fashion would provide the community pharmacist at any location
in the United States with an additional layer of confidence in
the integrity of the medications purchased from such companies.
Therefore, NCPA recommends that the U.S. government set
national uniform and Federal licensure standards for wholesale
distributors. At the present time, these distributors are
licensed at the individual State level, which has resulted in a
patchwork of requirements of varying rigor.
There are a number of other approaches that could also
further secure the pharmaceutical supply chain. S. 1002, the
SAFE DOSES Act, would expand the penalties for pharmaceutical
cargo theft, and in addition, H.R. 4095, the Online Pharmacy
Safety Act, would create a publicly available white list of
legitimate Internet pharmacies. This list would help to
eliminate rogue Internet pharmacies that exist and often prey
on consumers looking for bargain-priced medications.
NCPA is a member of the Pharmaceutical Distribution
Security Alliance, a working group comprised of representatives
from all sectors of the pharmaceutical supply chain. It has
been collaborating on a comprehensive proposal to address
supply chain security issues. The RxTEC Act is currently in
draft form. However, it includes language that would create the
registry of legitimate online pharmacy Web sites, increase the
penalties for counterfeiters as well as provide for tracking of
prescription medications at the lot level.
The actual tracking of prescription drugs through the
supply chain is a topic that has been discussed for a number of
years, and independent community pharmacists have had
significant concerns in the past about the cost of the
hardware, software and employment burdens placed upon the
association. This is a complex issue both in terms of the
technologies necessary to implement it as well as the fact that
each of the sectors involved in the supply chain operate under
very different business models and very greatly in terms of
financial resources and technological sophistication. Community
pharmacies are largely small businesses. Any system that would
require a pharmacist to electronically scan each item would
create a burdensome and time-consuming exercise that would
further limit the amount of time that we have to provide
patient care and counseling or any other activities necessary
to keep that small business running.
The tracking system proposed under RxTEC Act is one that is
lot-based tracking, would require that the encoded information
on each unit be both machine and human readable, and would
allow for collaboration between all members of the supply
chain. The proposed system is one that could be built upon in
the future if it was determined that this course of action was
advisable but is one that would not impose an undue burden
either financially or as it relates to work flow upon
independent community pharmacists.
I have a greater degree of confidence in the United States
drug supply than I did just a few years ago, largely due to
heightened awareness of those in the supply chain and the
possibility of counterfeit or diverted medications being
discovered. That being said, community pharmacies take very
seriously our role in ensuring the safety of medications that
we personally dispense to our patients and we remain committed
to working with our colleagues in the supply chain, other
pharmacy organizations, wholesalers and manufacturers as well
as with State and Federal authorities to make any needed
improvements. Moving forward, it is essential that all
stakeholders make a concerted effort to keep the lines of
communication open so that consumers can continue to implicitly
trust the integrity of the medications that they depend on.
I thank you, and welcome any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Davis follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.118

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
Mr. Coukell for 5 minutes for a statement.

STATEMENT OF ALLAN COUKELL

Mr. Coukell. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone,
subcommittee members, thank you for the opportunity to present
testimony. Thank you for your work on this issue and especially
to Representatives Bilbray and Matheson for introducing a
bipartisan bill that would help protect Americans from
counterfeit and diverted drugs.
My name is Allan Coukell. I am a pharmacist and Director of
Medical Programs for the Pew Health Group of the Pew Charitable
Trusts.
The safety of the drug supply has been a long-term focus
for Pew. Last year we issued a major report, and one of the key
findings was that we currently have no national system to
detect or prevent counterfeits, and with close to 2,000
individual wholesalers and many more individual pharmacies and
actors, it provides multiple points of entry to our system.
Let me illustrate the risks with just a few examples of
diversion, theft and counterfeiting. First, the black market
for diversion and resale of drugs that have already been
dispensed to patients and paid for, often by Medicaid. Two
years ago, Federal officials in Florida brought down a ring
that illegally purchased $13 million worth of prescription
drugs, buying them from patients and then selling them to
pharmacies through a licensed wholesaler in Texas. Similar
schemes have been documented in other States.
Drug theft is another threat. In 2009, thieves stole a
tractor-trailer containing 129,000 vials of insulin. After
disappearing for several months, some of this temperature-
sensitive drug was later found on the shelves of chain
pharmacies in Texas, Georgia and Kentucky. In another case,
thieves cut through the roof of an Eli Lilly warehouse in
Connecticut using forklifts to load a truck with $75 million
worth of prescription drugs. The fate of those drugs isn't
known, but some experts believe that the thieves may be letting
the alarm die down before selling them back into the system.
And then finally, we have incidents of outright
counterfeits. In recent weeks, a counterfeit cancer drug,
Avastin, made its way reportedly from Egypt through multiple
European countries to a licensed U.S. pharmaceutical wholesaler
that had been supplying numerous clinics. In 2001, counterfeit
Serostim, a high-cost injectable for AIDS patients, was found
in at least seven States and passed through multiple
wholesalers. The manufacturer of that drug has since put in
place a secure distribution program with a unique serial number
assigned to each vial that must be verified by the dispensing
pharmacy.
Unlike for that drug, for most drugs there is no currently
no way to check whether they are authentic or counterfeit. Some
State laws exist. California is implementing a comprehensive
system under which manufacturers will put a unique serial
number on each unit, and wholesalers and pharmacies will check
to ensure that the drugs they buy and sell are authentic.
A strong national standard would be preferable to a
patchwork of State laws, but a national system has been under
discussion for years and won't happen without legislation.
Congress is now considering a compromise proposal developed
between various industry sectors, and Pew supports a number of
the elements of this proposal including strengthened standards
for wholesaler licensure, but the proposal falls short in a
couple of crucial aspects.
First, the key to improved security of drug distribution is
knowing who handles the drugs as they move from manufacturer
through a succession of wholesalers to the pharmacy or the
hospital and ultimately to the patient. The industry proposal
calls for tracking drugs at the lot level, but a lot, as we
heard already this morning, can contain numerous cases and many
thousands of individual bottles and each case or individual
unit can be sold separately, and tracking by lot doesn't allow
industry or regulators to ever know who bought and sold a given
drug.
Maintaining data about lots may provide an incremental
benefit over the status quo, but it would fail to catch unsafe
drugs in many scenarios. If part of a lot was stolen and
illicitly reintroduced into commerce, a pharmacist or a patient
would have no way to tell if the product on their shelf was
compromised. That same lot will be sitting on the shelves of
dozens or hundreds of pharmacies, but if individual units are
tracked, specific stolen bottles could be identified.
While the PDSA proposal would result in a unique serial
number being placed on each unit of sale, keeping track of the
drugs would be impossible unless the serial numbers can be
associated with the case in which they are shipped. Even if we
decide that we don't need unit-level tracing now, the PDSA
system proposed would make it difficult or impossible to track
drugs at the unit level in the future.
Next, under the proposed system, neither the pharmacy nor
any other party in the system would ever be required to verify
the authenticity of drugs. A criminal could sell a vial of
counterfeit drug with a fake serial number, and no one would
detect it because no one would be required to check it. Pew
supports required authentication of drug products by the
companies involved in distribution as outlined in H.R. 3026,
the Bilbray-Matheson bill.
Let me conclude by noting again that the impending
California law creates momentum for a single national standard.
Such a standard should product Americans today and provide the
flexibility of future refinements.
Thank you, and I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Coukell follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.125

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and thanks all
the witnesses, and we will begin questioning. I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes for that purpose.
Let me ask a question to all of you first. You can each
respond. We are all concerned about the safety of our drug
supply, and we want to ensure that diverted drugs and
counterfeit drugs do not reach our Nation's patients. However,
as we look at policies to help, we also have to think about the
cost to our Nation's small businesses. They are struggling
right now. We need to take them into account as we analyze
every policy idea.
The first question, how do we ensure the safety of our
prescription drugs in the most cost-effective way? And then
two, why is a national standard necessary? Mr. Brown?
Mr. Brown. I think I would say the PDSA model, we have got
a consensus throughout industry from chain drugstores,
independent pharmacies, secondary wholesalers, third-party
logistics providers, brand and generic manufacturers. We
believe this is a scaleable system and a feasible system that
we are proposing, and I think that this will help to achieve
all of FDA's stated goals, one of which being to prevent
introduction and to help identification of counterfeit
medicines. We are concerned about the cost as well, but the
system that we are proposing is exponentially less than the
system would be if we had to implement the California model,
which we don't think is technically feasible.
Mr. Pitts. Ms. Gallenagh?
Ms. Gallenagh. I would agree with Mr. Brown. We believe
that the best approach is something that is done at the
national level, and our members have told us that it would be
more cost-effective to operate the RxTEC proposal that PDSA has
put forth and that we have worked on rather than work toward
California and then deal with potentially New York or Illinois
or whatever State is next in this arena. We are already--as
wholesalers, we see firsthand the 50-State patchwork that you
hear so much about, and that really is a reality for our
members in terms of dealing with 50 different laws, and so
automatically we think that we get greater efficiencies and
cost benefits from going with the PDSA proposal.
Mr. Pitts. Dr. Davis?
Mr. Davis. The PDSA proposal also looks at the problem in a
multifaceted approach. The only place that rogue pharmacies can
get counterfeit or diverted medications is from rogue
wholesalers, so we need to look upstream. I think the PDSA
looks at creating national standards to help us feel that the
drug supply above us is intact. I also feel that it takes a
look at the rules and regulations set against counterfeiters to
prevent that sort of activity long before it gets to a pharmacy
level, and I think that the infrastructure built on the
serialization and lot numbers included in the RxTEC Act prepare
this for adaptation in the future. We need a system that is
going to adapt to the health care needs of the near future, not
necessarily the legislative needs that we foresee coming, and
this market is going to continue to change and the products
that we are going to experience are going to continue to
change, positioning us very well to scale effectively.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Coukell?
Mr. Coukell. Mr. Chairman, along with the compliance, or
the costs of compliance that my colleagues raise, I think the
other argument for a national system is that the companies
involved in drug distribution work across State lines, so in
the case of Avastin, it was a Tennessee-licensed wholesaler
that sold the drugs but they ended up in Illinois, Texas and
California, or at least those are the practices that have been
mentioned. So that argues for a national standard, and clearly
we have to do it in a way that has the least necessary cost
impacts. So it is important to say what are the goals of the
system, do we want to be able to identify counterfeit drugs
when they come in, and if so, what is the most effective way to
do that, and secondly, do we want to be able to track product
as it moves through the system and what is the most cost-
effective way to track the product at the level we want to be
tracking it at.
One of our concerns with the proposal is that companies are
going to make a capital investment to be able to serialize
their product, and we certainly recognize they are stepping
forward to do that, and I think the question we have to ask is,
if we think that eventually we want to get to a system where we
are tracking individual units and we are putting into place an
infrastructure now that is lot-level tracking, are we going to
be back here in 5 or 8 years when we have a crisis because have
counterfeit drugs on the shelves asking them to invest again in
a new system to track at the unit level or should we get it
right now.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Brown, can you speak what would the costs be
to manufacturers if the California approach were adopted?
Mr. Brown. Yes, I can give you an approximate estimate. If
we think about the number of packaging lines that serve the
consumers in the United States, it is about 3,000. I have heard
some estimates higher, some lower, and per packaging line, my
manufacturers tell me that it ranges between $500,000 and $1
million per packaging line. So at the highest, I would say it
is near $3 billion just to implement the camera infrastructure.
We are not talking about the data management costs or the costs
of the barcodes, the ongoing costs. We are just talking about
getting the infrastructure set up into the packaging lines.
Mr. Pitts. My time is expired. The Chair recognizes the
ranking member for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was going to ask actually each of the panelists this
question. In addition to the various provisions related to
development of the RxTEC system, the proposal from the
Pharmaceutical Distribution Security Alliance contains a number
of provisions related to Federal licensing of parties involved
in the manufacture and distribution of pharmaceuticals. I
understand these provisions are intended to create Federal
uniform for the regulation of these parties and could help
prevent bad actors from engaging in the drug supply chain. But
I would like to ask each of you if you support the provisions
requiring Federal licensure for manufacturers, distributors,
repackagers and third-party logistics providers, and if not,
what concerns they have. And I am just looking for a yes or no
at this point.
Mr. Brown. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. Ms. Gallenagh?
Ms. Gallenagh. We support the provisions that are contained
in the proposal, but if I could clarify, on the wholesaler
licensure piece, we support Federal standards and still retain
the issuances of licenses with the State.
Mr. Pallone. OK.
Mr. Pallone. Dr. Davis, do you agree with that?
Mr. Davis. We agree as well.
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Coukell?
Mr. Coukell. As do we.
Mr. Pallone. Now, let me ask Mr. Coukell, I understand that
from the patient safety perspective, the best system would be
one in which the pedigree system goes to the unit level--you
talk about this--in which the pharmacist verifies the pedigree
of all the units he receives for dispensing. I also understand
that the current industry proposal does not have serialization
information down at the unit level but it enables tracing back
only to the lot level. You stated that, or one of you did.
Meanwhile, that proposal does not require a pharmacist to
verify any pedigree information whatsoever before dispensing,
although it would facilitate traceback once the problem has
been identified. So it appears that the industry proposal does
not go as far as some would like and certainly not as far as
the California law appears to go. However, what many of us have
heard is that the California law is proving much more difficult
to implement than anticipated and that the industry plan can
serve as a building block towards reaching the goal that
California law sets out.
So my question, I will ask you first, Mr. Coukell, is, do
you agree with that, what I just said, or do you see the
industry proposal as a step that while containing many useful
items ultimately puts a roadblock in front of ever reaching
unit-level tracing and verification, and I will ask Ms.
Gallenagh if you would respond as well?
Mr. Coukell. Thank you for that question. If I could begin
with one point of clarification, under the industry proposal,
there would be a unique serial number on each vial. It just
wouldn't be tracked as it moved through the system. So
potentially, on a case-by-case basis, somebody could look that
up and check it. But what you don't have is at the point where
there is no suspicion that vial being checked and, you know,
these counterfeits are pretty good. You can't by the naked eye
in a lot of cases detect them and so there is no system here
where a flag is automatically thrown up.
So I think the key question in looking at how to move
forward is, what are the basic elements that we want now and
what are the basic elements that we are going to want within a
reasonable time frame, and does this system give us enough to
build on, and as I said already, we are a little concerned that
if we go with this system, then we may not be able to get where
we need to go in the future.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Ms. Gallenagh?
Ms. Gallenagh. Sure. Thank you, Congressman. I think a
couple of things in this area. One, I am to agree with Mr.
Coukell's explanation. There is an SNI or serial number
included in the RxTEC data, so the 2D barcode would include the
SNI information as well as lot and expiration. What we think is
that that would alone for the first time provide unique
identification of medicines and would be a very big step for
the industry. Today we don't have that at all, and we are
dealing with paper and electronics sometimes, always lot level
and no real standard in terms of what different States are
doing across the country. I think we also would think that
going with the PDSA proposal is not a roadblock but sticking
with the 50-State patchwork may be a roadblock to actually ever
getting to a true electronic system across the country. I think
that, you know, we need to take a broader perspective of this
issue and that patient safety really does belong in the purview
of Congress right now. Right now is probably the best
opportunity we have, and we do have industry consensus and that
is something that we have never achieved before, and so I think
that goes a long way, and I believe that my members, other
industry partners, once those things are in place that are put
forth in the PDSA proposal like unit-level serialization, I
think that building on the innovation that we have built on in
the past and the efficiencies that can be achieved as we learn
more about the technology, we may eventually find other uses
for the technology and it may go further than what we have
initially set out to do.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the vice chairman of the subcommittee, Dr. Burgess, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Davis, you were probably in the room earlier when Dr.
Woodcock was here and you heard our exchange about the drug
shortages. She had been here 3 or 4 weeks ago, and this was a
lot of follow-up to that. Can you tell me from a community
pharmacist's perspective what you are encountering in the drug
shortage arena?
Mr. Davis. A single day doesn't go by where drug shortages
don't affect patients in one manner or another. So of the
hundreds of prescriptions that we fill daily in my pharmacies,
we know we have to have a conversation every single day with a
patient to alter therapy, to choose a different therapy or to
come to a consensus with the prescribers and other caregivers
as to how to change therapy to still get the best result for
that patient without the agent available that we need.
Mr. Burgess. Can you give us some examples of how that
might come up in the course of your day? What are the ones you
are seeing very frequently? You heard my exchange with Dr.
Woodcock. We had the executive order in October, and as far as
I can tell, not a darn thing happened. But then when we had a
very intense discussion about Doxil 3 or 4 weeks ago, suddenly
you got some movement on that and people were able to find oh,
yes, there is some supply that we could free up. So help me
here. Tell me what you are having the most trouble with. I will
write a letter to Dr. Woodcock. We will see what we can do.
Mr. Davis. The most trouble that is arising is mostly solid
dosage forms. At the community pharmacy level, we dispense very
few injectable medications or infusible medications so the
cancer drugs that you are referencing are not necessarily a
problem in the community, but what we do see are the ADHD
medications, solid dosage forms of those, medications in some
neurological disorders as well. Methotrexate has been recently
a problem for us in the treatment of RA and a couple of other
disease states. And in those cases, they are patients that were
managed and well managed on these medications and now we have
disruption of therapy. So we have to make a decision, can we
still achieve the clinical outcomes with another agent, and it
is proving to be burdensome. It is proving to burn time that we
shouldn't necessarily have to burn because this patient has
already been managed effectively and efficiently within the
system.
Mr. Burgess. How involved do you get with cost of
prescriptions? I get to do a number of telephone town halls
with other Members of Congress because they like for me to be
there, and invariably a caller calls and they are on whatever
and it is frightfully expensive, and then you kind of know in
the back of your mind, there is a generic available for that
that probably is much less. How do you handle that at the
community pharmacy level when somebody is having difficulty
paying for their medication and there might be a generic or
there might be something that is just a little bit different
but perhaps suitable? Do you communicate with the physician,
the prescribing physician, in those instances?
Mr. Davis. Absolutely. Something to keep in mind is, we are
probably the only health care professional that actually gets
to see the cost of care as it is rendered, so as someone is
standing in front of us approaching the instance of therapy, we
know what that is going to cost and how that is going to impact
that patient. We are also the only professional that still has
one-on-one time to render to those patients to help them
understand and navigate the waters associated with the cost of
those medications. So we do reach out to our prescribers in the
community and offer recommendations based on what we understand
to be the outcomes and efficacy of that drug while still
maintaining the integrity of the intent of that prescriber but
being able to do it at a lower cost.
Pharmacists are doing it each and every day over and over
again throughout their day. It is not necessarily a recognized
function but we have transitioned from being the makers of
salves and potions into clinically based social workers and
helping people to navigate Medicare, helping people to navigate
Medicaid, helping people to understand what is going on with
the PBMs and the cost of their medications.
Mr. Burgess. Let me ask you this because the issue of
Avastin came up, and I have to admit, a couple weeks ago I was
pretty taken by surprise. Now, I get why Viagra might be a
counterfeit and why there might be a market, you know, the
incredible markup that occurs on that, but Avastin is hardly
something you would just buy on the Internet and use. What is
going on there?
Mr. Davis. So the concern that I have is, it is a high-
dollar medication so clearly to be able to counterfeit and move
that into the supply chain puts a lot of value not only on the
people that are actually counterfeiting and entering it in the
supply chain but the hands that may touch it during the supply
chain itself. And that is why I said, the integrity of our
trading partners is of utmost importance, especially being the
end dispenser of that. So to understand the components of the
supply chain that come before us, to understand who your
wholesaler is, to understand the integrity associated with that
wholesaler and how they conduct business is vital to what we do
at the community and ground level.
With the case of Avastin, I understand that that particular
medication changed hands through multiple sources multiple
times after entering this country and did not necessarily enter
through the channels that we would normally consider as part of
the trusted lines.
Mr. Burgess. It wasn't in the legitimate stream of
pharmaceutical commerce?
Mr. Davis. Correct.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
That concludes our third and final panel. It has been very
informative. We thank all of you for your testimony.
I will remind the members that they have 10 business days
to submit questions for the record, and I would like to ask the
Director and witnesses to respond to the questions promptly.
Members should submit their questions by the close of business
on Thursday, March 22nd.
Without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:35 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1518.148


