- SETTING FISCAL PRIORITIES IN HEALTH CARE FUNDING

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SETTING FISCAL PRIORITIES IN HEALTH CARE FUNDING

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 9, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-17

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
68-055                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chair                         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JIM MATHESON, Utah
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              Islands
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

7_____

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  officio)
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)]

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Frank Pallone Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     4
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     6
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     8
Hon. John D. Dingell, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Michigan, opening statement.................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................   132

Witnesses

Ernest J. Istook, Distinguished Fellow, The Heritage Foundation..    11
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Answers to submitted questions...............................   135
John C. Goodman, President and CEO, National Center for Policy
Analysis.......................................................    16
Prepared statement...........................................    18
Answers to submitted questions...............................   136
Joseph F. Vitale, New Jersey State Senate........................    30
Prepared statement...........................................    32

Submitted Material

Letter of March 8, 2011, from 10 public health commissioners to
House and Senate leaders, submitted by Mr. Engel...............    56
Letter of January 24, 2011, from the National Governors
Association to Congressional leadership, submitted by Mr. Lance    63
Letter of March 1, 2011, from Chris Christie, Governor, State of
New Jersey, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr. Lance...............    68
Letter of March 9, 2011, from Sarah Audelo and Jen Heitel Yakush,
Co-Chairs, Sex Education Coalition, to subcommittee members,
submitted by Mrs. Capps........................................    74
Statement of the American Nurses Association, dated March 8,
2011, submitted by Mrs. Capps..................................    78
Letter of September 16, 2009, from Mr. Barton, Mr. Burgess and
Hon. Kay Granger to colleagues concerning JPS School-Based
Health Clinics, submitted by Mrs. Capps........................    80
Statement of Senator Tom Harkin, submitted by Mr. Waxman.........    88
Statement on behalf of Jeffrey Levi, Executive Director, Trust
for America's Health, submitted by Mr. Pallone.................   102
Letter of March 8, 2011, from Alan Weil, Executive Director,
National Academy for State Health Policy, to Mr. Pallone.......   124
``The Pitts Proposal to Block Mandatory Funding in the Affordable
Care Act,'' report dated March 2011, submitted by Mr. Pallone..   128

SETTING FISCAL PRIORITIES IN HEALTH CARE FUNDING

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 9, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:33 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joe Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Burgess, Shimkus,
Rogers, Murphy, Blackburn, Gingrey, Latta, McMorris Rodgers,
Lance, Cassidy, Guthrie, Barton, Pallone, Dingell, Engel,
Capps, Schakowsky, Gonzalez, Baldwin, Weiner, and Waxman (ex
officio).
Staff present: Clay Alspach, Counsel, Health; Howard Cohen,
Chief Health Counsel; Brenda Destro, Professional Staff Member,
Health; Paul Edattel, Professional Staff Member, Health; Julie
Goon, Health Policy Advisor; Todd Harrison, Chief Counsel,
Oversight/Investigations; Debbee Keller, Press Secretary; Ryan
Long, Chief Counsel, Health; Carly McWilliams, Legislative
Clerk; Monica Popp, Professional Staff Member, Health; Krista
Rosenthall, Counsel to Chairman Emeritus; Heidi Stirrup, Health
Policy Coordinator; Tom Wilbur, Staff Assistant; Jimmy Widmer,
Health Intern; Phil Barnett, Democratic Staff Director; Stephen
Cha, Democratic Senior Professional Staff Member; Alli Corr,
Democratic Policy Analyst; Tim Gronniger, Democratic Senior
Professional Staff Member; Purvee Kempf, Democratic Senior
Counsel; Karen Lightfoot, Democratic Communications Director,
and Senior Policy Advisor; Karen Nelson, Democratic Deputy
Committee Staff Director for Health; Mitch Smiley, Democratic
Assistant Clerk; and Lindsay Vidal, Democratic Press Secretary.
Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. Just a word
about this morning's proceedings. Because we have a joint
session of Congress today at 11:00, we will begin our hearing
at 10:30 with members' opening statements and then recess
shortly before 11:00 for members to move to the Capitol for the
session at 11:00. We will reconvene our hearing immediately
following the joint session at 12:15 and start with our
introductions of witnesses, their 5-minute statements followed
by the members' questions under the 5-minute rule. The chair
will recognize himself for an opening statement for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

The title of this hearing is ``Setting Fiscal Priorities in
Health Care Funding.'' And that is exactly what we must do:
Assess and prioritize all of the things that we need to do and
would like to do and then make difficult funding decisions with
limited amounts of money.
Today, we will address five areas of the health reform law
and determine if these funding streams are needed, if these
programs are funded at the most responsible levels, and if they
should be mandatory or discretionary.
Section 4002 of PPACA establishes a Prevention and Public
Health Fund ``to provide for expanded and sustained national
investment in prevention and public health programs to improve
health and help restrain the rate of growth in private and
public sector health care costs.'' The section authorizes the
appropriation of, and appropriates to the fund from the
Treasury, the following amounts: $500 million for fiscal year
2010; $750 million for 2011; $1 billion for 2012; $1.25 billion
for fiscal year 2013; and $1.5 billion for 2014, and for fiscal
year 2015 and every fiscal year thereafter $2 billion.
The Secretary has full authority to use this account to
fund any programs or activities under the Public Health Service
Act that she chooses, without Congressional oversight.
On June 18, 2010, HHS announced $250 million in Prevention
and Public Health Fund dollars would go ``to support prevention
activities and develop the Nation's public health
infrastructure.'' On September 27, 2010, HHS announced another
$320 million in grants from the fund to expand the primary care
workforce. And on February 9, 2011, HHS announced an additional
$750 million from the fund for various prevention activities,
including preventing tobacco use, obesity, heart disease,
stroke and other diseases, and increasing immunizations.
The goals of these three disbursements from the fund are
laudable, and there is no doubt that we must focus on
preventing disease. But we must remember that this funding is
over and above the amount that Congress has decided should go
to these activities and the amount that Congress has already
appropriated for these activities. It is also disbursed at the
sole discretion of the Secretary.
Last Thursday I asked Secretary Sebelius whether she needed
further Congressional approval to spend the money from the 4002
fund, and she answered no. I then asked her if she could fund
activities above and beyond the level Congress appropriated,
and she stated yes. This should concern every Member that we
have a created a slush fund that the Secretary can spend from
without any Congressional oversight or approval.
By eliminating this fund, we are not cutting any specific
program or activity. We are reclaiming our oversight role of
how federal taxpayer dollars should be used.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

The subcommittee will come to order.
The Chair will recognize himself for an opening statement.
The title of this hearing is ``Setting Fiscal Priorities in
Health Care Funding.''
And that is exactly what we must do: Assess and prioritize
all of the things that we need to do and would like to do and
then make difficult funding decisions with limited amounts of
money.
Today, we will address five areas of the health reform law
- and determine if these funding streams are needed, if these
programs are funded at the most responsible levels, and if they
should be mandatory or discretionary.
Sec. 4002 of PPACA establishes a Prevention and Public
Health Fund "to provide for expanded and sustained national
investment in prevention and public health programs to improve
health and help restrain the rate of growth in private and
public sector health care costs."
The section authorizes the appropriation of, and
appropriates to the fund from the Treasury, the following
amounts: $500 million for FY2010; $750 million for FY2011;
$1.00 billion for FY2012; $1.25 billion for FY2013; $1.50
billion for FY2014; and for FY2015 and every fiscal year
thereafter $2.00 billion.
The Secretary has the full authority to use this account to
fund any programs or activities under the Public Health Service
Act that she chooses, without Congressional oversight.
On June 18, 2010, HHS announced $250 million in Prevention
and Public Health Fund dollars would go "to support prevention
activities and develop the nation's public health
infrastructure."
On September 27, 2010, HHS announced another $320 million
in grants from the Fund to "expand the primary care workforce."
And on February 9, 2011, HHS announced an additional $750
million from the Fund for various prevention activities,
including preventing tobacco use, obesity, heart disease,
stroke, and other diseases, and increasing immunizations.
The goals of these three disbursements from the Fund are
laudable, and there is no doubt that we must focus on
preventing disease.
But, we must remember that this funding is over and above
the amount that Congress has decided should go to these
activities and the amount that Congress has already
appropriated for these activities. It is also disbursed at the
sole discretion of the Secretary.
Last Thursday I asked Secretary Sebelius whether she needed
further Congressional approval to spend the money from the 4002
fund, and she answered no.
I then asked her if she could fund activities above and
beyond the level Congress appropriated, and she stated yes.
This should concern every Member that we have a created a
slush fund that the Secretary can spend from without any
Congressional oversight or approval.
By eliminating this fund, we are not cutting any specific
program or activity. We are reclaiming our oversight role of
how federal taxpayer dollars should be used.

Mr. Pitts. At this time I will yield 1 minute to the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Barton.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to welcome especially Dr. Istook and Dr. Goodman.
They are both personal friends of mine, and Mr. Istook is a
former Congressman.
This is a very important hearing, Mr. Chairman, because we
are coming to find out every day more and more things about the
health care law that should be of concern to every American
citizen. The ability of the Secretary of HHS without any
oversight or any authorization of the Congress to spend such
sums as necessary which could total into the billions of
dollars is something that should concern everybody in this
room, and this hearing to look into that part of the law and
then look at some of the other specific sums that are
authorized, if we are really going to get spending under
control, this is ground zero for starting it.
So I appreciate you holding the hearing. I appreciate all
three witnesses for being here. And again to Dr. Goodman and
Mr. Istook personally, welcome to the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and yields the
remaining time to Mr. Latta from Ohio.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing today on fiscal priorities for health care spending. As
we continue to discover more and more details of the
ramifications of Obamacare, I am extremely troubled by the fact
that this bill put in place programs and spending that bypass
Congress and gives full control to the Administration.
There are several programs that have been identified in
Obamacare that are duplicative government programs as well as
mandatory spending programs. I have grave concerns about these
duplications and the fact that the programs contained in
section 2953 are of this nature. I am very supportive of the
discussion draft before us that will convert the appropriation
of payment in this section of $75 million for each of the
fiscal years 2010 through 2014 into an authorization. Congress
needs to be the one that determines funding for these programs
and determines if in fact they are duplicative and determine
this through the normal appropriations process. Making this
change could potentially save $375 million over 5 years. We
must get our fiscal house in order and there are many more
savings by further repealing Obamacare.
This past month, the Congressional Research Service updated
an October 2010 report that appropriations and fund transfers
in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. The new
report found that unbeknownst to almost every Member of
Congress, that Obamacare contains $150 in direct implementation
spending to bypass this Congress's normal appropriation
process.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The chair
yields for 5 minutes for opening statement to Ranking Member
Pallone.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Here we go again, same song, different verse, another
hearing that continues the Republican hollow agenda of round-
the-clock complaints of Democrat legislation without a glimmer
of their own innovation or substance. The American people can
do the math. Ten weeks, zero jobs bills from the GOP. Months
after the election, Republicans continue to put partisan
politics ahead of Americans' top priority, which is jobs.
But I should say, I welcome the opportunity to talk about
health care reform and health security. I am very proud of the
benefits it will bring to millions of hardworking Americans
nationwide and for the families that live in every single
Congressional district of the members of this committee. So
while I welcome an honest discussion about reform, the issues
raised today border on the absurd, in my opinion. The
Republicans couldn't be more hypocritical with their seeming
concern about the use of mandatory funding for some of the
programs in health care reform. This hearing isn't about
funding streams, it is simply an effort to dismantle the health
care reform law block by block by cherry-picking policies they
don't care for without offering any solutions in return. The
truth of the matter is, the last time Republicans were in
charge, they embraced mandatory health care funding and they
used it regularly in bills that passed through the Energy and
Commerce Committee. The Medicare Modernization Act of 2003, I
am sure we all remember that bill. It passed in the middle of
the night after a 3-hour vote was held open on the floor, and
that bill was chockfull of mandatory goodies. There was the
$1.5 billion to fund start-up administrative costs for
implementation of MMA and there was an unlimited appropriation
to fund the transitional drug assistance program and there were
a few hundred million in change for a health infrastructure
program and another billion for emergency health services, all
mandatory funding.
Then you can fast-forward a couple years and the committee
once again decided to use mandatory funding for billions of
dollars worth of programs throughout the so-called Deficit
Reduction Act of 2005, and I could spend my whole 5 minutes on
that but I am going to spare you that one.
The fact is that key programs under the jurisdiction of the
Energy and Commerce Committee are and continue to be funded
through mandatory spending authority. It is the way to ensure
an adequate and sustained funding stream to ensure the success
of important programs. And for the Republicans who cry foul
because we happened to utilize this tool in the Affordable Care
Act is simply not credible, and it continues to amaze me how
the Republicans cry States' rights, States' rights at every
turn and then undermine that same principle with gusto. They
want to eliminate all the funding for State health exchange
grants to tie the States' hands and you are not only going to
throw an unfunded mandate on them but in effect you are ceding
States' powers to the Federal Government and telling HHS to
step in and tell States what insurance exchange model will work
best for them. That wasn't our policy. We wanted State
innovation in the health care reform bill, and we urge our
Republican colleagues to rethink their misguided proposal.
As much as I disagree with the basis of this hearing, I am
pleased to welcome my good friend, State Senator Joe Vitale,
who is from New Jersey, who has testified before us several
times on health care reform, and he will talk about how health
care reform will help millions of New Jersey families and how
New Jersey already benefited from more than $3 million in
critical funding from the Prevention and Public Health Fund.
So at this time I would like to yield 1 minute to the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Engel.
Mr. Engel. I thank my friend for yielding, and I agree with
your sentiments.
Mr. Chairman, this hearing calls to mind the classic line
from Yogi Berra, ``It's deja vu all over again.'' This hearing
really isn't about the difference between mandatory and
discretionary funding, this hearing is really another veiled
attempt to undermine the Affordable Care Act and prevent 30
million Americans from accessing affordable health coverage.
According to the Majority, the Affordable Care Act was
``unusual in that it created mandatory spending on programs
that would otherwise be considered discretionary.'' It seems my
friends on the other side of the aisle have a short memory. The
Republican Majority mandated open-ended spending on new
programs in the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement and
Modernization Act and the Deficit Reduction Act, both of which
have resulted in billions of dollars spent outside of the
appropriations process and worst of all were unpaid-for federal
mandates. No jobs created by the Majority, just tax breaks for
the rich and big corporations, blowing a hole in the deficit
and again and again and again, day in and day out, attempts to
repeal the health care law, which is already helping millions
and millions of Americans.
I yield back.
Mr. Pallone. Whatever time I have left I yield to Ms.
Schakowsky.
Ms. Schakowsky. Let us take a look at FactCheck.org. This
ridiculous idea that somehow there is a dirty little secret, as
our former colleague, Mr. Istook, said in the bill--what it is
really about is what he said, pulling out Obamacare weed by
weed. This is another attempt to repeal the legislation that
will help 30 million Americans.
I look forward to having this conversation with Mr. Istook.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The chair
recognizes the vice chair of the committee, Dr. Burgess, for 3
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. I thank the chair for the recognition.
So here we are just 2 weeks shy of the anniversary date of
that big signing ceremony down at the East Room of the White
House. We all remember how the Vice President characterized
that morning.
But this bill does represent, this law now represents a
fundamental change in the relationship of the government with
the people. We have gone from government with the consent of
the governed to now the government telling the governed what
they should get and when they should get it. Remember President
Obama when he was running in 2008? He made two promises. One
was if you like what you have, you can keep it, and the other
was, we have to control costs, that way more people can buy
insurance. Actually not bad ideas. What happened to, if you
like what you have, you can keep it? Well, apparently that is
gone by the wayside, and what the American people told us in
the difficult summer of 2009 was, we are scared to death you
are going to screw up what we have, please don't do that, and
the other part of that equation was, could you do something to
help us with costs because we are dreadfully concerned about
the costs of health care. Turns out with the signing of this
law, we screwed up what was working and we exploded the cost.
Now, I do understand the difference between an authorizer
and an appropriator. I have been an authorizer during my short
Congressional tenure. Mr. Istook when he was here was an
appropriator. My first field trip out to the NIH, I was taken
to all of these big beautiful buildings, all named after
appropriators. I said where is the building named after the
authorizer; there aren't any. But I do understand the very
fundamental nature of what we do as an authorizing committee.
It is our heritage, and our strength comes from carefully
investigating and carefully vetting those expenditures that we
then pass off to the appropriators to eventually write the
check, and the oversight function that occurs at the
authorization level is something which cannot be minimized. We
have gone through almost a year of this. In fact, we went
through the first 10 months before we had a single oversight
hearing from any of the relevant federal agencies over just
what was going on with the implementation of this.
Now, look, we are hearing today about the problems with the
federal budget. February, $223 billion overdraft. February, I
might remind people, is the shortest month of the year. That
means that is as good as it going to get this year, $223
billion overdraft, and what do we get for it? Do you see new
clinics, do you see new schools? No, what you see is an
overdraft, and it gets worse because as this thing is
implemented, we go on to subsidies to middle-class families in
the exchange to help them buy health insurance and the answer
there is a tap with a high-pressure line into the federal
Treasury. That $223 billion deficit is something for which we
all wax nostalgic after that kicks in in this bill.
The mandatory spending which we are all talking about needs
to be brought back under the control of this committee and be
authorized. You don't have to be against something just because
you want to label it ``mandatory.'' It simply means you want to
have the correct amount of Congressional oversight.
Let me yield at this point to the gentleman from Kentucky.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
gentleman for yielding.
You know, we are all working on jobs. Everywhere you go,
you hear people and businesses are sitting on the sidelines not
investing because they are not sure how much their employees
are going to cost them because of the expense that is coming
because of this bill, and also we need to address spending so
American people and businesses can have money to create jobs.
And every day families across this country are sitting around
trying to figure out what to spend their money on, and I
believe Congress should follow suit.
Unfortunately, during the annual appropriations process,
Congress's equivalent of a family budget, a number of federal
programs are off-limits because they are created as mandatory
spending and not discretionary. These programs are subject to
the same scrutiny or evaluated for effectiveness in order to
earn their continued funding.
The new health care law created an unprecedented number of
these mandatory programs. One that we will discuss today is an
authorization of a mandatory spending program for graduate
medical education. While I support graduate medical education
and believe we need more residency physicians, particularly
primary care, I support shifting this program to an
authorization. This program should not be protected and
prioritized over other similar programs. This change is not
only fiscally responsible but good policy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and yields 5
minutes to the ranking Member, Mr. Waxman.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
What the Republicans are conjuring up today is a completely
contrived issue about funding for the Affordable Care Act that
is entirely false and misleading. Don't fall for it.
Republicans are trying to turn back the clock on the Affordable
Care Act, a law that reduces the deficit by over $210 billion
in the next decade, expands the health care coverage to 32
million people, closes the Medicare drug doughnut hole,
provides free preventive care under Medicare and strengthens
the Medicare trust fund, and it prohibits predatory, abusive
behavior by insurance companies. It addresses public health
challenges that confront our Nation such as obesity and health
disparities through support of the public health
infrastructure.
This hearing is about having appropriate resources to fund
the Affordable Care Act. The Republicans tried to repeal that
law but they weren't successful, so now they are trying to
defund it in another way.
Every member of this committee has a history of voting for
both mandatory and discretionary spending. In fact, a
Republican-led Congress passed legislation that included over
$400 billion of mandatory spending that was not paid for in the
Medicare drug bill.
It is a fundamental part of the responsibility of an
authorizing committee like Energy and Commerce that has
jurisdiction over programs like Medicare, Medicaid and CHIP to
determine where mandatory funding is needed to ensure a
program's sustainability. Similarly, assuring funding to
implement and support the Affordable Care Act is critical to
its viability and success.
The legislative proposals being discussed today are marked
by irony and hypocrisy. For example, one proposal repeals the
monies for the States to establish their exchanges. Just last
week we had a hearing where Republicans argued the need for
State flexibility under health reform and discussed the fiscal
constraints that face States today. This proposal would take
away monies that allow the States to do the work necessary to
design a health insurance exchange that meets the needs of
their residents.
Our members have been discussing the need for expanding the
health care workforce, especially primary care physicians to
serve the growing demands for service. According to his
testimony, Dr. Goodman agrees. It is ironic that one of the
Republican proposals cuts support from our health care
workforce. In a third proposal, they claim that education
programs aimed at decreasing teen pregnancies should not have a
stable funding source. However, Republicans, including
Representative Istook, fully support mandatory funding for
abstinence-only programs and have voted numerous times for such
programs.
Well, I look forward, I suppose, to hearing from our
witnesses and seeing where this bill will go. I want to
apologize ahead of time. I will need to leave this committee to
attend another hearing in another subcommittee. I want to yield
my 1 minute to Ms. Capps and then take back my time after that
to yield further to Mr. Dingell.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Waxman.
I will add that today's hearing is another effort by this
subcommittee to do everything it can to repeal the Affordable
Care Act and avoid the issue Americans care most about, which
is jobs. But unlike previous efforts that just ignored job
creation altogether, today's hearing is on legislation that
will flat out hurt our economy and keep people out of the
workforce.
For example, the school-based health center construction
grants will enhance the health of children and their families
but also stimulate the economy of local communities with new
construction jobs. Similarly, the teaching health centers
program not only expands primary care services to those who
need it most but also trains new providers with the expertise
needed to serve these expanding populations. The Republican
majority has placed both of these programs on the chopping
block. Let us be clear: These proposals take away funding from
shovel-ready projects in our communities and they keep
qualified applicants away from the primary care workforce.
I know many of our colleagues will say that our budget
requires us to make tough calls. It is not being tough to go
after kids and the underserved. These aren't tough calls; they
are bad calls.
I yield back the balance of my time to Mr. Waxman.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much. I want to yield 1 minute
to the distinguished chairman emeritus of our committee, Mr.
Dingell.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN D. DINGELL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Dingell. Thank you very much for that. I appreciate
your courtesy.
Today's hearing is a wasted opportunity to have a
substantive conversation as to how this committee can work
together in a bipartisan fashion to further improve our health
care system. I understand that the Majority has concerns about
the reform. So do we. But we have also heard repeatedly about
how the health care reform law will destroy State budgets, kill
jobs, drive up health care costs and overwhelm Medicare and
Medicaid. But I see nothing that they are putting on the table
to address these problems.
And while my colleagues take great joy in extolling the
problems of the health care reform law, they have not brought
forward a single substantive suggestion for improvement. We can
see clearly from the five discussion drafts before us today
that the Majority has no intention of working with the Minority
to improve the health care reform law.
I have long said that no law is perfect. The last perfect
law that came into the hands of men came on stone tablets off
the top of Mount Sinai in the hands of Moses, and I believe
that we are going to find that the draft legislation that you
have submitted to us or will be submitting to us is going to be
bad legislation, and indeed, you are letting the perfect be the
enemy of the good.
It is my sincere hope that this committee will work
together to improve this bill and not blindly tear it down.
Further, I hope that the next hearing before this subcommittee
will take some time to deal with the real problems in health
reform and not the politics. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dingell follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. John D. Dingell

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing is yet another example of the Majority's
strong commitment to improving the Affordable Care Act.
Rather than bringing substantive suggestions as to how we
can work today to improve our health system, the Majority comes
to the table once again with a sledgehammer and a long list of
myths about what health reform will do.
The Majority continues to warn about the dangers and
deficiencies in the health reform. It is their misguided belief
that the health reform law will destroy State budgets, kill
jobs, drive up health care costs, and overwhelm Medicare and
Medicaid.
And while my colleagues seem to take great joy in extolling
the problems with the health reform law, they have yet to bring
a single, substantive suggestion for improvement. You can see
clearly from the five discussion drafts before us today that
the Majority has no intention of working with the Minority to
improve the health reform law.
The process of drafting good legislation is a difficult
one, but as Members of Congress it is our responsibility to
draft legislation that will improve the lives of our
constituents and communities. A straight repeal of the funding
for these public health programs is not in the interest of
American families, it is not in the interest of public health,
and it is not in the interest of State budgets.
I have long said that no law is perfect, and I strongly
believe that as you draft legislation you cannot let the
perfect be the enemy of the good. I hope to work with my
colleagues to improve this bill and not blindly tear it down. I
hope that the next hearing before this subcommittee will deal
with the substance and not the politics.

Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The opening
statements are concluded. We will recess for the joint session
at 11:00. The joint session may end early, so I would urge the
members to return 15 minutes after the close of the joint
session. So we will recess until approximately 12:00 or before
if we can do that.
The committee is in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Pitts. The time of recess having expired, the
subcommittee will come to order, and I would like to welcome
the three witnesses at this time. Note that your written
testimony will be entered into the record and we will ask you
to summarize, each of you for 5 minutes.
Let me introduce two of the witnesses, and then I will ask
the ranking member to introduce the third witness. First of
all, the Hon. Ernest Istook serves as a Distinguished Fellow at
the Heritage Foundation. Prior to joining Heritage, Mr. Istook
served the people of Oklahoma's 5th district for 14 years, and
he was a member of the House Appropriations Committee.
Secondly, Dr. John Goodman is with us. He is the president and
CEO of the National Center for Policy Analysis. Dr. Goodman is
an expert on consumer-driven health care reform. He received
his PhD in economics from Columbia University. Welcome.
And I will turn to the ranking Member to introduce his
witness.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I already mentioned that Senator Joe Vitale, he has
testified before our subcommittee on at least two occasions in
the last Congress, I believe, and he was the chairman of the
health committee in the State senate. He continues to be a
senior member of the health committee. And he doesn't actually
live in my district but a majority or a good portion of his
State senate district is in my congressional district. He is a
friend, but beyond that, I would say most people in the State
would consider him the number one expert on health care in New
Jersey, so good to see you.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, and welcome.
Now the chair recognizes the gentleman Mr. Istook for 5
minutes for his opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF ERNEST J. ISTOOK, DISTINGUISHED FELLOW, THE
HERITAGE FOUNDATION; JOHN C. GOODMAN, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
NATIONAL CENTER FOR POLICY ANALYSIS; AND JOSEPH F. VITALE, NEW
JERSEY STATE SENATE

STATEMENT OF ERNEST J. ISTOOK

Mr. Istook. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and of course, you
have my written testimony. We are here talking of course about
the authority for funding and the actual appropriations that
were made within what is known both as the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act, or PPACA, and also known as----
Mr. Pitts. Is your mic on?
Mr. Istook. Let us try it now.
Mr. Pitts. That is better.
Mr. Istook. I will begin again, if I may.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having us here. We are here of
course talking about the funding approaches within the health
care legislation that was passed last year, formally known as
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, PPACA, also
known to many of us as Obamacare because of President Obama's
crucial role as the driving force.
This legislation was so unwieldy and complicated that even
now people are discovering things that they didn't realize
about the legislation, and I compare it to the ability to hide
a lot of needles inside a haystack that contains 2,700 pages,
and people are at different times finding the challenges
presented by that. Although original estimates said that the
bill created 159 new government agencies, the Congressional
Research Service later concluded the actual number of new
agencies, boards and so forth is currently unknowable because
so many of those are given the authority to sprout off new
entities in return.
The new law attempts to bypass the normal appropriations
process, which is another feature that makes it more difficult
to deal with it, and for we who believe that the bill should be
repealed, and if not repealed, then defunded, that presents
special challenges because so many advanced appropriations were
made. Advance appropriations are actual appropriations for
future fiscal years. The comparison is to think in terms of
writing checks. If you say I am not going to write any future
checks for something, you are trying to defund it. However, if
there is already a series of postdated checks out there, you
have not defunded it. And I realize that is the subject of a
major political battle that we have in Washington.
And of course, that violates the typical Congressional
process of appropriations. I spent 14 years as a Member of the
House Appropriations Committee, several of those years as a
subcommittee chairman. Typically, the normal process is, you
create enacting legislation, so-called authorization bills that
authorize spending and then the second half of the process is
that appropriations are made in the amount that they deem to be
proper at the time.
Now, I am not aware personally of any occasions where we
have had advance appropriations not just for one fiscal year in
the future, not just for two fiscal years in the future but for
three, four, five, six, seven. In fact, the legislation
actually contained funding actual appropriations spread out
over ten different appropriations and fiscal years.
Now, what happens when you do that is, in essence you make
an attempt to handcuff the current elected Members of Congress.
You can just as easily decide spending levels for a future
fiscal year, say, 2079. You could pass a bill now that seeks to
control what spending is going to be 5 years, 10 years, 50
years in the future but it would not be good practice.
The people who should make the key funding decisions for
the current time are the people who are elected to serve and
represent the public at this particular time. So I am glad that
you are looking at legislation to pull back funds previously
appropriated to PPACA, or Obamacare, which in essence is
putting a stop-payment order on these postdated checks. But it
is important that this be done both through the authorizing
process and through the appropriations process where there is
also authority to repeal these existing appropriations and to
pull them back.
Defunding is a very routine policy tool for Congress and
for the White House. So is funding at levels below what is
authorized. As noted by the Congressional Research Service,
Congress is not required to provide funds for every agency or
purpose authorized by law. One of our founding fathers, James
Madison, said it is the power over the purse, which is the most
complete and effectual weapon with which any constitution can
arm the immediate representatives of the people. However, if
the decisions were made by the last Congress, by the prior
representatives of the people, then you don't have the same
power that James Madison said was essential as a safeguard of
the public purse.
I should mention that the White House also routinely
proposes not funding programs which have been authorized or
funding them at beneath authorized levels. If we intend for a
policy to bind future generations, we should follow the
supermajority process that would actually enshrine that in the
Constitution but we should not accept that a simple act of
Congress today should be elevated to handcuff a future Congress
not that the last Congress should handcuff the current
Congress.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Istook follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.003

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
Dr. Goodman for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JOHN C. GOODMAN

Mr. Goodman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is John Goodman. I am president of the
National Center for Policy Analysis.
I would like to begin by saying there are serious
structural problems in the Affordable Care Act and they are so
serious that even if the critics weren't around, the Congress
is going to have to go in and make major structural changes to
this bill. Let me just draw your attention to a few of them.
First, people are going to be required to buy an insurance
plan whose cost is going to grow at twice the rate of growth of
their income. You don't have to be a mathematician or an
accountant or an economist to know that if you have to buy
something whose cost is growing at twice the rate of growth of
your income, eventually it is going to crowd out everything
else that you are consuming. That is an impossible path. It
wasn't created by President Obama or by Congress, but the bill,
the Affordable Care Act, locks us onto that path and takes away
a lot of the ability that people need in order to get off of it
and move to a lower-cost health care system.
Secondly, there is a bizarre system of subsidies in the act
under which people at the same income level get radically
different amounts of help from the Federal Government depending
upon whether they are on Medicaid, whether they are in an
employer plan or whether they are in an exchange. For example,
a family at an income level of $30,000 a year in the health
insurance exchange will get more than $16,000 of help from the
Federal Government. That same family at work gets the current
tax break which is a little over $2,000. I think this huge
discrepancy of subsidies is one of the why the job market is
not responding better than it is right now. There is enormous
uncertainty right now on the employer side but eventually this
is going to be very, very disruptive and eventually I think
everybody who is average income or below average income is
going to lose his employer-provided health insurance. The
numbers are just so large and the incentives are just so great.
They will either go into Medicaid or they will go into an
exchange, or the subsidized plans, if we follow the
Massachusetts example, will pay little better than Medicaid
rates. Essentially you can think of it as Medicaid Plus.
Number three, in the exchange itself we are creating
perverse incentives for insurers. They will have to take all
comers for the same premium. They will try to attract the
healthy and avoid the sick. After people enroll, they have an
incentive to overprovide to the healthy because those are the
ones they want to keep. They want to attract more just like
them. They will have an incentive to underprovide to the sick
because they didn't want them in the first place and they
certainly don't want to attract any more just like them. I
think this is one of the worst features of the bill and it is
the one that has been the least talked about in Congress and
outside Congress.
On the other side of the exchange from the buyer's point of
view, the incentives are also perverse. In Massachusetts,
people are going bare while they are healthy. They get sick,
they enroll, they pay premiums for a few months, get their
health care, get their bills paid and then they drop coverage
again. So far, we are only talking about a few thousand people
although the number is growing every year. In a State like
Texas where we are signing up people for Medicaid in the
emergency room, this would be absolutely disastrous.
Number five, we have promises that we can't possibly keep.
This bill will insure between 32, 34 million additional people
if the economic studies are correct. These people will try to
consume twice as much health care as they have been consuming.
In addition, almost everybody else is going to be pushed into a
plan where benefits are more generous than they are now. There
is a whole long list of preventive services that have to be
made available with no deductible, no copayment. Bottom line,
we are going to have a huge increase in demand for care. The
bill has no provision for increasing supplies. We are going to
have a huge rationing problem, and that is going to be very,
very bad for anyone whose plan pays below market rates, and who
are those people? That is everybody in Medicare, everybody in
Medicaid and maybe everybody who is getting subsidized
insurance in the health insurance exchange.
And finally, we have impossible benefit cuts for seniors.
We are paying for more than half the cost by cutting spending
on Medicare. What are we talking about? Well, for someone
reaching the age of 65 this year, the reduction in Medicare
spending will be about $35,000 in present value terms. That is
equal to about 3 years' worth of benefits. For a 55-year-old,
the day that President Obama signed the bill, they lost $60,000
in spending, and for 45-year-olds, it is $100,000 in spending.
Where are all these dollars coming from? I heard on TV this
morning they were going to come from eliminating waste, fraud
and abuse. Well, that is ridiculous. Where it is going to come
from is in reduced payments to doctors and hospitals and other
providers. According to the Medicare chief actuary, by the end
of this decade Medicare will be paying doctors and hospitals
less than Medicaid. Senior citizens will be behind welfare
mothers in terms of their attractiveness to physicians. In 3
years, most of you will be flooded by phone calls from
constituents telling you they can't find a doctor. I think it
is a very, very serious problem and one that Congress has not
yet addressed.
The appropriations process is not the only way to deal with
this but Congressional oversight is certainly a beginning.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goodman follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.015

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
Senator Vitale for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH F. VITALE

Mr. Vitale. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon,
Chairman Pitts and members of the Subcommittee on Health. My
name is Joe Vitale. I was elected to the New Jersey State
Senate in 1998 and had the distinct pleasure of serving with
your colleague, Congressman Leonard Lance. In fact, he is my
Congressman. Congressman Pitts, Congressman Pallone and
Congressman Waxman, thank you for the invitation to testify
regarding proposals that would defund critical pieces of the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
I want to limit my testimony to how PPACA will benefit New
Jersey citizens and how the act has already begun to do so and
how defunding elements of reform will only serve to undermine
access to our State's uninsured citizens. In addition, I will
cover some ground on how the federal and State health care
partnerships have already made a significant difference in the
wellbeing of hundreds of thousands of New Jerseyans.
New Jersey was recently awarded a $1 million health
exchange planning grant. The State department of banking and
insurance awarded nearly $250,000 of that money to the Rutgers
University Center for State Health Policy, which is a
nonpartisan evidence-based think tank, to hold shareholder
sensing meetings. The center will provide it gathers through
these meetings and to provide to the State and other
stakeholders including legislators. With the remaining funding,
the department has planned to hire consultants to inform
policymakers of aspects of an exchange such as design,
development and oversight. In short, an exchange designed
specific for New Jersey will contemplate and deliver a well-
thought-out mechanism where hundreds of thousands of currently
uninsured New Jerseyans will gain access to affordable and
sustainable health care coverage. It is my belief that a
properly financed and implemented exchange as made available
through PPACA is smart, efficient and a sustainable way to
access the appropriate care.
The public health initiatives are the single-most proven
method of controlling health care costs. Vaccinations,
workplace safety, infectious disease control, safe food
handling, prenatal care and family planning are just a few
examples of how population-based prevention and public health
programs are the most effective investment Congress can make to
control future health care costs.
One example through PPACA is where New Jersey received
$350,000 for an HIV prevention grant. With these funds, we have
tested an alternate means of confirming HIV that replaces a
more expensive test at a fraction of the cost. Defunding public
health initiatives will have a devastating consequence for all
the people we serve.
Of all the components of PPACA that are being considered
for defunding, rolling back expansion of school-based health
centers may be the most shortsighted. Five years ago, I worked
with the Visiting Nurse Association of Central New Jersey to
create a nontraditional school-based health services program in
the suburban middle-class town in which I live. Children
enrolled in the program are able to see a visiting advanced
practice nurse within the school nurse's office. APNs are
licensed and able to diagnose and recommend treatment.
Prescriptions are called in to the student's pharmacy so that
they are ready for their parents to pick up on the way home.
Children are treated faster, return to their classroom sooner
and parents miss less work that many times adds up to less
income and employee productivity. At the request of parents,
the Visiting Nurse Association now provides annual sports
evaluations for their students. School-based health centers
require a relatively small investment and provide an enormous
return on that investment.
Through PPACA, New Jersey has received several grants to
address primary care workforce shortages. Defunding programs
aimed at addressing these critical shortages for me may be the
most reckless. The primary care workforce shortages impact
every State and will reach critical levels as access to health
care coverage is expanded. It takes 10 years to produce a
physician and 8 years to produce an advanced practice nurse. In
New Jersey, we already aggressively addressing this issue but
we cannot go it alone and PPACA will make an enormous
difference. A loan redemption program has been created to
encourage nurses to pursue nursing faculty careers. PPACA
dedicated $800,000 to this program and will help ensure that
New Jersey's health care system can handle the increased
demand.
Through PPACA, New Jersey Department of Labor was awarded
$150,000 workforce development primary care grant and has
received $10,560,000 to increase the number of resident
physicians trained in family medicine, general internal
medicine and pediatrics. Defunding primary care workforce
development will cripple health care delivery in States that do
not already have existing health care workforce development
programs in place.
As one of the original authors and ongoing supporters of
New Jersey's SCHIP program, I can tell you firsthand just how
effective federal and State partnerships can be. Currently, New
Jersey enrolls over 600,000 children in SCHIP and in Medicaid,
an additional 600,000 parents and adults without children in
SCHIP and in Medicaid as well. Many also contribute to that
insurance.
I will close by saying that most of us elected officials
enjoy some of the best health insurance that taxpayer dollars
can subsidize. I think it is fair and right that we extend that
same generosity to millions of Americans who may never have
that same opportunity. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Vitale follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.030

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. Thanks to all
the witnesses for their testimony and we will now turn to
questioning. The chair recognizes himself for 5 minutes for
questioning.
Mr. Istook, regarding State exchange grants with unlimited
mandatory expenditures and the size of the appropriations
really at the discretion of the Secretary with such sums, in
your years as an appropriator and legislator, have you ever
seen Congress grant an Administration official an unlimited tap
into the U.S. Treasury?
Mr. Istook. No, Mr. Chairman. I can recall no such
instance, and furthermore, I think it violates what the
Constitution intends when it says no spending shall be made
except by appropriations from the Congress, and to leave the
amount at the discretion of any public official, whether it be
the Secretary of HHS or anyone else, I think is not in keeping
with the constitutional intent.
Mr. Pitts. As our national debt currently sits at over $14
trillion, each citizen is individually responsible for roughly
$45,000 of debt. We also heard news earlier this week that in
February, the shortest month of the year, the Federal
Government ran its single largest monthly deficit in U.S.
history, $223 billion. In analyzing this law, we have found
2,000 ``the Secretary shall'' statements. With these facts in
mind, do you think it is appropriate to give a single
Administration official an unlimited tap into the U.S.
Treasury?
Mr. Istook. No, sir, I do not believe that is an
appropriate thing to do, just as it would not be appropriate
for you to entrust all of your personal finances and investment
to some individual and leave out your own discretion and
control over them.
Mr. Pitts. Now, section 4002 of PPACA creates a fund to
provide funding for programs authorized by the Public Health
Service Act for prevention, wellness and public health
activities. From the period fiscal year 2012 to fiscal year
2021, there will be $17.75 billion deposited in that fund. Who
has the authority, Mr. Istook, on how to determine how these
funds are spent?
Mr. Istook. Under the statute, that authority appears to
rest solely with the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Mr. Pitts. And so the Secretary can spend this money
without any further Congressional action. Is that correct?
Mr. Istook. Yes. Because it is already appropriated, the
Secretary is given discretion to decide how it has been spent.
Then Congress does not need to take further action to authorize
the Secretary to do that but it would need to take further
action to stop the Secretary from spending that fund freely as
they may see fit.
Mr. Pitts. Does the program's appropriations sunset at any
point?
Mr. Istook. I do not find any sunset in the legislation. If
it is there, I am sure somebody else would point it out to us.
Mr. Pitts. So the HHS Secretary will receive a $2 billion
annual appropriation for this program in 2030, in 2040 or in
perpetuity regardless of the effectiveness of the program or
the need for these funds?
Mr. Istook. So long as the Secretary doth live. That
appears to be the case.
Mr. Pitts. All right. Let us to go to Dr. Goodman. As a
general proposition, do you believe the massive health care law
signed by President Obama responsibly sets federal spending
priorities in the health care field?
Mr. Goodman. No, I do not. Just my back-of-the-envelope
calculations suggest that for every $2 of spending, only $1 is
actually paid for, and if Congress has to restore the spending
for seniors, that means only one of every $4 of promises is
actually paid for. So there is a commitment here to spend an
enormous amount of money and no one can tell me where the money
is going to come from.
Mr. Pitts. All right. Senator, in your testimony you argue
that the massive new health care law does not expand
government's role in the health care arena. Are you aware that
PPACA adds 20 million Americans into the government-run
Medicaid program?
Mr. Vitale. Yes.
Mr. Pitts. Are you aware the health care law creates at
least 159 new agencies, boards and commissions?
Mr. Vitale. I am not aware of the total number but I will
take your word for it, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Are you aware that the Secretary of HHS has the
power to prevent doctors and hospitals from contracting with
insurers if they fail to meet new federal guidelines and
standards?
Mr. Vitale. Yes, and I agree with her.
Mr. Pitts. Are you aware that the Secretary of HHS can
dictate the benefits, the network requirements, the medical
loss ratios, the actuarial value and the other terms of every
health plan in America including new requirements on plans that
Americans have and like today?
Mr. Vitale. Someone should, and the responsibility rests
with her.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. I am sorry I am out of time.
I yield 5 minutes to the ranking member, Mr. Pallone, for
questioning.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to ask a question of Senator Vitale. Forty-eight
States and D.C. receive grants for the purpose of planning and
establishing an exchange. In addition, six early innovator
grants were awarded to develop an array of models for exchange
information technology systems that can be used by other
States. So about $296 million has gone out to States for these
grants related to the exchange. Now, the Republicans criticize
again and again that they do not want a federal solution for
health reform but the fact is, if a State does not or is unable
to establish a State exchange, the Federal Government would
establish one for them. So these planning and establishment
grants provide the necessary support to ensure States are able
to work with their stakeholders. You know, if it is an active
exchange, it negotiates with insurers to leverage the best
quality choices for best prices or it is an open exchange that
invites all insurers to offer products that consumers can be
aware of or choose from. These grants basically make all this
possible and make for good exchanges.
So I wanted to ask you, Senator, if Congress were to repeal
this provision providing for grants for the States for
exchanges, does New Jersey have the money to do this work on
its own, and what is the fiscal situation in New Jersey that
relates to that?
Mr. Vitale. Well, I don't believe that we have the money to
do it on our own, and I think earlier in my testimony I
described the level of federal-State partnerships that have
always been successful when run properly and really in good
coordination have always made sense. Having a one-size-fits-all
exchange model that would be implemented by the Federal
Government I don't think would work in New Jersey, but be that
as it may, in terms of the dollars and cents, we don't have the
resources to not only design but also implement the exchange,
and of course, our condition economically is as bad or worse
than most other States, the worst recession since the Great
Depression. And so our resources are limited and already the
governor has decided that he is going to eliminate and reduce
programs to the uninsured, to the Medicaid recipients in our
State. So I don't see how it is in New Jersey or any other
State, for that matter, unless they find a pot of gold and can
come out from underneath this recession without the partnership
of the Federal Government.
Mr. Pallone. I appreciate that. Let me ask you about the
prevention and the public health investment fund because again
we are trying to provide Americans with better choices about
prevention. Both Democrats and Republicans keep talking about
prevention as a way to provide better quality care and save
money, and I think if you talk about where we are today before
this act, the health care reform goes into place, you know, be
more apt to describe the situation as sick care rather than
wellness care, and that is why we created this prevention fund
to provide Americans with options to keep themselves healthy
instead.
There are over 530 organizations that support the
prevention and public health fund because it has already shown
it can deliver on the promise of creating a better pathway to
prevention. So many people on both sides of the aisle have
supported prevention because it holds a promise to reduce
health spending, and I know this has been important to you both
improving health and reducing spending.
My question, Senator, again is, New Jersey has received
over $15 million in grants from the fund. It supported
activities such as quit lines, HIV prevention, other important
activities. Are you able to comment on how prevention and
public health fund awards like these help to complement your
own state efforts, and is this an investment that is worth
making because obviously the Republican option is to eliminate
it?
Mr. Vitale. Well, I think everyone in this room will agree
that we want to have smart public health opportunities and
options for every American, but the States can't go it alone,
but we also know that it makes smarter financial sense to
address these issues early on in terms of prevention not only
in terms primary care, spending money in the beginning of life
prevention and not at the back end of life but also on all the
public health initiatives that the Federal Government and the
State government by itself certainly lowers cost, lowers the
instances of contagious disease and infections and the variety
of things that happen to people in the public health field and
so reducing those costs is paramount and it makes financial
sense. You know, we have to spend so much more not wellness but
on sickness, as you said earlier, as opposed to spending it up
front. It makes sense to spend it now and do it in a way that
is appropriate and provides the greatest bang for the buck.
Mr. Pallone. I appreciate that. I don't want us to be
fooled by these arguments about mandatory versus discretionary
spending in this fund. Seventy-one percent of Americans favor
increased investment in community health and disease
prevention. I think it is tragic that we are even considering
striking the fund, given what it can do.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman's
time is expired. The chairman recognizes the vice chairman of
the committee, Dr. Burgess, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Goodman, did you want to respond to that last question?
Mr. Goodman. Yes. I agree with Congressman Pallone that
both Republicans and Democrats are out there saying that by
spending money on preventive care we will save money overall
but it is just not true. There are an enormous number of
studies of this issue. They overwhelmingly show that preventive
medicine by and large does not save money, that yes, you will
save money if you catch a disease in its early stage with one
person but to get to that person you have to spend money on
10,000 other healthy people, and it turns out that there are
very few preventive procedures that actually save money. I
think the political reason why we hear so much about preventive
medicine is, it is the only thing you can do for healthy
people, and most people are healthy. So it makes political
sense to talk about spending money on preventive care but it is
not a way to overall health care costs. Pregnant women at risk,
smoking cessation advice, immunizations, they will pay for
themselves but giving free checkups to the elderly, that will
never save money.
Mr. Burgess. Interesting observation. And we do appreciate
all of you being here. Let me just say that again.
Mr. Vitale, let me ask you a question. In your testimony,
you talk about the rollback of the funding of the country's
school-based health centers and maintain that in fact that is
shortsighted. I don't know, you may be being a little tough on
the President but let us explore this a little bit. In the law
as it is now, section 4101(a), the mandatory funding that we
are talking about today is actually for school-based clinic
construction, correct? Is that yes? That is a yes. The clerk
will note that is a yes.
Mr. Vitale. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. What about the money for the doctors and
nurses that are going to be in the clinic? Is that mandatory or
discretionary?
Mr. Vitale. I am not sure.
Mr. Burgess. Well, 4101(b) is discretionary. Do you know
the dollar amount that President Obama requested in his latest
budget that he sent up here to the Hill just a little over a
month ago?
Mr. Vitale. For which part?
Mr. Burgess. For the staffing of the school-based clinics.
Mr. Vitale. I am not aware of it but any staffing would be
helpful. If the money doesn't in that proposal, then it is what
it is, but what is important to recognize is that whether it is
for bricks and mortar or whether it is for individuals to serve
in those capacities is vitally important.
Mr. Burgess. Well, the actual dollar figure requested by
the President was zero, so I think maybe you are stating the
President was shortsighted with that budgetary amount. I don't
know. I will leave that up to you.
But what good are the bricks and mortar if you don't have
the doctors and nurses there to receive the children, the
patients when they come in to be seen? How are you going to
have a child seen at a school site if there is no doctor or
nurse in the clinic?
Mr. Vitale. Well, the elements of reform in PPACA and what
we do in New Jersey is to encourage primary care workforce
development so primary----
Mr. Burgess. Yes, encourage it by not funding it in the
discretionary part of the President's budget, and that is a
discrepancy and that is one of the things--you know, the
Secretary couldn't answer the question when I asked her why it
was that it was constructed like that. I am going to accept
that it was a drafting error on the part of the Senate. I am
going to accept the fact that this bill was a poorly
constructed product that was rushed through on the Senate Floor
to get the Senators out of town before a snowstorm hit on
Christmas Eve. We all accept that. They never got to a
conference committee because we know that 2 weeks later Scott
Brown gets elected, they lose the 60-vote margin. Nancy Pelosi
said there is not 100 votes for this damn thing over in the
House, and it took 3 months to twist enough arms and crack
enough skulls to get it passed, and that is precisely the
reason why, because it doesn't deliver on the promise that was
intended.
Now, another aspect is, what are the duplicative aspects of
this? You had a stimulus bill that passed in February 2009, $3
billion, I believe, for community health centers. Was there not
enough to scrape together for the $50 million that would fund
the school-based health clinics in this program? Did the
Congress have to fund it twice to get to your level of
satisfaction?
Mr. Vitale. Well, you know, I would certainly welcome and
support legislation that you could introduce that would fund
those programs and put those doctors and nurses in those
buildings.
Mr. Burgess. Well, oK. There is the other part of the
problem, last month, a $223 billion overdraft by the United
States Congress. If you multiply that out over the 10-year
budgetary window, that is almost $27 trillion. That is twice
what the debt limit is going to be expanded later this year.
That is twice what the debt limit already is, and that is
irrespective of any money collected in taxes. So that is the
problem. There is no money there, and that is an important
concept.
Let me just ask you a question. Governor Christie, did he
sign on a letter asking for relief of maintenance of effort to
the Congress?
Mr. Vitale. Yes, he did.
Mr. Burgess. And was he correct or incorrect in that?
Mr. Vitale. He was incorrect, sir.
Mr. Burgess. I believe he was correct, and again, the
answer is, $223 billion overdraft, it is unsustainable.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. I hope we have time for a second
round because I have some questions of the other witnesses, and
I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman's
time is expired. The chair recognizes the ranking member
emeritus of the committee, Mr. Dingell, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy to
me, and I want to welcome our panel, particularly my old
friend, Mr. Istook. I am delighted to see you here.
I am troubled about the committee and what it is doing. I
am very much troubled that instead of trying to improve the
legislation, we are concentrating on trying to repeal it. At
the same time, I note that those who would repeal the
legislation and who are trying to impede the implementation of
this legislation are coming forward with no suggestions as to
alternatives and no differences that they would make because of
either amendments or replacement legislation.
This is a yes or no question, old friend. You have great
familiarity with the differences between mandatory and
discretionary funding and the importance of both, and I know my
colleagues have concerns that they have expressed about
mandatory spending under the Affordable Care Act but I would
point out that the majority of the members on the other side of
the aisle have voted for this kind of funding when it suits
their purposes, particularly in the instance of the Medicare
Part D or the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement and
Modernization Act. There was a lot of funding of this
particular kind, and a similar situation in which many of the
members on the other side of the aisle also voted for the SCHIP
program in the Deficit Reduction Act.
Would you agree, old friend, that mandatory appropriations
are from time to time a necessary part of legislating and
particularly so in the case of the Medicare Prescription Drug
Improvement and Modernization Act and in the Deficit Reduction
Act? Yes or no.
Mr. Istook. One, I always appreciate your courtesy, Mr.
Dingell. The challenge is, there are different types of
mandatory appropriations. They have been used in different
mechanisms. I have never seen them used in the same way that
they are here. For example, in the prescription drug benefit
bill, you had an existing program which receives permanent
appropriations, namely Medicare, and there is an expansion of
its scope rather than a creation of a new mandatory stream of
funding.
Mr. Dingell. But we are following a precedent long
established in many differences.
Mr. Istook. I don't see it in the manner it is done here.
Mr. Dingell. Now, as a former Member, you served here with
distinction, do you agree that Medicare and Medicaid programs
are essential cornerstones of the health care system in this
country?
Mr. Istook. I think they certainly have become cornerstones
upon which people depend. Is it necessary, especially for
Medicaid, to be its current scale? I don't believe so.
Mr. Dingell. And those bills that we have been discussing
have been funded by mandatory appropriations over the years.
Well, I want to thank the panel for being here. I notice I
have a minute and 27 seconds and I just want to maintain that I
continue to appeal to my friends on the Majority. Let us work
together to get a good piece of legislation made better and to
meet the concerns that are expressed by all of us here about
different components of this legislation. I have heard that the
Members on the other side want to repeal it. I think that would
be extraordinarily unwise, and I would hope that they would
join us in trying to improve our Nation's public health, to
save our health care system, to see to it we have the money in
the system that we need and that we have a workable program
that will head off the appalling increase in cost which we see
going forward on a continuing basis under the old system, and I
thank you for your courtesy, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman's
time is expired. The chair recognizes the gentleman from Ohio,
Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
it. And to our panel, thanks very much for being here. I really
appreciate it. It is always enlightening to get the testimony
from you all.
Dr. Goodman, if I could maybe start with you. It is kind of
interesting, because I know that this has been discussed a lot
during the debate on the health care legislation. On page 7 of
your testimony you were talking about Massachusetts and what
has happened up there. It is interesting that you stated that
people remain uninsured while they were healthy and get
insurance after they are sick. Then they receive care and their
medical bills are paid, they drop their insurance coverage
again. And I guess some of the questions I would like to ask is
first of all, what is the enforcement mechanism they have in
Massachusetts or lack thereof to try to change this or get
people to be on insurance all the time?
Mr. Goodman. Well, the Massachusetts model has a fine, and
the general Massachusetts approach was copied. I do agree with
President Obama on this. The federal model did in large part
come from Massachusetts, and it is a strange model because, you
know, in other health care programs that we have, we don't let
people game the system. In Medicare Part B, in Medi-gap
insurance and prescription drugs, you don't let people just go
until they get sick and then sign up for the same price
everybody else is paying. There is a penalty if you do not sign
up when you are eligible, and yet in Massachusetts, people can
wait until they can sick, they can sign up at any time. There
is a 12-month open season. They pay a small penalty when they
are not insured but the penalty is small compared to the cost
of insurance so the real incentive there and the real incentive
under the Affordable Care Act is go bare while you are healthy,
pay the fine and wait until you get sick and then sign up for
the most generous--and if you are really sick, you will sign up
for the most generous of the options that you have.
Mr. Latta. Do you know what that penalty is, out of
curiosity?
Mr. Goodman. In Massachusetts? I don't remember. But under
the Affordable Care Act, it will be less than $1,000 a person.
Mr. Latta. This might be a rhetorical question then,
because I already know what the answer is. Who makes up that
difference?
Mr. Goodman. Well, the cost of care falls on everyone else,
and if you allow people to game the system, stay outside when
they are healthy, let them join when they are sick for the same
premium everybody else pays, premiums have got to rise.
Everybody else has to pick up that difference. And through time
costs just get higher and higher and higher as people are
allowed to game the system in that way.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Congressman, a question for you. As a former appropriator,
you know, when you look at this, and you stated in your
testimony but is it right that Congress should really abdicate
its responsibility by saying that we are going to have these
going out year after year after year in these mandatory's
instead of us looking at every year? As Dr. Burgess pointed
out, we had a $233 billion shortfall in the month of February.
You know, should that be abdicated by Congress?
Mr. Istook. No, neither in the case of Obamacare nor for
that matter in the case of Medicare or Medicaid should we have
unrestricted, open-ended appropriations or permanent
appropriations rather than putting things upon a defined budget
that is defined by what Congress is able to provide what the
Nation can afford at a particular time. So this is a common
problem with any form of mandatory appropriation whether it be
the permanent appropriations that go out, for example, to
Medicare or the different process that was used here, passing a
series of annual appropriations for consecutive years. Either
way, you are not matching your current resources with what you
are trying to provide, and that of course is what leads to
deficits such as the $1.6 trillion that we have for this
current fiscal year.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much.
If I could, I would yield the remainder of my time to Dr.
Burgess.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you.
Dr. Goodman, you mentioned in your testimony that the
mandate is going to become ever more costly. You already
alluded to the amount of money the deficit is for February of
this year and what future projections are. How expensive is
that going to be for the taxpayer in the years ahead?
Mr. Goodman. Well, I don't have an estimate off the top of
my head but it is going to be very expensive and it is going to
be more expensive and it is going to be more expensive than I
think the Congressional Budget Office has estimated, and the
reason is because of these different subsidies that I have
talked about. It is going to be foolish for modern income
employees to try to get insurance from an employer. They are
all going to find their way into the exchange, and the
subsidies in the exchange are paid for by the federal taxpayer.
So I think the Congressional Budget Office was estimating maybe
17 million people would go over into the exchange. Douglas
Holtz-Eakin, former director of the Congressional Budget
Office, thought it might be twice that many, but it could be
much higher than that. I think eventually everybody who can get
a better deal will be in the exchange.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The chair
recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. Engel, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Engel. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
first ask unanimous consent to introduce for the record a
letter from the public health commissioners from 10 of our
Nation's biggest cities, which provides great examples of the
ways the fund is being used in our Nation's cities.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.034

Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, Republicans have decided that this is the
week to talk about mandatory spending in the Affordable Care
Act. This has probably confused many Americans who thought that
Congress was going to focus on creating jobs and reducing the
deficit.
I want to welcome our three panelists. I want to welcome
Congressman Istook back. But let us examine the issue of the
Affordable Care Act mandatory spending provisions. One of our
colleagues, Michelle Bachmann, on Meet the Press last weekend
said that using mandatory funding was ``gangster government''
and she said that this mandatory funding was the bill's, and
again I quote her, ``dirty little secret.'' Congressman Istook,
you said to FactCheck.org that this assessment was fair because
these appropriations were, and I quote you, ``not trumpeted
loudly by sponsors of the measure.'' So I am going to ask you
in a minute to comment, but let us review the history here.
For example, let us look at the prevention and wellness
fund. This is a critically important fund to provide stable
funding for our public health infrastructure. The fund will
support State and community efforts to prevent disease and make
our Nation healthier. Over 530 organizations have supported
this fund because investing $10 per person per year on
community-based prevention could save this Nation more than $16
billion annually. I have never considered this a ``dirty little
secret.'' I am proud of it. I have tried to trumpet it loudly.
It was in just about every document we ever produced, every
draft on the House and Senate side, every explanatory fact
sheet and every full CBO score. So let me read to you from our
fact sheet: ``Provides $15 billion in mandatory spending to
support prevention and wellness activities.'' Does that sound
like we are trying to keep this a secret? Even FactCheck.org
concluded that ``No secret. Bachmann gets it wrong.'' And the
Washington Post said, ``This is bordering on ridiculous,'' and
concluded that there is no bombshell beyond the bombast.
But let us take this chance to learn more about the fund. I
would like to first ask Senator Vitale, according to
Healthcare.gov, organizations in New Jersey have received
nearly $15 million in prevention and public health grants from
tobacco cessation programs to HIV prevention, to public health
infrastructure to primary care training. Senator, you mentioned
in your testimony the idea of bringing primary health care
services to people in their behavioral mental health setting. I
am told that people with serious mental illness die an average
of 25 years sooner than the general population, largely due to
untreated chronic disease. Can you tell us how bringing primary
care and mental health together is actually an important shift
in how we think about prevention?
Mr. Vitale. Well, thank you for that question, Congressman,
and you are right. It is an incredibly important way in which
to bring the care to them. I think that for a long time a lot
of policymakers, even State legislatures, have overlooked the
importance of those mental health and substance abuse issues,
and in New Jersey we have the same issues. And I was a little
blindsided and dumbfounded by a comment by my friend, Dr.
Goodman, that prevention really doesn't save money. If you talk
to any other health care expert in the Nation that is learned
as he is, we would get a different answer, that that prevention
model is incredibly important. It means the world to people
even in terms of life and death, and so I would support those
initiatives. They make a whole lot of sense.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. This fund is much more than simply
providing more funds for good things. It is about changing the
way we think about prevention. I can't think of a better use of
tax dollars than to institute proven prevention strategies that
could save the taxpayers money.
I just wanted to say, Dr. Goodman, I don't necessarily need
a reply from you but I was interested when you were talking
about the Massachusetts bill vis-a-vis the bill that we tried
to put in, and I think you actually make a point many of us
have been saying, that the fact of the matter is, it is not
fair for someone not to belong and then when they get sick opt
in because then everyone else's premium rises. That is why you
have to everyone being directed to mandatorily purchase
insurance, and I find it really ironic that Mr. Romney, who
implemented as governor the law in Massachusetts which allows
people to first get sick and then opt in is now one of the
people who is cracking the bill.
Mr. Istook, I want to give you a chance to respond. You
replied to an inquiry from FactCheck that Congresswoman
Bachmann's ``dirty little secret'' remarks were fair and you
said these appropriations were ``not trumpeted loudly'' by
sponsors of the measure. I tell you, we trumpeted it loudly and
I don't know why you can say that we tried to hide it, but I
would like to give you a chance to respond.
Mr. Istook. If I may, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Pitts. Proceed.
Mr. Istook. Thank you. Actually, particular things have
been checked both by FactCheck, by the Washington Post and by
PolitiFact. None of them had any criticism of what I have said
on this. They had criticism of Ms. Bachmann but not of my
characterization. As I said, her characterization I believe was
a fair comment and opinion. Just because something is well
known to some people such as, say, yourself does not mean that
it has overall been well communicated to the American people.
That is why I mentioned that we have a 2,700-page bill that is
a huge haystack with a lot of needles still being discovered
within that haystack, and I think the revelations are
continuing and that is part of what the chairman is seeking to
point out during this hearing.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The chair
recognizes Mr. Lance for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon to
you all. I am new to this committee, and it is my honor to meet
for the first time Congressman Istook and Dr. Goodman. I
certainly know Senator Vitale. We served together in the State
senate for the 7 years I was in the State senate. I believe
Senator Vitale is completing his 14th year in the State senate,
and not only is he an expert on health care, he and I served
together on the State senate budget committee and worked on
many issues together.
As a general matter, the National Governors Association
writing our leaders, Speaker Boehner and leader Pelosi and
leader Reid and leader McConnell, in January said that moving
forward Congress should not impose maintenance-of-effort
provisions on States as a condition of funding. This was a
general letter and it did not relate specifically to the health
care bill. It was more in general in tone. I want to make that
clear. I would like to have unanimous consent to introduce that
letter into the record. It was signed in a bipartisan capacity
by the chair and the vice chair of the National Governors
Association.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.038

Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And then more recently Governor Christie wrote the chair of
the full committee, Chairman Upton, on March 1st relating
specifically to the health care legislation. Governor Christie
was unable to join the distinguished panel last week that
included the Governors of Mississippi, Utah and Massachusetts,
and as it relates directly to the health care issue, the
Governor of New Jersey stated that we in New Jersey are facing
an unprecedented Medicaid shortfall of approximately $1.3
billion in State fiscal year 2012 and he goes on to state that
``our options to close this gap are severely affected by
further restrictive maintenance-of-effort requirements in the
health care legislation. Noncompliance with those requirements
could result in our losing $5.4 billion federal funding.
Governors need flexibility, not federal mandates.''
To the panel in its entirety, if you would, gentlemen,
beginning with you, Congressman Istook, address your views
regarding the maintenance-of-effort requirement, specifically
given the fact that it seems to me so many governors have
suggested that we should look at that. And Mr. Chairman, might
I place in the record of the subcommittee the letter from the
Governor of New Jersey to Chairman Upton on March 1st?
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.040

Mr. Lance. Thank you.
Congressman Istook?
Mr. Istook. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Lance. And having served in
State government as well as Federal Government, I know that
often States feel trapped by having gotten into a program and
then told you have to maintain those efforts even if federal
funding may be diminished or even if there are major changes in
the federal program. A key example right now, the Obama
Administration is saving we are trying to provide States some
certain opt-out flexibility, but what the fine print says is we
will only let you do it if we decide you are trying to the same
thing that we are trying to do, if you are trying to do things
our way. It is not really an opt-out. It is still another level
of control. So I fear that the maintenance-of-effort
requirements have become just another way for the Federal
Government to dictate to the States they participate in a
program that they cannot afford. Medicaid is if not the largest
certainly an enormous budget item in so many States right now
and they are finding that it is simply unaffordable, and
providing some leeway on maintenance of effort is an important
way to address that.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Congressman.
Dr. Goodman?
Mr. Goodman. Well, of course, the States are trapped, and
all the programs that we are talking about here today further
trap people in the existing health care system. We want lower
costs and higher-quality care. We have to let people get out of
the way we have been doing things and try something new.
Probably the best way that we could spend money on preventive
care for low-income folks is to pay the market price that
minute clinics charge and shopping malls and at Walmart for
basic preventive primary care. At least I could argue that that
has a much better chance of getting care to people that
anything else that we have talked about. In any event, people
at the local level need to have these flexibility. These kinds
of programs don't give it to them.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
Senator Vitale, my friend.
Mr. Vitale. Thank you. Well, you are right, Congressman
Lance. The governor did sign onto that letter to remove the MOE
from New Jersey's obligation, and I will tell you that could be
the worst thing that could happen to the population. If this
happened last year and the governor cut out tens of thousands
of parents from SCHIP, he didn't go below 133 because that was
the maintenance-of-effort level. If he were able to do this
year, we would have tens of thousands of working parents who go
to work every day without the ability to have health care and
the access to health care that we all enjoy. He would also
dismantle many of the benefit designs and programs in Medicaid
to the aged, blind and disabled and to the vulnerable
populations. So to say that the maintenance effort is a way in
which it forces the States to provide their care, I know that
at least in the case of our governor, he will take that
opportunity to remove that care and it would be just
devastating for that population and literally hundreds of
thousands of New Jerseyans.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
recognizes the gentlelady from California, Ms. Capps, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to take a
minute to clarify one item regarding the application process
for construction funds. Already 350 community clinics or
schools have applied for funding for construction. Part of that
process includes the requirement that as they apply for the
funds that they demonstrate that they have adequate funding for
adequate staffing for that facility.
I want to also welcome our witnesses and thank them for
their testimony, and in particular, welcome to our former
colleague, Mr. Istook.
As you all know, school-based health centers provide
comprehensive and easily accessible preventive and primary care
health services to approximately 2 million students nationwide,
and there is no doubt about it, and I know this as many years
of being a school nurse: Healthier children do better in
school. At a time now when we are trying to out-compete and
out-innovate other countries, we do need our kids healthy and
in the classroom.
Now, there is a statement, Senator Vitale, that I would
like you to respond to and see if you agree with this
statement. It is a quote: ``School-based health centers have
proven that effective preventive and primary care for medically
underserved children can decrease academic failure rates
resulting from poor health.'' Is that something you would agree
with?
Mr. Vitale. It is, Congresswoman, and thank you for being a
school nurse. We have an example in the town in which I live,
and I was interim mayor for a few months and I worked with the
Department of Human Services and the Visiting Nurse Association
of Central Jersey to establish a school-based health clinic in
six of our communities out of 30 schools, six of the most
medically underserved schools in our school district, and one
of them which had very high special-needs population and now
several years later when I visit and we assess the efficacy of
that program, it clearly illustrates that those children
receive care when they need it up front right in the school.
Parents get the prescription. They are able to write those
prescriptions because the advance practice nurses now can
diagnose and prescribe. Kids get on their medication earlier.
They get back to school quicker and they learn faster. And we
have seen an enormous decrease in the amount of absenteeism for
all those children in those six schools where previously those
absentee rates were much higher. So they are learning better,
they are learning faster, and parents who need to take time off
from work in many ways can't afford to do that save them money
as well.
Mrs. Capps. Absolutely. I agree with your testimony. It is
eloquent. I also agree with the statement that I quoted, and I
wish I could take credit for the quote but I wanted to point
out that this comes from two of my colleagues who are members
of this committee, Chairman Emeritus Barton and Mr. Burgess,
and they sent a ``dear colleague'' highlighting their support
along with their fellow Texan, Congresswoman Kay Granger, their
support of school-based health centers. And after an
endorsement like that one, I find it quite puzzling that our
Republican colleagues are here trying to eliminate funds for
communities across the Nation who want to benefit from the
school-based health centers.
Mr. Burgess. Will the gentlelady yield?
Mrs. Capps. I will yield after I finish my statement and
question.
In fact, the interest in expanding school-based health
centers is so great that HHS has received 350 applications for
this funding. Requests come from 44 different States including
the Congressional districts of nine of our Republican
colleagues who are part of this subcommittee. So let us be
clear. The need is there. While these centers benefit all
children who have access to them, they are also a vital support
for low-income Americans and I hope it is clear to us all that
40 percent of children treated at school-based health clinics
either have no insurance or are enrolled in Medicare, SCHIP or
other public coverage. For some children, school-based health
centers are the only consistent access to health care that they
or their families have, and we know there are many millions of
other children who could benefit from them. With more access to
these centers, these children could be spending more time
learning in their classrooms and less time clogging up our
emergency rooms.
And now, Senator Vitale, as a former mayor, which you
mentioned, and current State senator, you do understand the
economic needs of local communities during these tough times.
The funding for school-based health clinic construction is the
perfect shovel ready for today. So with so many people out of
work, we are trying to provide more jobs for the American
people. Maybe you can talk about what this means to your State
of New Jersey.
Mr. Vitale. Well, we have many of the same challenges as
every other State, in fact, New Jersey being so urbanized in so
many areas and where there are so many medically underserved
populations, school-based clinics are a perfect way to capture
kids that are school age. Providing the bricks and mortar or
the dollars for those bricks and mortar is certainly very
important but the other elements of the act that would help us
to train additional physicians, advance practice nurses, to put
those bodies in those clinics from time to time are also
important elements so we are dealing with both the bricks and
mortar and those who would be future physicians and advance
practice nurses. So those developments combined certainly make
great sense and will make a great deal of difference in
urbanized communities.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you.
I wanted to yield time to my colleague, and I would be
happy to, but I could ask unanimous consent, Mr. Chairman, to
insert two letters for the record, one from the Sex Education
Coalition and also one from the American Nurses Association.
These groups highlight the importance of personal
responsibility education programs, and I think for the record
we should include the ``dear colleague'' that was sent out by
our colleagues.
Mr. Burgess. Reserving the right to object until I have a
chance to respond.
Mr. Pitts. All right. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Burgess. I object to the insertion in the record.
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Chairman, can I ask why----
Mr. Pitts. Would you provide us a copy so we can look at
it?
Mr. Burgess. I have a copy. The copy is not the issue. I
asked for a chance to respond. I was denied that chance. I will
object to the insertion in the record until I am given such
chance to respond.
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent for 30 seconds to
respond.
Mr. Pitts. All right. Without objection, go ahead. You can
have 30 seconds.
Mr. Burgess. The issue is not whether or not Chairman
Barton and I support the program. The issue is to have
mandatory funding for the construction of the clinic and zero
funding for the doctors and nurses who staff it. The other
issue is a $223 billion structural debt for the month of
February. There are going to be all kinds of programs that I
supported in the past that we simply cannot fund. We simply
cannot pay for everything. This is a poor crafting in the bill
that was signed into law a year ago. We should fix it. It is
within our scope to do so. Let us make the construction an
authorizing program, not a mandatory program, and I will yield
back.
Mr. Pallone. Does the gentleman withdraw his objection?
Mr. Burgess. Objection withdrawn.
Mr. Pitts. All right. Without objection then, the letters
are entered into the record.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.048

Mr. Pitts. The chair recognizes the gentleman, Dr. Cassidy,
for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Cassidy. I forego my questioning. I wasn't here to hear
the testimony. And although I have a great interest in the
topic, I don't want to just read something put in front of me.
I would actually rather digest, and so if I could yield to
anyone who wishes to have time yielded to them.
Mr. Burgess. I would be happy to accept the time from the
gentleman from Louisiana.
Dr. Goodman, we started just a moment ago when I had a few
seconds yielded to me and we were talking about the costs of
the subsidies. Now, we had multiple hearings leading up to the
passage of PPACA a year ago, and one of the things that got me
was, we never really focused on the cost of delivering care.
Now, you have been a proponent of patient-powered, consumer-
directed health plans. Governor Mitch Daniels in Indiana
popularized the Healthy Indiana program and over the same
period of time that Medicare and Medicaid expenses, PPO
expenses grew by 7 or 8 percent, he saw an overall reduction in
expenses for State employees of 11 percent over that same 2-
year interval. Would you care to comment on the techniques used
by Governor Daniels to hold down costs in his State for the
State employees?
Mr. Goodman. Well, sure. Part of the approach is to empower
patients and give them control over dollars, and that is the
reason I said earlier, if low-income families could just stop
by the minute clinic, get their immunization shot, get their
flu shot, get a prescription filled, that probably is a better
use of money than building a lot of buildings.
Mr. Burgess. And what is the barrier to the patients doing
that?
Mr. Goodman. The barrier is the government and
bureaucracy's control of the money, and it is not patient
friendly, and so the system is set up so that it is a
relationship between the provider and the payer and the patient
is just an excuse to bill, and if you want real change in the
marketplace, then you have to have providers competing for
patience based on price and on quality, and they are not going
to do that unless the patient controls the money.
I wonder if I might respond to Congressman Engel's point
about Massachusetts and the mandate there, if I may?
Mr. Burgess. Please.
Mr. Goodman. Because I have talked to Governor Romney about
this. They did it the wrong way in Massachusetts and we did it
the wrong way in the Affordable Care Act, and if I could just
choose a number, suppose we are willing to offer somebody a
$2,500 subsidy to buy individual health insurance. The way to
do it is to offer it as a refundable tax credit so that if he
buys this insurance, he gets his $2,500 for the insurance. But
if he doesn't buy the insurance, then the $2,500 needs to go
over into the social safety net. So if he goes in for care, he
doesn't have insurance, he is responsible for his bills. If he
can't pay for his bills, we put money over there for him. But
in doing it that way, you don't let people game the system. You
let money follow people. We will never get all the people in
the insurance system. But the way you make them pay their own
way is, they pay higher taxes if they turn down your subsidy,
and that is the right way to organize the system, and I can't
speak for Governor Romney but I think these days he is leaning
more toward that approach than trying to force everybody to buy
a plan that they don't really want to buy.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you.
Mr. Istook, you were an appropriator during the years that
the Medicare Modernization Act passed. Would you care to
comment on some of the discussion we have heard today how the
forward funding or advance appropriations occurred in the
Medicare Modernization Act? I was too young to remember it or
to acknowledge it at the time but you were there, a seasoned
appropriator.
Mr. Istook. It was not done the same way. What we have in
Medicare, whether you are talking about Medicare Part D or any
other Medicare, you have what is called a permanent
appropriation. Now, that is a problem because rather than
having a defined amount where we spend what we can afford to
spend, it is an open-ended expenditure. So when Medicare Part D
was created, it was simply changing the definitions of what is
covered as opposed to providing new appropriations.
In the case of PPACA, Obamacare, there are a series, and
Congressional Research Services devotes I think 16 pages to
describing specific item after specific item after specific
item after specific item where they make appropriations for the
current fiscal year when it happened, fiscal year 2010, where
they make appropriations that are explicit to fiscal year 2011,
explicit appropriations for fiscal year 2012, and so forth all
the way up to fiscal year 2019 scattered over a whole variety
of different programs. So it is taking singular programs and a
great number of them and creating annual appropriations for
them not on a permanent basis but for a 10-year period not
changing the definition of something that exists that also has
permanent appropriations. It is a very different process and
very unprecedented in my experience.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you. And I will just point out in H.R.
3200 that passed this committee, the appropriations, the public
health fund was subject to appropriations.
I thank the gentleman for yielding. I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
recognizes the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, for 5
minutes for questions.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. First I wanted to clarify
something about the school-based clinics. The grant application
for the school-based clinics, which many schools are applying
for, is very clear. They need to demonstrate that they have the
funds to run the center but they don't have the funds to build
the center. So this is a suggestion where denying construction
funds actually would deny the clinic and they understand that
they have to provide the money to run it.
Mr. Istook, we are kind of getting into the weeds here, but
in general about this issue of secret funding, you said that
FactCheck exonerated you but I wanted to just read a quote. You
said that ``it is within the range of fair comment and opinion
for Congresswoman Bachmann to say that funding for these and
other programs was a secret.'' So in a way, you are saying that
this kind of we didn't know about it, nobody knew about it,
this was snuck in there is a fair statement. Do you agree with
that?
Mr. Istook. Well, when the Speaker of the House told people
that you had to pass the bill so that folks could find out what
was in it, you know, I think that illustrates that we are
finding out bit by bit is certainly within the realm of fair
comment.
Ms. Schakowsky. So even though the debate was very clear,
for example, on the CHIP program you say that there is
something very different about the Medicare Prescription Drug
Improvement and Modernization program which you voted for but
in fact $40 billion of what is in the Affordable Care Act goes
to the CHIP program just for 2 years, so isn't that exactly the
same thing?
Mr. Istook. Actually it goes for 2 years and those
particular 2 years, if I recall correctly, are something like
adding--what is it--2017 and 2019----
Ms. Schakowsky. No, 2014 and 2015, actually, and that is
when the program goes into effect.
Mr. Istook. There are other provisions that go up to 2017.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, I wanted to ask you about something--
--
Mr. Istook. So the point there is, if something is supposed
to be subject to the annual appropriations process, why isn't
it subjected to the annual appropriations process by the
people----
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, that is what I want to ask you about.
Funding for the State pharmaceutical assistance program into
2006, that was 3 years into the future. You voted for that,
right?
Mr. Istook. I am not sure what you are talking about.
Ms. Schakowsky. This is what was in the bill, a 3-year
appropriation for the State pharmaceutical assistance program,
and there was also funding for a pilot program for nursing home
backgrounds. That was 4 years into the future, and of course,
that was a good call. But you voted for that.
Mr. Istook. Ma'am, one, if you have specific provisions you
want to recite from that bill to see where they are parallel, I
would be happy to look at that. But secondly, whether you are
talking about the practice of advance appropriations for
appropriations that occur 1 year or 2 years in the future,
there is no comparison with a bill that seeks to make advance
appropriations 10 years into the future which is what we are
talking about with Obamacare.
Ms. Schakowsky. When you voted for the Personal
Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996,
the welfare reform, did you know that that bill contained
significant mandatory appropriations for abstinence education
and childcare and development block grant?
Mr. Istook. When you use the term ``mandatory
appropriations,'' it means different things. Does it have
express line items for year by year for fiscal years? Do you
have that information in front of you?
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, let us ask for the Deficit Reduction
Act. You missed that vote. But all the Republicans on this
committee supported it. It contained mandatory spending.
Mr. Istook. Well, again, you see, the term ``mandatory
spending'' is used to cover a lot of different definitions. I
am talking about the practice of advance appropriations which
are defined, and this is from OMB, which are defined as one
made to become available 1 year or more beyond the year for
which the appropriations act is passed. That is not the same as
other categories of so-called mandatory spending. It is
certainly not the same as permanent appropriations as they are
found, for example, in Medicare. So again, if you have
something specific you would like me to look at, the line item
of a legislation, but I find nothing that is comparable to what
happens----
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, actually that is not true because the
State pharmaceutical assistance program that you asked about,
and I was listening to you while staff was telling me, that was
unlimited 3 years into the future but absolutely unlimited.
There was no dollar amount.
Mr. Istook. If you can recite a--there is--well, then it is
certainly not the same thing as what we are talking about if
you say there was no dollar amount. If you have a citation to a
specific section of a law that you want me to look at, I would
be happy to look at that with you.
Ms. Schakowsky. And let us remember also that none of us
this was paid for, period, that that legislation was not paid
for at all, and the Affordable Care Act is.
Mr. Pitts. The gentlelady's time is expired. The chair
recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to our
panelists. I appreciate you coming. I am going to yield my time
to Congressman Burgess for questions.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the gentleman for yielding. You know,
it is almost like a line from that Kevin Costner movie, if you
build it, they will come, so OK, we are going to build the
clinics. We are not going to fund the staffing but the
requirement is that you have to staff the clinic if you are
going to apply for the building fund, but what happens when the
States get into a budget crunch. Who could believe that that
would ever happen, but it could. The States get into a budget
crunch and they can no longer afford that. The fact of the
matter is, we are going to continue to build the clinics. That
spending is required in the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act. So it is duplicitous to say that hey, it is oK to pay
to mandate the funding for the building of the clinics because
people have to demonstrate an ability to staff. In fact, they
don't. If they did, why have 4101(b) contained within the bill?
Again, I will accept Secretary Sebelius's assertion that
she doesn't know why those two sections were put side by side,
4101(a) and 4101(b). I accept the fact that the bill was poorly
crafted and poorly drafted. I accept the fact that even though
I opposed H.R. 3200, it was an infinitely better crafted
product than this thing that came out of the Senate on
Christmas Eve. After all, 3200 had a severability clause. The
bill that was signed in law contains no such clause and in fact
if there were a severability clause, we might not be having the
arguments that we are having down in Florida today.
Dr. Goodman, I wonder if you would--we heard it expressed
again today that the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
is going to save $142 billion over the lifetime of the bill. I
think that is preposterous. But you started to talk about the
cost of the subsidies for purchase of insurance in the
exchange. We have already talked about the huge deficit for the
month of February, the extrapolated deficits into the future.
What is going to happen to those projections when the subsidies
for families earning up to $80,000 a year, what is going to
happen when those subsidies kick in to the overall cost of this
legislation?
Mr. Goodman. Well, it is going to soar, so we are sort of
treading water right now. There are a few changes that have
been made but really everything begins January 1, 2014. That is
when the mandates become effective, the subsidies become
effective. Overall on the employer side, I think companies like
McDonald's and Burger King, who employ a lot of workers who
only make $10, $15 an hour, they are not going to be able to
afford family coverage that costs as much as $6 an hour, so
they are going to have to find a way to get their workers over
in the exchange, and I don't know how they will do that, maybe
treat them all as independent contractors, but they are going
to find a way or they won't survive, and then when they get
over there, the taxpayer is going to pay for not just the
premium but going to reimburse those workers for a lot of out-
of-pocket costs.
The costs are going to be quite large. Remember, the only
way we really are paying for most of this is by thinking we are
going to cut Medicare, but when you all 3 years from now start
getting calls from seniors saying we can't find a doctor who
will see us, then you are going to be under enormous pressure
to undo all of that spending that is in the bill and then you
are going to find that you really haven't paid for this at all.
Mr. Burgess. And of course, the Independent Payment
Advisory Board is beyond our scope today, but it should be the
subject of a future hearing but that actually has some pretty
dire consequences, again, wasn't part of the House bill, 3200,
but certainly as part of the bill that was signed into law.
Have you had any thoughts looking ahead to that Independent
Payment Advisory Board and how that is supposed to structurally
pay for the expansion of all of this?
Mr. Goodman. Yes. And let me just say too that I think we
do need to reform Medicare and there is a right way to reform
it and the right way to reform it is to let doctors and
hospitals come to Medicare and propose different ways of being
paid. If they can save Medicare a dollar, you ought to be able
to let them keep 50 cents or 25 cents, and if you did it that
way, I think you would solve a lot of problems very quickly.
But the only way this payment commission is going to be able to
control cost is just by squeezing the providers. The only thing
they know how to do is just squeeze down the doctor fees,
hospital fees, and as the chief actuary of Medicare pointed
out, the Medicare rates are going to be down here and everybody
else's rates are going to be going like that, and the
difference is going to grow wider and wider through time, and
by the time we get to the end of the decade, doctors will
prefer Medicaid patients to Medicare patients. The waiting
lines are going to be long and seniors will be at the end of
the line.
Mr. Burgess. What is the implication for the average Member
of Congress on that day?
Mr. Goodman. You are going to be hearing from a lot of
older voters and they are not going to happy.
Mr. Burgess. I was going to say, are they going to be happy
or sad?
Mr. Goodman. They are going to be very sad.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the gentleman for yielding his time,
and I will back the 10 seconds.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman's
time is expired. The chair recognizes the ranking member of the
full committee, Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to draw
attention to a statement from Senator Harkin which I first of
all ask unanimous consent to put into the record.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.052

Mr. Waxman. He is chairman of both an authorizing committee
and appropriations subcommittee, and he says, ``I understand
the implications of this guarantee that Congress should mandate
appropriations for certain programs in the Affordable Care Act
that are fundamental to its success.'' So I thought he has a
lot to say from both sides of authorizing and appropriating.
The health insurance marketplace was broken, and reforming
the health insurance market was imperative. We say this
frequently, and I would like to ask rhetorically, what does it
mean? It meant the number of uninsured Americans would have
grown to 66 million by 2019. Those would be unhappy people as
well. From 2004 to 2007, 12.6 million adults, 36 percent of
those who actually tried to purchase insurance in the
individual market, were denied coverage. They weren't happy
about that. They were charged a higher premium rate or
discriminated against because of preexisting conditions. Health
insurance premiums more than doubled in the last decade and
have risen three and a half times faster than wages during the
same period, and at least 42 States, at least 75 percent of the
insurance market was controlled by five or fewer insurance
companies. This type of market concentration provides little
leverage for consumers to fight insurance company abuses such
as rescissions of health care coverage when someone gets sick
or denials of medically necessary treatments are insisted on.
Now, I might just point out that those facts are I guess
the Republican plan because they want to repeal the Affordable
Care Act, which would leave us with the status quo. They would
do nothing. The Affordable Care Act addressed these problems,
and here are a few of the examples. They prohibit insurers from
denying individuals insurance or charging people more because
of preexisting health conditions from hangnails to heart
disease. They limit out-of-pocket spending for health care
benefits, prohibit annual and lifetime limits by insurance
companies, significantly reduce red tape, invest in ways to
reform the delivery system to provide better care at lower
costs.
Senator Vitale, can you describe why health reform is so
important, why repealing it would be disastrous for Americans,
for the economy and for our health care system?
Mr. Vitale. Thank you, Mr. Waxman. You all have a very
difficult time of it here and you made some very difficult
decisions and very controversial decisions. I can speak from
the experience of New Jersey and what it means to have a State
with 1.3 million uninsured mostly working people who get up
every day, put on their shoes and try to make a living and
provide for their families. They work for small companies by
and large who can't afford the cost of health insurance to
provide to their employees, and if they can, the contribution
by the employee is usually beyond what it is that they can
afford. So the simple facts are, and setting aside all the
controversy between what is mandatory and what is
discretionary, the fact of the matter is that there are
millions of New Jerseyans and millions of Americans who are
suffering every day without an opportunity for what is reliable
and dependable and affordable health care. PPACA provides that.
It is an imperfect piece of legislation, and most legislative
initiatives are, and I can speak for that firsthand in New
Jersey.
Mr. Waxman. Now, if it weren't there, we would be back to
the golden age of pre-Affordable Care Act, which I guess is
what the Republicans would want.
Now, one of the things they attack in this proposal today
are the teaching health centers. For years, we provided
mandatory funding for hospitals under the Medicare program to
train medical resident trainees. In 2009, we provided about
$9.5 billion in mandatory funding to train medical residents.
Multiple expert bodies including MedPAC, the Council on
Graduate Medical Education and others have called for more
training of primary care residents and more training in the
community because that is where most physicians practice today.
That is why the ACA provided $230 million over 5 years to
directly fund community-based centers to train primary care.
Now, my colleagues on the other side of the aisle have
repeatedly called for more workforce efforts. One of the
witnesses, Dr. Goodman, has criticized the ACA for not
providing enough funding to train physicians. Senator Vitale,
can you tell us about the importance of funding to training
primary care residents in your State?
Mr. Vitale. Three years ago, I attended a class and I spoke
to a class at Rutgers Medical School, and there were about 60
students present and I asked by a show of hands how many were
going forward to primary care. One person raised their hand. So
the importance is of course--and thank you, Mr. Chairman. The
importance is of course that we begin to develop this not just
those who practice in primary care but also those who practice
in advanced practice nursing.
Mr. Waxman. Well, I can think of no better use of mandatory
funds than to provide funding for residents.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
recognizes the gentlelady from Tennessee, Ms. Blackburn, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
our witnesses for your patience today, and also for
understanding that we have another hearing going on downstairs.
Mr. Vitale, I appreciate that you are here. I was a State
senator in Tennessee before I came here, and I was a State
senator during the TennCare era, which was the test case for
public option health care. Now, I know in New Jersey you have
guaranteed issue and I think it is 45 mandates--am I correct--
that you all have to cover in that package? Which is pretty
expensive. And the way TennCare is set up under an 1115 waiver
with CMS, it was between the Governor's Office in Tennessee and
CMS. So in New Jersey, do you all have any law on the books
that allows the governor to spend State money without coming to
the legislature?
Mr. Vitale. Well, there are elements in every--and we
balance our budget every year by constitutional mandate. There
are elements in the budget that is part of the governor's
budget and so he is of course free to spend the dollars in his
budget appropriation.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Let me ask you this, the 45 benefit
mandates, that is a big number. Do you think as you are looking
at the health care situation in your State and others and
talking with us, do you think that individuals should have
access to health care with fewer mandated benefits, State or
federal mandated benefits?
Mr. Vitale. I think we should all have the same benefits
available to all of us.
Mrs. Blackburn. So you think one size fits all?
Mr. Vitale. In most cases, yes.
Mrs. Blackburn. I have to differ with you on that.
Mr. Istook, let me talk to you about the teaching centers.
I found this very interesting. Section 5508 of Obamacare
provides $230 million not simply an authorization but this is
for the teaching study program yet the President's budget
zeroes out funding for children's hospital graduate medical
education. And you are a former appropriator so do you think
that it is wise to make one program mandatory and beef up one
and then completely cut out another one, especially when you
are looking at children's health care?
Mr. Istook. There is an unfortunate trend that we have seen
in the President's budget proposals of substituting mandatory
funding for discretionary funding, in other words, trying to
remove things beyond the ability of Congress to control
spending. Examples include not only what you cite but when the
President says, for example, we are reducing discretionary
spending, if you read the budget you find that one way is, you
take Pell grants and say they are no longer discretionary, now
they are mandatory. You take transportation funding and say it
is no longer discretionary, now it is mandatory, and they then
trumpet a claim that we have reduced discretionary spending.
Well, you have done that by relabeling it as mandatory. There
is no savings there and it is lousy practice as far as
accountability.
Mrs. Blackburn. Dr. Goodman, if I could come to you on that
very point, because the concern of moving things from
discretionary to mandatory is of great concern to us. As you
all have reviewed the bill, have you been able to articulate
the number of times that this has happened in the Obamacare
bill and to look at the estimated impact above what we know as
the appropriated dollars for this one action?
Mr. Goodman. Well, not beyond what the Congressional
Research Service report has stated. I just think there are, as
my testimony indicated, fundamental flaws in this bill. And in
response to Congressman Waxman's critique, behind every flaw
that we discuss in this testimony, we said this is the
alternative, this it the right way to do it as far as general
concept is concerned, and if we don't do it the right way, then
we are going to continue on a spending path that is simply
unsustainable. There is nothing in the Affordable Care Act that
fundamentally changes the way we are going to pay for health
care. It is going to make all the perverse incentives that are
now there worse than they were before, and the price we pay is
going to be higher.
Mrs. Blackburn. I found it so interesting last week, and I
discussed this with Secretary Sebelius last week. There was a
Wall Street Journal editorial where you had Ms. Cutter and Ms.
Daparel, the word was that they were telling people not to
worry about all the numerous waivers that were there and not to
worry about the duplications, that this is a way--giving the
States a waiver was a way to ease us more to a single payer
system, and as we have looked at these programs, the personal
responsibility education program, there is money for that that
is made mandatory in the Obamacare program but yet the
President's fiscal year budget, 2012 budget, includes $16
billion for programs that overlap. Are you all doing any
research work on that? And I know my time is expired and I will
yield back at the end of your response.
Mr. Goodman. Well, let us think about what those waivers
are about. Two point seven million people have been granted a
waiver. That contracts with 12,500 people who have the problem
everybody is talking about, that they have been denied health
insurance because of a preexisting condition. Twelve thousand
five hundred people now have been signed up for insurance,
paying the same premium healthy people pay. That problem is
solved. The 2.7 million people are people like the workers at
McDonald's who earn $10, $15 an hour. The insurance that they
are going to have to buy for family coverage would be almost $6
an hour. They can't afford it. McDonald's can't afford it. That
is why they were granted a waiver but at the end of the waiver
period the problem is not going to go away.
Mr. Pitts. The gentlelady's time is expired, and the chair
recognizes the gentlelady from Wisconsin, Ms. Baldwin, for 5
minutes for questions.
Ms. Baldwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and before I turn to
the topic of the hearing, I do want to express my gratitude to
you and members on both sides of the aisle for advancing H.R.
525 on public health veterinarians, which passed last night by
the very comfortable margin of two votes. So mission
accomplished with regard to that piece of important
legislation, and I really do appreciate the efforts of members
on both sides of the aisle.
Turning to the subject at hand, many are familiar with the
expression ``everyone is entitled to their own opinions but
they are not entitled to their own facts,'' and I understand
that my Republican colleagues may have differing opinions about
the health care law that was signed into law last year but
there should be no mistake about the facts. The five committee
prints that we are looking at in this hearing put forth by the
Majority will not create jobs. These proposals will not
stimulate our struggling economy and these proposals will not
put the middle class of America back to work.
The Republican Majority is playing what I would consider a
dangerous game of bait and switch with the American people.
Despite promises from the new Majority during the midterm
elections that this Congress would be focusing on creating jobs
and bolstering the economy, the legislative proposals and the
committee prints that they have offered us today fail to
deliver on this promise. In fact, not only do the Majority's
legislative proposals do nothing to create jobs or bolster the
economy, I think these proposals would actually exacerbate the
problem by taking away new job opportunities.
With new investments in the health care law, we took
tremendous strides towards expanding, for example, the primary
care workforce, and we are on a path to train 16,000 new
primary care providers in the United States. So far, my home
State of Wisconsin has received $3.8 million for a primary care
residency program, and we know how important training primary
care physicians is for our economy. I mean, these doctors serve
as gatekeepers, keeping people out of emergency rooms and
controlling health care costs. The Republican proposal to
change the teaching centers development grants program places
this investment at risk and could ultimately worsen the health
care workforce shortage. I fail to see how taking away funding
for critical jobs is going to help our economy.
Another proposal that we are looking at today would repeal
funding for grants to States to establish exchanges. These
exchanges are critical for ensuring that thousands of small
businesses and 24 million Americans have access to new coverage
options. The grants to States would provide States with the
flexibility to create an exchange that meets each State's
needs. Wisconsin has already received $38 million through an
early innovator grant. This critical funding will spur job
creation in my State and improve access to quality, low-cost
health coverage.
This Republican proposal raises an important question: Are
we going to ask cash-strapped States to return the money they
have already been awarded? Will Wisconsin have to return the
$38 million that Governor Walker has already accepted? And I
fail to see how rescinding money that will create jobs is the
right thing to do to get our economy back on track.
Mr. Chairman, the American people, the people of Wisconsin
deserve better, and we should be focusing on the greatest need
our country has right now, which is jobs, jobs and jobs. I
would yield my remaining time to the gentleman from New York,
Mr. Weiner.
Mr. Weiner. Thank you very much, and welcome, Congressman.
It is nice to see you back. It is nice to see people who leave
this place with marketable skills. I am glad at least you do.
I just want to ask a yes or no question, if I could, in the
brief time that Congresswoman Baldwin has yielded to me.
Congressman Istook, is Medicare a single-payer system?
Mr. Istook. No.
Mr. Weiner. Dr. Goodman, is Medicare a single-payer system?
Mr. Goodman. No.
Mr. Weiner. Senator Vitale, is Medicare a single-payer
system?
Mr. Vitale. I believe it is.
Mr. Weiner. It is single payer in the traditional way that
it is used because there is one person writing the checks but
that doesn't mean that--right? I mean, basically the Federal
Government collects our money in our taxes, in our payroll
taxes and then reimburses doctors, reimburses clinics,
reimburses other--that is a single-payer system. It doesn't
mean that Medicare employs the doctors, it doesn't mean they
employ the clinics, it doesn't mean they employ the
pharmaceutical companies. It is just who passes the money
along. And in the one second I have left, do you know what the
overhead and profits is of Medicare? One point zero three
percent.
Mr. Burgess. [Presiding] The gentleman's time is expired.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Dr. Gingrey.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and Representative
Istook, let me associate myself with Representative Weiner in
regard to his comments. Thank you for your service and happy to
see you, and thank all three of the witnesses for your
testimony today.
I want to start out by saying that the actions of this
Administration and the Secretary of Health and Human Services I
think border on deception and they leave me with very little
confidence in both Obamacare and the Administration's ability
to enact the law through regulation over these next 3 years.
Just last week was the latest example. Secretary Sebelius right
here in this committee told Congressman Shimkus that the
Administration was confident that she could spend one pot of
money, $500 billion worth of money, twice, both to pay for
Obamacare and increase the solvency of Medicare. And then next
the Secretary testified that she had used her powers as
Secretary to slip in an end-of-life provider code into Medicare
in the dark of night without allowing for public comment. And
finally, she told our panel and a Senate Finance Committee
panel a few weeks ago that a major long-term-care program
created in Obamacare that she is in charge of was totally
unsustainable but only after direct questioning. No previous
announcement to the American people or to Congress, and of
course, I am referring to the CLASS Act.
With these thoughts in mind, I wanted to ask you,
Representative Istook, section 4002 of the Obamacare bill, or
the Affordable Care Act, created a fund for prevention,
wellness and public health activities. In the language of
Obamacare, it says that these funds are for ``sustained and
national investment in prevention and public health programs.''
Are the words ``prevention'' and ``public health programs''
defined in section 4002?
Mr. Istook. I am not aware of any definition. I think that
is left to the sole discretion and judgment of the Secretary.
Mr. Gingrey. And so conceivably then Secretary Sebelius or
any Secretary could use these funds for any purpose that they
decide is prevention, correct?
Mr. Istook. Oh, yes. They could be extremely broadly
defined.
Mr. Gingrey. Wide, wide discretion on the part of the
Secretary of HHS.
Mr. Istook. Right.
Mr. Gingrey. Let me go to Mr. Goodman. You know, we all
remember the Andy Griffith Medicare ads that the Secretary ran
last year that looked a lot like to me political advertising
for the Affordable Care Act, Obamacare. Is there anything that
would prevent the Secretary from using these taxpayer dollars
to pay for similar political advertising on provisions in
Obamacare in a lead-up to the 2012 elections, as an example?
Mr. Goodman. I don't think so, and let me say, those Andy
Griffith ads were extremely deceptive bordering on fraud
because what he talked about were the benefits for seniors
under the bill but didn't mention any of the costs, and for
every $1 of new spending, there are $10 of reductions in
spending for seniors. So on net, there is going to be a lot
less spending on senior citizens. You know, that ad made it
sound like boy, once seniors find out how this works, they are
going to like it.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, I thank you for that response, and I
wasn't going to use the word ``fraud'' but I guess ``bordering
on fraud'' is acceptable language in your testimony, and I tend
to agree with you on that.
Dr. Goodman, how much authority does Secretary Sebelius
have over Obamacare now that it is being implemented by
regulation?
Mr. Goodman. You know, I don't know but every time I learn
about some new exercise of authority, I am shocked. I have
never seen so much authority that has been given to a
Secretary, nothing even close to it, and it bothers me because,
you know, there are elections, Presidents come and go,
Secretaries come and go, and if a Secretary has that much
power, how do we know what is going to happen 8 years from now,
12 years from now? We are no longer a government of laws, we
are government of people and discretion, whims.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Goodman, thank you.
In the few seconds I have got left, let me shift to Senator
Vitale. Senator, in your written testimony and what you said to
us here today, you kind of touted what New Jersey has done in
regard to the CHIP program and the fact that you cover
childless adults, and I realize this goes back to Governor
Whitman but, you know, and you talk about the fact that charity
care went way down because you expanded this cover, the CHIP
program. I think it was, what, something like 400 percent of
the federal poverty level in New Jersey. Are you aware of the
fact that most of these hospitals that provide charity care are
not-for-profit, and in that status as not-for-profit they get
tremendous tax breaks, and it is their obligation to be
designated as not-for-profit to provide this charity care?
Mr. Vitale. May I respond, Chairman? Thank you.
Well, you are right, but the fact of the matter is that the
overwhelming amount of charity care has just really been
debilitating for our State's hospitals. It is so overwhelming
that they do meet their charitable obligation as not-for-
profits but to the extent now that there are so many uninsured
accessing health care in the worst and most expensive manner,
in the emergency departments, has pushed a number of hospitals
and into closure in our State, and those who are surviving are
under increasing pressure from those who are uninsured.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, reclaiming--I realize my time is
expired and I appreciate your indulgence. If you could just let
me make this one comment? I mean, the point I am making is that
these hospitals, they are designed not-for-profit, and it
doesn't mean that these patients are going to the emergency
room to get their care. Most of these hospitals have outpatient
clinics and the ability to provide the same level of care that
they would be getting if they were signed up for SCHIP or in
one of these exchanges that the good senator is referring to,
and I will yield back and I thank you for your indulgence.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you. The gentleman from New York is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Weiner. The problem is, they are not paid for.
Ultimately, they have to pay for it. The bill fairy doesn't
come in and say to any kind of hospital we are going to go pay
your bills.
By the way, Dr. Goodman, calling Andy Griffith a fraud is
outrageous. He is one of the most beloved Americans. I am just
kidding.
Let me just, Senator Vitale, let me ask you a couple of
questions. There has been a lot of discussion by the two
gentlemen to your right about the inflexibility and the Federal
Government control that is being taken by this bill. Let me
just ask you a couple of questions. State insurance
commissioners were still kept in charge of State insurance
policies in the 50 States. Is that correct?
Mr. Vitale. Yes.
Mr. Weiner. And didn't the Affordable Care Act not only do
that but empower them with additional tools they didn't have
before on behalf of the residents of the State? Is that
correct?
Mr. Vitale. That is correct.
Mr. Weiner. Is it also correct that under the federal
Affordable Care Act the exchanges if the States so choose are
going to be set up as State-run, State-governed exchanges? Is
that correct?
Mr. Vitale. That is correct.
Mr. Weiner. Isn't it also true that despite the efforts of
many of my Republican friends and perhaps the gentlemen to your
right, efforts to nationalize tort reform were resisted? Isn't
tort reform still the purview of the States under this law?
Mr. Vitale. It is and always has been.
Mr. Weiner. Isn't it also true that the expansion of
Medicaid between now and 2017 is entirely picked up by the
Federal Government? Is that true?
Mr. Vitale. Yes.
Mr. Weiner. Isn't it also true that in 2018, 2019, 2020 and
2021, if there are fewer poor people, fewer people bankrupted
by health care costs, for example, more people working, more
people employed, the number of Medicare beneficiaries if your
State is successful will go down, will it not?
Mr. Vitale. Yes, it will.
Mr. Weiner. And with it will be Medicaid expenses, will it
not?
Mr. Vitale. Yes.
Mr. Weiner. So in fact, if you are a well-governed State
and the economy does better, meaning less, God willing, 20
percent of the economy is health care, and people are employed
more like they have been increasingly--more private sector jobs
have been created under President Obama than under 8 years of
President Bush--if it continues that way, Medicaid expenses
could go down. Is that correct?
Mr. Vitale. That is correct.
Mr. Weiner. Now, if I can talk to you a little bit about
some of the things that are required in here and just get your
feedback on them. One is this notion of standards. The
gentlewoman from Tennessee says oh, one size fits all, but let
us assume for a moment the citizens of New Jersey through their
State rights say that we are going to have certain health care
standards that are robust, we want to make sure that our
insurance actually covers people, and the State of Tennessee
says no, we are going to have a scaled-down program that has
virtually no benefits but lower cost, isn't it very likely that
citizens of New Jersey, if they can go to that lower standard,
the healthy ones will say, Wait a minute, I don't need a lot of
insurance, I am going to go to the lower standards--won't there
be a race to the bottom, less insurance and ultimately the same
thing we have now, which is people who are underinsured?
Wouldn't that be the effect?
Mr. Vitale. That will be the effect, yes.
Mr. Weiner. So the effect of having standards across State
lines is to make sure there is fair competition between States.
Next is this notion of mandatory coverage that is enshrined
in Romneycare. Are you aware that under the mandatory policies
of Romneycare that with the subsidy, a very similar model that
we set up, under Romneycare, a grand total of 0.67 percent
chose not to take the subsidy and buy insurance? Are you aware
of that?
Mr. Vitale. Yes.
Mr. Weiner. It is a very tiny number because actually this
is going to come as a surprise, the American people when given
a subsidy, they want the insurance.
Now I would like to talk a little bit about Dr. Goodman and
Congressman Istook's solutions. They say why don't we look at
what Walmart does and they are able to lower costs if we just
give people money, they will go out and buy insurance. Well, if
you don't believe in the laws of big markets and you don't
believe in the laws of the economy that more people joining
together can negotiate for lower prices, you can do something.
Maybe my father when he retired at 61 with an incidence of
prostate cancer was not yet eligible for Medicare, he went out
as an individual and said I am going to try to buy insurance so
the insurance company said one of two things: One, we don't
want you, you are going to get sick, our business model is
paying out as little as possible, or two, they said $17,000 to
$20,000 a year from my retired father. And the reason is very
simple. Under Dr. Goodman's model, we can all be given money to
go out and spend and people like me and Congressman Istook, who
is healthy as an ox, he will be able to get insurance, but what
do you do with the people who the insurance company says I
don't want it. Under Dr. Goodman's model, there are no
standards, everyone just gets a check. What you are doing is
deconstructing one of the most powerful models that Walmart
uses, which is when you get large pools of people, you are able
to hold costs down. If you don't believe me, look at how auto
insurance works. It aggregates risk over the whole pool. You
say to each and every citizen, go out and buy for yourself, you
are resisting the ideas of a free marketplace and how it works
and works best. And I have got news for you, Dr. Goodman. Do
you know who is going to love your idea? Insurance companies.
They love the idea of just give the money, we will get some
people come in with the money but we will get to decide who we
want and who we don't, and you ignore the idea that sometimes
what you have got to say is you know what, let us pool people
together, and for those of you who are wondering, the idea of
expanding Medicare, the boogeyman of the single-payer system,
is based on that model because we have all these citizens, we
hold down costs and we aggregate everyone together. That is the
way the system works correctly. I thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
recognizes the ranking member for a unanimous consent request.
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Chairman, I would ask unanimous consent to
include the testimony of Jeff Levi of the Trust for America's
Health and from Alan Weil of the National Academy for State
Health Policy, and I would also like to add a facts sheet on
your proposal, the chairman's proposal, to block mandatory
funding in the Affordable Care Act. This was prepared by Mr.
Waxman, our ranking member. I believe you have all of these.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.081

Mr. Pitts. In conclusion, I would like to thank our
witnesses, former Congressman Istook, Dr. Goodman, Senator
Vitale, for their testimony. I would like to thank them and the
members for participating in today's hearing. I remind the
members that they have 10 business days to submit questions for
the record, and I ask the witnesses to please respond promptly
to the questions. Members should submit their questions by the
close of business on March 23rd.
With that, this subcommittee hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:50 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 68055.086


