- THE PPACA'S HIGH RISK POOL REGIME: HIGH COST, LOW PARTICIPATION

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE PPACA'S HIGH RISK POOL REGIME: HIGH COST, LOW PARTICIPATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 1, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-29

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                      HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                     Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida                 JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois                 EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania          FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
MARY BONO MACK, California             BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                    ANNA G. ESHOO, California
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                    ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                  GENE GREEN, Texas
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina     DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
Vice Chairman                        LOIS CAPPS, California
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma                MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania               JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas              CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee            JAY INSLEE, Washington
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California           TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire         MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                  ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana               JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington     JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi              DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

(ii)
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

CLIFF STEARNS, Florida
Chairman
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma                Ranking Member
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                GENE GREEN, Texas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
CORY GARDNER, Colorado                   Islands
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)        officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Cliff Stearns, a Representative in Congress from the state
of Florida, opening statement..................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the state
of Colorado, opening statement.................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the state
of California, opening statement...............................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the state of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    58
Hon. John D. Dingell, a Representative in Congress from the state
of Michigan, prepared statement................................    59

Witnesses

Steve Larsen, Deputy Administrator and Director, Center for
Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight, Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services, Department of Health and Human
Services.......................................................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    14

Submitted Material

Letter of March 31, 2011, from John Barthell, submitted by Ms.
DeGette........................................................    60
Early Retiree Reinsurance Program (ERRP) reports dated March 2,
2011, and March 31, 2011, respectively, submitted by Mr.
Stearns........................................................    62
Energy and Commerce Staff memorandum dated March 23, 2011,
submitted by Mr. Stearns.......................................   132
Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) Chief Actuary report
dated April 22, 2010, submitted by Mr. Stearns.................   143
HHS response to Committee dated February 28, 2011, submitted by
Mr. Stearns....................................................   181
New York Times article entitled, ``G.E.'s Strategies Let it Avoid
Taxes Altogether,'' by David Kocieniewski, dated March 24,
2011, submitted by Mr. Stearns.................................   203
www.HealthCare.gov Newsroom, posted February 10, 2011, submitted
by Ms. DeGette.................................................   209

THE PPACA'S HIGH RISK POOL REGIME: HIGH COST, LOW PARTICIPATION

----------

FRIDAY, APRIL 1, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Cliff
Stearns (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Stearns, Terry, Sullivan,
Murphy, Burgess, Blackburn, Myrick, Bilbray, Gingrey, Scalise,
Gardner, Griffith, DeGette, Schakowsky, Markey, Green,
Christensen, Dingell, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Carl Anderson, Counsel, Oversight; Stacy
Cline, Counsel, Oversight; Julie Goon, Health Policy Advisor;
Todd Harrison, Chief Counsel, Oversight & Investigations; Sean
Hayes, Counsel, Oversight & Investigations; Carly McWilliams,
Legislative Clerk; Andrew Powaleny, Press Assistant; Krista
Rosenthall, Counsel to Chairman Emeritus; Ruth Saunders,
Detailee, ICE; Alan Slobodin, Deputy Chief Counsel, Oversight;
Sam Spector, Counsel, Oversight; John Stone, Associate Counsel;
Phil Barnett, Democratic Staff Director; Brian Cohen,
Democratic Investigations Director and Senior Policy Advisor;
Karen Lightfoot, Democratic Communications Director, and Senior
Policy Advisor; Ali Neubauer, Democratic Investigator; and Anne
Tindall, Democratic Counsel.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CLIFF STEARNS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mr. Stearns. Good morning, everybody, and let me welcome
the members here, and our witness to the Subcommittee on
Oversight and Investigations, and I will start with my opening
statement.
We convene this hearing of the Subcommittee on Oversight
and Investigation today to gather information concerning the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act High Risk Pool
Regime. The Administration's healthcare allocated $5 billion to
provide healthcare coverage for individuals who have been
locked out of insurance market. The President and the Democrats
try to sell this law to the American people by telling us how
many people were unable to get health insurance, and how this
law was going to protect these individuals, while somehow
saving the American taxpayers money.
It has been 1 year since the healthcare law was forced on
the American people. It has been 9 months since the high risk
pools became operational. The chief actuary of Medicare and
Medicaid estimated that 375,000 people would enroll in these
high risk pools by the end of 2010, but only 12,000 actually
did enroll. CMS informed us that they have conducted a massive
outreach campaign to try to advertise this program in order to
get people to sign up. Who is paying for this advertising tour
is a good question. The taxpayers. Through the $5 billion
allotted to this program in the healthcare reform law, this
means money that was allocated to help the uninsured is being
used to help the Administration save face and rescue this
program.
This is on top of the previous Democrat majority spending
an entire year talking about nothing but this healthcare law.
If countless speeches by the President can't advertise these
high risk pools, how can a bureaucratic advertising campaign
hope to accomplish the same goal?
Just as alarming as the law enrollment numbers, this
Committee has learned through its investigation that low
enrollment does not equal low costs. For example, California
expects to accumulate $1 billion in claims over the lifetime of
this program, with approximately 70 percent of the tab paid for
by the Federal Government. This means that California alone,
one state, that is, expects claims to eat up almost one-fifth
of the total cost of the program. Our investigation revealed
that not a single state expects premium revenue to be near the
cost of claims over the life of this program.
Now back in December, The Washington Post reported that
``New Hampshire's plan has only about 80 members, but they have
actually spent nearly double the $650,000 that the state was
allocated for this program. HHS agreed to give New Hampshire
more money.'' So this is a program that must operate within a
fixed budget of $5 billion. HHS has not explained how it
intends to keep the program running through 2014 without
additional funding.
Our investigation has also uncovered problems with the
implementation of the high risk pool. In order to get the
program up so quickly, HHS used the CHIP formula to allocate
money between the States. While the CHIP formula is used to
determine the number of uninsured children in each State, we
would think that HHS would use a formula that measures the
number of uninsured children with preexisting conditions in
each State, since this fund is supposed to help the uninsured
with the preexisting condition. This program uses a non-
relevant formula simply because it was easy and already
available. This inequity could mean people in some states are
getting more than they need, while people in others aren't
getting enough. We want to make sure that the money is being
allocated fairly and properly.
Obamacare was supposed to be the solution to our Nation's
healthcare ills, but here we are, 1 year later, and has a
single promise made by the President and the healthcare plan
that the Democrats passed--promises they made about this law
come true? The high risk pool program is yet another promise
that has fallen short, in our opinion. We were supposed to
enroll over a quarter of a million Americans. We didn't even
reach 5 percent of that goal.
Steve Larsen, the Deputy Administrator and Director of the
Center for Consumer Information Insurance Oversight was before
the Subcommittee back in February to talk about the waivers--
you remember that--that HHS has been granting to states and
entities that can't afford the Administration's healthcare
plan. Since he testified just 2 months ago, we have seen more
states' struggling companies all seek waivers. A big indicator
to me that we are on the wrong track is the number of people in
need of waivers to relieve them of the legislative and
financial burdens of the Democrat healthcare plan. As we have
seen through our investigations, this is a problem that is
getting worse. We intend to hold HHS accountable today for what
we see as low enrollment, skyrocketing costs, and poor
implementation of a program that was promised to help support
one of our most vulnerable populations.
So I welcome Mr. Larsen returning, and recognize the
ranking member, my colleague, Ms. DeGette from Colorado.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stearns follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Cliff Stearns

We convene this hearing of the Subcommittee on Oversight
and Investigations today to gather information concerning The
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act's High Risk Pool
Regime. Obamacare allocated $5 billion to provide health
coverage for individuals who have been locked out of the
insurance market. Obama and the Democrats tried to sell this
law to the American people by telling us how many people were
unable to get health insurance and how this law was going to
protect these individuals, while somehow saving the American
taxpayer money.
It has been one year since the health care law was forced
on the American people. It's been nine months since the high
risk pools became operational. The Chief Actuary of Medicare
and Medicaid estimated that 375,000 people would enroll in
these high risk pools by the end of 2010. But only 12,000
actually did enroll. CMS informed us that they've conducted a
massive outreach campaign to try to advertise this program in
order to get people to sign up. Who is paying for that
advertising tour? The taxpayers.through the $5 billion allotted
to this program in the health care reform law. That means money
that was allocated to help the uninsured is being used to help
the administration save face and rescue the program. This is on
top of the previous Democrat majority spending an entire year
talking about nothing but this health care law-if countless
speeches by the President can't advertise these pools, how can
a bureaucratic advertising campaign hope to accomplish this
goal?
Just as alarming as the low enrollment numbers, this
committee has learned through its investigation that low
enrollment does not equal low costs. For example, California
expects to accumulate $1 billion in claims over the lifetime of
the program, with approximately 70 percent of the tab paid for
by the federal government. That means that California alone,
one state, expects claims to eat up almost one fifth of the
total cost of the program. Our investigation revealed that not
a single state expects premium revenue to be near the cost of
claims over the life of the program.
Back in December, the Washington Post reported that ``New
Hampshire's plan has only about 80 members, but they have
already spent nearly double the $650,000 the state was
allotted. HHS agreed to give New Hampshire more money.'' This
is a program that must operate within a fixed budget of $5
billion. HHS has not explained how it intends to keep the
program running through 2014 without additional funding.
Our investigation has also uncovered problems with the
implementation of the high-risk pool. In order to get the
program up so quickly, HHS used the CHIP formula to allocate
money between the states. While the CHIP formula is used to
determine the number of uninsured children in each state, we
would think HHS would use a formula that measures the number of
uninsured children with pre-existing conditions in each state,
since this fund is supposed to help the uninsured with pre-
existing conditions. This program uses a non-relevant formula
simply because it was easy and already available. This inequity
could mean people in some states are getting more than they
need, while people in others aren't getting enough. We want to
make sure that the money is being allocated fairly.
ObamaCare is supposed to be the solution to our nation's
health care ills but here we are, one year later, and has a
single promise made by President Obama and the Democrats about
this law come true? The high risk pool program is yet another
enormous promise that has fallen short: we were supposed to
enroll over a quarter of a million Americans. We didn't even
reach five percent of that goal.
Steve Larsen, Deputy Administrator and Director of the
Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight, was
before the Subcommittee back in February to talk about the
waivers that HHS has been granting to states and entities that
can't afford Obamacare. Since he testified just two months ago,
we've seen more states and struggling companies seek waivers. A
big indicator to me that we are on the wrong track is the
number of people in need of waivers to relieve them of the
legislative and financial burdens of ObamaCare. As we've seen
through our investigations, this is a problem that is getting
worse. We intend to hold HHS accountable today for what we see
as low enrollment, skyrocketing costs, and poor implementation
of a program that was promised to help support one of our most
vulnerable populations.
With that, I welcome Mr. Larsen, and recognize the ranking
member, Congresswoman Degette.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DEGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Before I give my opening statement, I would like to take a
moment of personal privilege and introduce my sister Cathy and
her family who have come here to visit and see how sausage is
made all week long.
Mr. Stearns. Cathy, you are welcome.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Chairman, President Obama signed the
historic healthcare reform legislation into law just 1 year
ago. When the law's full benefits have been implemented, every
American will have access to affordable health insurance, and
abuse of insurance industry practices like discrimination with
people--against people with preexisting conditions will be
banned entirely. Millions of Americans are already benefiting
from the law, including Americans with preexisting conditions.
Thousands of these individuals, thanks to the subject of this
hearing, the preexisting condition insurance pools, or PCIPs,
have access to affordable individual coverage for the first
time. Prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act, health
insurance for people with illnesses like diabetes, asthma,
cancer, arthritis, or HIV/AIDS was either not available on the
individual market or was so expensive as to make it effectively
unavailable. But the Affordable Care Act immediately banned the
egregious practice of denying coverage to children with
preexisting conditions. The Affordable Care Act also offered
immediate benefits to adults with preexisting conditions
through the PCIP program. These plans also offer individuals
with preexisting conditions insurance at the standard
individual market rate, not the exorbitant rates offered on the
private market. These plans began accepting applications in
late 2010, and over 12,000 people are now enrolled in them.
One of the enrollees is John Barzel, who is a constituent
of mine from Colorado. Mr. Barzel, a bartender who works on his
feet all day long, suffered from a condition I am well aware
of, severe arthritis in both hips and desperately needed two
hip replacements to keep his job, but his employer doesn't
offer health insurance and he could not obtain health insurance
on the individual market. When he learned about PCIP, he signed
up immediately. He has since had two hip replacements and in
his words to my staff, he got a new lease on life. He says
that, and I quote, ``The health insurance coverage provided for
me under the Affordable Care Act took me from chronic pain to
free daily life and restored by ability to support myself.''
Now Mr. Chairman, I wanted to have Mr. Barzel come here in
person at this hearing, but we were told that he would not be
allowed to testify, so I am disappointed by this decision, but
I would at least ask unanimous consent that his letter to the
Committee be included in the record.
Mr. Stearns. By unanimous consent, so ordered.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Mr. Waxman. I would like to object, and I do so to inquire
why he was not allowed to come. Here is a man who could tell us
from his own experience what these high risk pools meant to
him. Why wouldn't we allow him to come, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Waxman, you understand that we are going
to have continued hearings on this, and we will have another
opportunity to bring your witness in. I thought as we started
this process, dealing with one specific subject we would have
just the government explain exactly what the status is, and so
that is why we have just one witness. I think----
Mr. Waxman. How many hearings do you intend to call on this
subject?
Mr. Stearns. Well, I would be glad to sit down with you at
a later date. We are just in the early stages of this. As you
know, we have got plenty of hearings on the healthcare plan,
and this is just one of many. So at this point, by unanimous
consent, so ordered the letter will be entered into the record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. DeGette. Chairman, not to put too fine a point on it,
this is the second hearing the Minority was denied their
witness, so I hope we can work this out for future hearings.
I know that we are going to hear--in fact, we already heard
from the chairman that PCIP enrollment is lower than
anticipated, and I appreciate that CCIIO, in recognition of
these concerns, has outreaches--has improved its outreach
efforts. I hope we will hear more about those efforts from our
witness, but I find it a little ironic that my friends across
the aisle would complain about low enrollment in a plan that
every single one of them voted to repeal, because when I hear
about stories like John Barzel, I find repeal efforts
impossible to understand. These thousands of people who now
have access to insurance for the first time would have it
whisked away immediately. So it seems to me that the solution
to the problem is to try to increase outreach efforts so that
we can get a lot of people who are uninsurable because of
preexisting conditions to be enrolled in insurance.
Now, PCIP is not a permanent solution to the problems faced
by people with preexisting conditions, that is for sure. It is
a transitional benefit that will be superseded by the full
panoply of the Affordable Care Act's reforms in 2014. But what
the program is right now is critically important to that slice
of people who are and will be enrolled. That is why we should
not repeal this law. Doing so would rob thousands of PCIP
enrollees of the healthcare coverage they now have and take it
away.
A more productive discussion would be a discussion about
how we can enroll more people with preexisting conditions in
this program until we transition to full coverage in 2014.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. DeGette follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Diana DeGette

President Obama signed the historic healthcare reform
legislation into law just over 1 year ago. When the law's full
benefits have been implemented, every American will have access
to affordable health insurance, and abusive insurance industry
practices, like discrimination against people with pre-existing
conditions, will be banned entirely.
Millions of Americans are already benefiting from the law,
including Americans with pre-existing conditions. Thousands of
these individuals, thanks to the subject of this hearing--the
pre-existing condition insurance pools (P-CIPs), have access to
affordable individual coverage for the first time.
Prior to passage of the Affordable Care Act, health
insurance for people with illnesses like diabetes, asthma,
cancer, arthritis, or HIV/AIDS was either not available on the
individual market, or was so expensive as to make it
effectively unavailable.
But the Affordable Care Act immediately banned the
egregious practice of denying coverage to children with pre-
existing conditions. And the Affordable Care Act also offered
immediate benefits to adults with pre-existing conditions
through the PCIP program. PCIP plans offer individuals with
pre-existing conditions insurance at the standard individual
market rate--not the exorbitant rates offered on the private
market.
PCIP plans began accepting applications in late 2010, and
over 12,000 people are now enrolled in them. One of those
enrollees is John Barthell, a constituent of mine from
Colorado.
Mr. Barthell, a bartender who works on his feet all day
long, suffered from severe arthritis in both hips and
desperately needed two hip replacements to keep his job. But
his employer doesn't offer health insurance, and he could not
obtain affordable insurance on the individual market. When he
learned about PCIP, he signed up immediately. He has since had
two hip replacements, and in his words to our staff, ``got a
new lease on life.'' He says that--and I quote--``the health
insurance coverage provided for me under the Affordable Health
Care Act took me from chronic pain to a pain-free daily life
and restored my ability to support myself.''
I wanted to hear from Mr. Barthell in person at this
hearing. I thought that it would be obviously worthwhile to
learn about PCIP from the perspective of someone enrolled in
the program. But we were told by the Majority that he would not
be allowed to testify. I'm very disappointed by this decision,
and I would at least like to ask that Mr. Barthell's letter to
the Committee be included in the record.
I know that we will hear from my Republican colleagues
today that PCIP enrollment is lower than anticipated. And I
appreciate that CCIIO, in recognition of these concerns, has
improved their outreach efforts. I hope we will hear more about
those efforts from our witness.
It is ironic, however, that my friends across the aisle
would complain about low enrollment in a plan that every single
one of them voted to repeal. When I hear stories about what
that would mean to people like John Barthell, I find these
repeal efforts impossible to understand. Repeal would mean that
thousands of people who now have access to insurance for the
first time will have it whisked away from them immediately. One
of those people, Suzanne Hannon of Maryland, also spoke with
our staff.
Suzanne's husband worked for Bethlehem Steel for decades,
but when he turned 65, they cancelled his health benefits,
leaving her uninsured. She was unable to obtain affordable
coverage because of a pre-existing condition: moderately high
cholesterol.
Then last fall, Suzanne heard about PCIP and enrolled. A
month later, she went in for a check-up-something she would not
have done without insurance-and learned she had uterine cancer.
She caught it early, and her prognosis is good, as long as she
can continue her treatment. She is terrified, however, that the
Affordable Care Act will be repealed and that she'll have to
end her chemotherapy. In her words, the repeal of PCIP would be
``a death sentence.''
PCIP is not a permanent solution to the problems faced by
people with pre-existing conditions. It is a transitional
benefit that will be superseded by the full panoply of the
Affordable Care Act's reforms in 2014.
But the program is critically important to the people who
are and will be enrolled. That's why it would be shameful for
Congress to repeal this law. Doing so would rob thousands of
PCIP enrollees of the health coverage they now have, and take
away their rights to even better coverage in the future.

Mr. Burgess [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back. I will
yield myself 2 minutes, and then we will hear from other
members on the Majority side.
This hearing, once again, represents legitimate oversight
of ongoing federal activities over this healthcare law, what we
should be doing in this committee, and I would just address to
the ranking member, we are doing it this year as opposed to
last year, when we had not a single oversight hearing on the
implementation of the healthcare law.
And those with preexisting conditions was identified as one
of the major reasons that the healthcare law was necessary, but
I guess I would just simply ask the question, I don't really
recall the provision in H.R. 3200 that we marked up in this
committee on preexisting conditions, but was it really
necessary to spend $1 trillion to fix this problem, which after
all, is what we have done with the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act? We all want to help, but was it necessary
to go to the lengths that we did and essentially upset the
system that was working arguably for two-thirds of the
population in implementing this program?
We have heard that the universe of people with a medical
diagnosis who were locked out of the system was vast. We were
led to believe that it was in the millions, at different times
eight million, 12 million were used by the President in his
addresses during the summer of 2009. But at the end of the
first year, 2010, we had 8,000 people and then with a massive
advertising campaign, we signed up 12,000 people. Well, why is
that? Is it because the premiums were too high? Is it because
we mandated that you had to go uninsured for 6 months to
qualify? That is kind of risky. Is it because people don't know
we spent a lot of money in advertising, or was it because the
problem just wasn't as bad as we thought? Despite the low
enrollment, the program's finances are high. It begs the
question, was this the proper path to take or could we have
provided subsidized risk pools?
The last Congress, the ranking member of the Health
Subcommittee, Nathan Deal and I introduced H.R. 4019 and 4020,
which actually attempted to get this population as locked out
of the current system while providing the right incentives for
those who have lost their jobs.
At this point, let me yield 2 minutes to--1 minute to the
gentleman from Nebraska, Mr. Terry.
Mr. Terry. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman--acting chairman.
I appreciate the opportunity to hear from this agency how we
can remove waste and perhaps even abuse of funds under their
control. So it concerns me that my friends on the other side of
the aisle do not wish us to press to find wasteful use of
taxpayer dollars or abuse. Hopefully we can get an explanation
on the early retirement and insurance program where there has
been, in the last day or two, several news articles that
concern me about waste and possible abuse of $5 billion that
seem to be going--sent to companies that are quite healthy and
wouldn't need government subsidies for early retirees.
For example, the United Auto Workers received the most this
last year at $206 million. A healthy company, AT&T, received
$140 billion. Verizon received $91 billion. General Electric, I
guess if you hug the President enough, you will get $36
billion. General Motors received an additional $19 billion. I
would like an explanation of why these companies were even
eligible for government subsidies for an early retirement
program.
I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman's time has expired. Yield the
balance of our time to gentlelady from Tennessee, Ms.
Blackburn.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes indeed, if my
colleagues are wondering why we are not calling or if we are
going to call other witnesses on programs such as this early
retirement program, I think we need to call the American
taxpayer who is footing the bill for this and is livid with the
lack of accountability and the lack of measurable results that
they see coming from these programs. It is not hard to
understand, in my book, why we would vote to repeal these
programs.
When you look at this program and the burn rate of this
money, I am curious as to why you have flown through $1.3
billion over the last 2\1/2\ months when you have a total of $5
billion which was supposed to last you for a few more years?
You know, this is a little bit of a head scratcher. Why are you
trying to get this money out the door? Why are there so few
people enrolled in this program? Why is it not giving the
results that are necessary, and of course, as I have said many
times, there is no successful example of public option
healthcare being implemented and achieving a savings, either a
near-term or a long-term savings. The wasteful spending has to
stop. The American taxpayer is growing ill and fatigued with
the practices they see in Washington, DC.
I thank the chairman for calling the hearing. I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. Gentlelady yields back, and the gentlelady
from Colorado.
Ms. DeGette. The gentleman from California----
Mr. Stearns. The gentleman from California is recognized
for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have been involved in congressional oversight for
decades. I have seen firsthand how oversight can, when it is
done right, educate and inform the public and make government
programs work better, but I have also seen how the oversight
process can be abused for no purpose other than to fight
partisan ideological battles, and that is what I see here
today.
This hearing is ironic because it is about the new state of
federal preexisting condition insurance plans, or high risk
pools, established under the Affordable Care Act. These plans
are supposed to be a transition for people who couldn't buy
insurance. They can't go to the individual market because
insurance companies won't give them coverage because of
preexisting medical conditions. So we set up some high risk
pools for them until we get to the transition where we will
insist that insurance companies cover those people at the same
time that we are requiring everybody to be covered so that the
costs are being spread so that everybody gets coverage. Not the
kind of situation we have had up until now where it doesn't
make sense, but insurance companies will not give a policy to
somebody with a preexisting condition because they are just
very likely to be expensive. So the insurance companies want to
exclude people, not cover people.
This is ironic because this is exactly what the Republicans
proposed instead of the bill that we passed. You would think
the Republicans would love this idea. These high risk pools
were the centerpiece of their health reform. They didn't want
to actually eliminate the insurance company discrimination
against people with preexisting conditions. What they wanted to
do was to let the insurance companies treat them differently in
a high risk pool.
Mr. Burgess, who I seem to believe is an outspoken opponent
of the healthcare reform law, said ``The programs to deal with
preexisting conditions would involve risk pools to be sure.''
Politico described high risk pools as one of the old GOP
standbys.
So when we have this high risk pool to give people care
until we transition into the new healthcare system, suddenly
Republican leaders decide they don't like them anymore. Why
don't they like them? Well, they don't like them because not
enough people are taking advantage of these high risk pools.
This hearing isn't about why some are taking advantage and
others not. We are not hearing from people, we are only hearing
from the administrator of this program. Mr. Barthell, a
constituent of Representative DeGette, who is enrolled in one
of these preexisting condition insurance programs, was denied
the ability to be here for this hearing. Now maybe in the next
five or six hearings on the subject he will get a chance to
come in and talk about it. But Republicans are attacking this
program because it is not popular enough and it has too low an
enrollment. Then they are attacking the Early Retiree
Reinsurance Program for being too popular and having enrollment
that is too high. There is just nothing you can do that won't
bring Republican criticism, because what they see is their job
is to whine and complain and attack and confuse people about
the health insurance law so that people won't start realizing
that it is a pretty good law. It ends the worst insurance
company abuses. It helps seniors in Medicare. It helps small
businesses afford healthcare coverage. It makes sure that all
Americans have access to high quality, affordable healthcare.
Now, they say they want to repeal and reform, repeal and
replace. Well, we haven't seen their replacement, but we do
note that they did propose some ideas as alternatives, and one
of the ideas they proposed were high risk pools. Now we are
having a series of hearings on high risk pools and why they are
not successful enough. High risk pools could have been the ones
we would have adopted on a bipartisan basis, but they wouldn't
work with us to do anything on a bipartisan basis.
This hearing is not a serious hearing. This hearing is not
really trying to get facts that will help bring about some
understanding that could lead to reforms. This is just a
partisan show. It is not a legitimate oversight hearing, and
unfortunately, that seems to be par for the course for this
committee, even though this subcommittee is called the
Oversight Subcommittee. I think at some point we need to stop
these partisan games, learn how to work together for the
benefit of the American people.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Waxman follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Henry A. Waxman

I've been involved in congressional oversight for decades,
and I've seen firsthand how oversight, when done right, can
educate and inform the public and make government programs work
better. And I've also seen how the oversight process can be
abused, for no purpose other than to fight ideological battles.
This kind of partisan oversight helps nobody, but it is
apparently becoming the norm in this Subcommittee.
Today's hearing is about the new state and federal pre-
existing condition insurance plans, or high-risk pools,
established under the Affordable Care Act. These plans are a
good example of the immediate benefits provided by the landmark
health care reform law. They have allowed thousands of
individuals desperately in need of health care coverage to
purchase insurance. They have provided an essential lifeline to
individuals who were shut out of the market for individual
health insurance.
Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, discrimination by
insurance companies against individuals with pre-existing
conditions will be banned. In 2014, everyone will have a wide
variety of choices of health care plans through state-based
exchanges. Families will receive subsidies to help pay for
coverage if they cannot afford it.
Until then, the high-risk pools available in every state
will serve as a bridge to these state-based exchanges, allowing
individuals with pre-existing conditions to purchase coverage
at market-based rates.
You would think Republicans would love this program. In
fact, these high-risk pools were the centerpiece of Republican
health care reform proposals. Last Congress, Republicans
introduced 11 bills creating state-based high-risk pools. One
Committee member, Mr. Burgess, an outspoken opponent of the
health care reform law, said: ``The programs to deal with
preexisting conditions would involve risk pools to be sure.''
Politco has described high-risk pools as one of ``the old GOP
standbys.''
But when these high-risk pools were included in the health
care reform law, suddenly Republican leaders in Congress
decided they don't like them anymore.
We have one excellent witness today, Steve Larsen from HHS.
He's responsible for administering the program, and I'm glad
he's here to share his insights with us. But we asked Chairman
Stearns for an additional witness: John Barthell, a constituent
of Rep. Degette's from Colorado who is enrolled in the pre-
existing condition insurance program. We wanted to get his
perspective on the value of the program. We heard Ms. DeGette
read some of his testimony for the record.
This request was denied. Apparently, the Committee does not
want to hear from individual Americans who disagree with
Republican orthodoxy.
Last week, Committee Republicans put out a memo attacking
one part of the law--the Early Retiree Reinsurance Program--for
being too popular and having enrollment that is too high. In
today's hearing, they will attack the high-risk pools for
exactly the opposite reason: they are not popular enough and
have too low an enrollment.
The Affordable Care Act is simply not going to get a fair
hearing from the Republicans on this Committee.
And that's a shame, because it's a good law. It ends the
worst insurance company abuses, helps seniors in Medicare,
helps small businesses afford health care coverage, and makes
sure that all Americans have access to high-quality, affordable
health care coverage. Americans of all ages in all 50 states
are already benefitting from the health care reform law.
Our country faces grave challenges. We need to grow our
economy and create jobs. We need an energy policy that protects
our national security and our environment. We need a health
care system that provides quality, affordable coverage to all
Americans.
But to achieve these goals, we need to stop these partisan
hearings and learn how to work together for the American
people.

Mr. Stearns. I thank the gentleman, and with that, there
are no additional opening statements. At this point, we will
ask Steve Larsen, the Deputy Administrator and Director of the
Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight, who is
part of the Democrat administration, to stand before the
committee.
Mr. Larsen, you are well aware that the committee is
holding an investigative hearing, and when doing so, has had
the practice of taking testimony under oath. Do you have any
objection to taking testimony under oath?
Mr. Larsen. No, I don't.
Mr. Stearns. The chair then advises you that under the
rules of the House and the rules of the committee, you are
entitled to be advised by counsel. Do you desire to be advised
by counsel during your testimony today?
Mr. Larsen. I don't.
Mr. Stearns. In that case, if you please rise, raise your
right hand. I will swear you in.
[Witness sworn.]
Mr. Stearns. Thank you. You are now under oath and subject
to the penalties set forth in Title 18, Section 1001 of the
United States Code, and you may now give your 5-minute summary
of your written statement.

TESTIMONY OF STEVEN B. LARSEN, DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR AND
DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR CONSUMER INFORMATION & INSURANCE
OVERSIGHT, CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES

Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Chairman Stearns, Ranking Member----
Mr. Stearns. I think you should put the mic just a little
closer, if you don't mind.
Mr. Larsen. Is that better?
Mr. Stearns. I think that is. Yes, that is good.
Mr. Larsen. Chairman Stearns, Ranking Member DeGette,
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the chance to appear
before you this morning. I have submitted my full testimony for
the record.
As was mentioned, I serve as Deputy Administrator and
Director of the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance
Oversight, or CCIIO, within CMS. I have been involved in
implementing many of the provisions of the Affordable Care Act,
including overseeing private health insurance reforms, working
with States to establish exchanges, and ensuring that consumers
have access to information about their rights and coverage
options.
At this time last year, Congress passed and the President
signed into law the Affordable Care Act, which will expand
access to affordable quality coverage to over 30 million
Americans, and ensure individuals have coverage when they need
it most. Just 1 year after the Affordable Care Act became law,
many reforms have taken effect, including eliminating
preexisting condition exclusions for children, prohibiting
insurance companies from rescinding insurance policies simply
because a consumer may have made an error on a form, ending
lifetime dollar limits on health benefits, and enabling many
young people to stay on their parent's insurance plans up to
the age of 26.
The Affordable Care Act also established new programs to
expand and support coverage options as a bridge to 2014. In
2014, everyone will have access to affordable health insurance
choices through the new competitive marketplaces, the exchanges
which prohibit discrimination based on preexisting conditions.
The bridge to 2014 includes the Preexisting Condition
Insurance Plan, or PCIP. The Affordable Care Act created PCIP
to make health insurance available to people whom private
insurance companies denied coverage because of their
preexisting conditions. The presence of a preexisting condition
is one of the major barriers to obtaining health insurance for
individuals, and the fact that so many people are denied
coverage for these conditions is yet another reason why
healthcare reform is so important.
PCIP provides health coverage options for people who have
been uninsured for at least 6 months, have a preexisting
condition, or have been denied health coverage because of a
condition, and are U.S. citizens or residing in the U.S.
legally. The program covers a broad range of health benefits,
including primary and specialty care. PCIP eligibility is not
based on income, and the plan does not charge people higher
premiums because of their medical condition.
Previously, many states have run high risk pools or other
programs that offer insurance to people with preexisting
conditions. While the PCIP and existing state pools cannot be
combined, states have the option to build on their current
programs and choose to run the new program under contract with
HHS, or elect to rely on HHS to provide PCIP coverage in their
State. Twenty-seven states run PCIP programs, and HHS, along
with the Office of Personnel Management and the Department of
Agriculture's National Finance Center, are running the federal
PCIP programs, which cover 23 states and the District of
Columbia. The Federal Government is contracting with the
National Finance Center to administer benefits in those states
covered by the federal PCIP program, and we are flexible about
how each state chooses to implement the state program, allowing
every State-administered PCIP to be uniquely tailored to their
local market.
The law appropriates $5 billion of federal funds to support
PCIP beginning on July 1, 2010, through July 1, 2014, and an
allocation of these funds was made across the states based on
the CHIP formula that takes into account the population of the
State, the number of uninsured in the State, and local cost
factors. A 10 percent cap limits administrative expenses in the
PCIP program over the life of the program, and CCIIO and the
states work together to monitor expenditures to ensure we are
maximizing the value of the program while staying within the 10
percent administrative cost limit, and within the total funds
that were allocated.
Based on the data released in March, PCIP has 12,437
members. Of this total, over 8,000 people have been enrolled in
the State-run PCIPs in the 27 States, and over 3,000 have been
enrolled in the federal PCIP in the 23 States. I am very
pleased that enrollment in the PCIP program increased by over
50 percent in the last few months, and we expect it to continue
to grow between now and 2014.
I am proud of all that we have accomplished over the past
year and look forward to 2014 when Americans will have access
to more affordable, comprehensive health insurance plans
without worrying about preexisting conditions. PCIP is an
important part of the bridge to the exchanges in 2014. Until
then, I look forward to continuing to implement the Affordable
Care Act and strengthening CCIIO's partnership with Congress,
the States, consumers, and other stakeholders across the
country.
Thank you so much for the opportunity to discuss the work
that CCIIO has been doing to implement the Affordable Care Act
and to help people with preexisting conditions, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Larsen follows:]

Mr. Stearns. Mr. Larsen, thank you very much. I will take
the opportunity to ask the first set of questions.
As you know, as everybody in the room knows, this is an
oversight investigation committee that is looking at high risk
insurance program, and I thought I would, before we start on
that, a recent AP story just came out this morning indicating
that your office has given out large sums of money under the
Early Retiree Healthcare Program. You are familiar with that
program?
Mr. Larsen. I am.
Mr. Stearns. And you were cited as the person who was
involved with this. So we wanted to just, in passing, ask a few
questions, that it appears that a lot of corporations,
including General Electric, got $36 million for their early
retirees. It appears that United Auto Workers got over 200
million, Verizon Communications got 91 million, AT&T got 140
million, and so the list goes on and on. It is a huge amount of
money that you are giving out to subsidize retirees--early
retirees. I guess the question is how can you justify giving
out so much of taxpayers' money to these corporations?
Mr. Larsen. Well, these----
Mr. Stearns. These are profitable corporations.
Mr. Larsen. The Early Retiree Reimbursement Program in fact
has been an incredibly successful program in accomplishing the
goals that we set out to accomplish. The fact is that history
has shown that the rate in which large companies are dropping
coverage--insurance coverage for early retirees----
Mr. Stearns. But these are corporations that are
profitable, and when you talk about AT&T and General Electric
and Verizon Communications, United Auto Workers, why would they
need taxpayers to subsidize them, and why do--I mean, you have
Northrop-Grumman, Boeing Company, the State Teachers Retirement
System Ohio. If this is a healthcare program that is going to
work, why would you be taking taxpayers' money and giving so
much out to companies that are very successful and have a very
good profitable history?
Mr. Larsen. Well, those companies are companies that, in
fact, continue to offer retiree benefits, health benefits for
early retirees----
Mr. Stearns. But shouldn't they have the responsibility of
taking care of that themselves and not asking for the
taxpayers-- basically giving them free money?
Mr. Larsen. Well, the program allows them and positions
them to continue to offer this critical benefit to early
retirees, because I will tell you, early retirees, folks that
are between 50 and 65, when they are put out into the
individual market, are the ones that are the most at risk for
not being able to get insurance.
Mr. Stearns. Well I understand that, but that was part of
when they got to work for GE or AT&T or Verizon, this is part
of the package they understood. I guess are you going to give
money out like this to all major corporations, all the unions,
all the public employee retiree systems? I think the point
would be that if you think the healthcare system that the
Democrats passed is so successful, why in the flip are you
giving out so much money of taxpayers so freely and
overwhelming to companies that are very profitable?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I would respond with a couple points.
First of all, there are a number of different types of
recipients. Certainly, State and local governments are also one
of the main recipients so that employees and retirees of State
and local governments can continue to have retiree benefits.
Mr. Stearns. OK, but Mr. Larsen, I have a statement from
you. You said, ``The overwhelming response to this program
demonstrates exactly how broken the current healthcare system
is, exactly why we needed reform in the first place.'' Is the
reform you are talking about is taking taxpayers' money and
giving it out to successful, profitable corporations? Is that
your definition of why we need the Democrat healthcare bill?
Mr. Larsen. We think the program is successful because it
has allowed these companies and State and local governments and
non-profits and commercials to continue to be able to offer
coverage for early retirees.
Mr. Stearns. Now, you followed the recent publicity with
General Electric paying no taxes on the huge amount of money
they paid, so I understand you gave General Electric $36
million to help their early retirees. Do you think it was
absolutely necessary the taxpayers fund early retirees for
General Electric? Is that your position today?
Mr. Larsen. Well, when a sponsor in the program receives
the money, it must apply the money to the benefits that are
received by the retirees or to the costs that the company
incurred----
Mr. Stearns. OK, I understand. Let me--my time is almost
expired, but let me just move on to what we are here for also
is the high risk insurance program.
Enrollment in the high risk pool was supposed to be about
375,000 in the first year, according to the chief actuary of
Medicare. Is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. That is my understanding, yes.
Mr. Stearns. OK. You know, based upon what we have seen so
little, as you saw in my opening statement, how can you justify
those costs if you have only done so little at this point?
Where are you going to get the money to do this high risk for
everybody?
Mr. Larsen. Well, it has been a fact across the country as
States, and certainly for the federal high risk pool, that the
pools are generally slow to start up. When the bill was passed,
we devoted our efforts to standing the program up----
Mr. Stearns. I will just close by saying if you have only
got 12,000 in the program today, and you have indicated 375,000
people is your goal, and you spent this huge amount of money on
12,000, you won't possibly have enough money to do 375,000.
Wouldn't you and I agree that you won't have the money to do
375,000, based just upon the 12,000 you have done?
Mr. Larsen. I don't think, respectfully, we agree because
we have not spent a large amount of money on the program to
date.
Mr. Stearns. OK. All right, my time is expired.
The gentlelady from Colorado.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Larsen, how much money has the program spent to date?
Mr. Larsen. For outlays or incurred expenses associated
with----
Ms. DeGette. Either one.
Mr. Larsen. The federal program and the state program
combined is about $33 million as of February 28.
Ms. DeGette. OK, and how much was set aside in the
healthcare for this program?
Mr. Larsen. Five billion.
Ms. DeGette. Five billion. So you have spent several
hundred million of the 5 billion?
Mr. Larsen. Well, not--we have spent about $33 million on
what I will call program costs, and then additional funds on
administrative costs, but together it is less than $100
million.
Ms. DeGette. OK, it is less than $100 million of the $5
billion, correct?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. Now, you are making efforts to try to enroll
more people with preexisting conditions in this program,
correct?
Mr. Larsen. In fact, I think they have been successful.
Ms. DeGette. And why do you think that?
Mr. Larsen. Well, we had several phases of enrollment
initiatives. The second phase started from January to March in
which we conducted outreach with staff, by the way, just--
hitting nine cities, talking with providers, and we have seen
enrollment double--well, increase by 50 percent between
November and February. So we have made those efforts and
enrollment is going up.
Ms. DeGette. So is your projection you are going to wildly
exceed this $5 billion before the 2014?
Mr. Larsen. I don't think we are prepared to say that yet.
Ms. DeGette. OK, thank you. Well, that is what the chairman
is implying, but you have spent less than $100 million.
Mr. Larsen. We will work within the appropriation.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. Now, let me just ask you one
question. I know the topic of this hearing is about the PCIP
program, but let us talk about this early retirement
reinstatement program for a minute. That was--what was
happening was a lot of employers who had early retires,
retirement programs, were cutting those healthcare problems
when the economy turned down, right?
Mr. Larsen. Correct.
Mr. DeGette. So then what would happen would be people
between the ages of 50 and 65 wouldn't have insurance and they
would have to go out on the individual market, right?
Mr. Larsen. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. And so then those people couldn't get
insurance, right?
Mr. Larsen. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. So that is what this is designed to help, is
that correct?
Mr. Larsen. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. And that program is also going to phase out by
2014, right?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. But at this moment, it is helping--Congress
can't require these companies to continue these programs for
their early retirees, can we? No. And so therefore the people
that these programs are helping are those early retirees who
have no other way to get insurance, right?
Mr. Larsen. And there are millions of people who are
conversed in the retiree programs that have been helped by this
program.
Ms. DeGette. Right, and it helps them get insurance.
Mr. Larsen. It helps them keep their coverage.
Ms. DeGette. Now, let us talk about the subject of this
hearing, again the PCIP program.
Before the healthcare bill became the law of the land. Let
us say that somebody was diagnosed with cancer, and they wanted
to by health insurance on the private insurance market. What
sort of options would those people be offered?
Mr. Larsen. Well, they are generally limited to the
individual market, which they would be either offered
exclusionary riders or denied coverage.
Ms. DeGette. So you mean the individual market would say we
are not going to cover you for your cancer because it was
preexisting, right?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. Let us say they wanted to get coverage for the
cancer. How much will that cost them?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I don't think they could get coverage for
that, without going to a state higher risk pool.
Ms. DeGette. OK, and let us talk about the state high risk
pools. How many states had high risk pools?
Mr. Larsen. I think there are about 35 that had state high
risk pools.
Ms. DeGette. OK, and where in those 35 states were they
providing affordable coverage to anybody who needed it?
Mr. Larsen. Well, the difference between the PCIP program
and the state high risk pools is they often have a standard
rate that is up to 150 percent or 200 percent of some----
Ms. DeGette. The state program?
Mr. Larsen. The state program, which is not the way the
PCIP program is structured.
Ms. DeGette. OK. How is the PCIP program----
Mr. Larsen. The PCIP program has a cap of no more than 100
percent of the standard market rate. So the state programs,
although available, are often viewed as not affordable for some
people.
Ms. DeGette. OK. I just have one last question. What would
happen to these PCIP plans if the Affordable Care Act was
repealed?
Mr. Larsen. You would have a lot of people that have no
good option to get coverage, and these are the sickest of the
sick, in many cases.
Ms. DeGette. Their plans would be cancelled, right, and
then they would have to go to these other options that you
talked about, right?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. Gentlelady yields back.
Gentleman from Texas, Mr. Burgess, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I don't want to spend too much time on this, but I feel
obligated to answer the ranking member of the committee. It
always seems that they want to paint Republicans as a friend of
the insurance companies. Just a quick review by a simple
country doctor on his iPhone app tells me that Cigna and Aetna
have done extremely well in the year since the passage of the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Apparently when
people are required to buy insurance, the companies that sell
insurance seem to be able to manage OK.
Let us talk for just a minute, because you were giving
Ranking Member DeGette some information about the amount of
money you spend in the program. You said about $100 million, is
that correct?
Mr. Larsen. No, I said no more than that. The approximate
number on her sleeve would be the program spending of about $33
million, and then administrative costs of about $25, which
includes a significant portion of startup costs that you incur
anytime you start up a major program.
Mr. Burgess. Yes, I will accept that, but that seems a
little bit--$33 million in benefits, is that correct, did I
understand----
Mr. Larsen. Well remember, these are the amounts that are
paid to the states or to fund the federal program beyond the
premiums that are collected from the folks that are covered in
the programs. But that is the level of federal spending for the
program combined for both the state and federal.
Mr. Burgess. So that is combined help for people against a
backdrop of $25 million of administrative costs, is that
correct?
Mr. Larsen. Well again, the 25 million, there are at least
10 million of kind of one time----
Mr. Burgess. Yes. This would all be easier----
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. Startup costs.
Mr. Burgess. We talked about this before. Boy, if we had a
breakdown of your budget, it would just be so helpful and you
promised that to us, and I am having to ask these questions
because I don't have that information yet.
Mr. Larsen. It is my hope and expectation that you will
have that next week.
Mr. Burgess. Next week, OK. So we will mark the calendar
and we are all anxiously awaiting that.
Now you previously testified that you added 300 new jobs to
implement the program, is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. Not just this program, that is----
Mr. Burgess. For all of society.
Mr. Larsen. For all of society, yes, that is correct. Less
than 300.
Mr. Burgess. Do you know how much you spent on salaries for
those 300 people?
Mr. Larsen. I am sorry, could you repeat the question?
Mr. Burgess. The amount you spent on salaries for those 300
jobs?
Mr. Larsen. I don't know off the top of my head.
Mr. Burgess. Well, is that money coming out of the
administrative or the non-administrative funds?
Mr. Larsen. Oh, you mean the salaries that administer--that
would be in the administrative portion. It is a very lean and
small staff that administers the PCIP program.
Mr. Burgess. Now on the issue that has come up, and
unfortunately, we haven't had a lot of time to work though it
because of the retiree program information that has come
through this morning. But eight of the 17 companies had more
than $10 billion in profit last year. I mean, are those not
companies that could have afforded to do some of this on their
own?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I can't speak to their capability, I can
only say that, as I mentioned earlier, when they receive funds
through the ERRP program, they are required to devote those
funds to either reducing their own costs or reducing the costs
of the beneficiaries, and I think 80 percent direct the funds
to directly lowering the costs of people that participate in
the programs, so we think that is a success.
Mr. Burgess. Yes, but you have got a big company whose
initials I won't mention, but they haven't paid any taxes this
past year, they post an enormous profit, and you are providing
them $36 million. You know, the only problem with that--and I
want to help people, too, but we are borrowing 42 cents of
every dollar we spend, so was there perhaps a way to tighten
this up and run it just a little bit leaner? You know, even
Karl Marx said ``Each according to his disability, each
according to his need.''
That is a non-response response. It is very difficult for
the recording clerk to record that.
Let me just ask you one more question. Was it--I have no
problem with risk pools. I think the state risk pools, although
they were underfunded, certainly provided good help, and when I
would do town halls and talks in my district, and even in
talking to doctor groups around the State, someone would always
come forward and say, you know, don't do anything to mess up
what I have got with this risk pool. But at the same time, why
was it necessary to reinvent the wheel? You already said that
you have 35 of the states with something up there in a risk
pool arrangement. You have additional states that have
reassurance programs, so you are already getting to a pretty
significant number of the states already. Now we come and
overlay a federal program. Hailey Barbour, when he was here,
actually testified that he had 3,600 people on his risk pools
in the State of Mississippi, and with the infusion of--he did
not participate at the federal level, but what the additional
federal funds at a significant cost were able to provide
additional benefits to 58 new people. That almost seems like we
are not being smart about how we are spending this money.
Mr. Larsen. I guess I have two responses. First, I would
say that this is a compliment to the state pools because it has
different design elements. For example, often the state pools
have waiting periods before they start to cover----
Mr. Burgess. Yours is 6 months.
Mr. Larsen. Well, it is a little different for the federal
program. That is you can't have been insured for 6 months,
because we didn't want people migrating across pools. So in the
state pools, you often have a waiting period, so that even if
you come into the pool, you don't have coverage necessarily
right away.
Mr. Burgess. Six months seems like a waiting period.
Mr. Larsen. And then as we discussed earlier, typically the
standard rate for the state pools is 125 percent, 150 percent
or higher, and so there are features of the federal program
that complement what is going on at the state level.
Mr. Burgess. I get that. It just seems like it would have
been better to streamline those two together, rather than
reinvent the wheel.
Mr. Stearns. Gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Michigan, the emeritus of the committee,
Mr. Dingell is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you. Thank you, Director Larsen----
Mr. Stearns. I think you will have to pull the mic a
little----
Mr. Dingell [continuing]. For implementing the Affordable
Care Act. You have a large task before you, including the
critical patient bill of rights and State-based exchanges, as
well as today's focus, the Preexisting Condition Insurance
Plan. I appreciate the work that you have done in getting the
pool up and running in Michigan, including the work you have
done to make a difference in the lives of Michiganders like
Jerry Garner, who you pointed out in your testimony.
Now, as my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
question the effectiveness of high risk pools, I think it would
be useful to remind them of the strong support of these pools
as a way to expand coverage. In fact, members of this committee
offered their own legislation appropriating far more money than
laid out in the--or expended in the Affordable Care Act to
implement high risk pools nationwide.
Now, Director Larsen, a few questions. Please answer yes or
no.
The PCIP was designed to be a temporary program to help the
sickest of the sick and those most in need to have access to
coverage until health insurance exchanges are up and running in
2014. You point out that more than 12,400 individuals have
enrolled in these programs across the country. In your
experience, have the states been able to set up affordable
premiums for individuals in need? Yes or no.
Mr. Larsen. Have states been able to set up affordable
programs? No, they have not completely.
Mr. Dingell. They have not.
You point out in your testimony that CCIIO recently
adjusted the federal PCIP program to reduce premiums and to add
two plan choices. You point out that the enrollment in PCIP
programs has increased by 50 percent from November to January--
rather, November to February. In your opinion, will increased
plan choices in the PCIP program encourage further enrollment?
Yes or no.
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, you also discussed in your testimony the
outreach efforts in CCIIO that have been used to encourage
enrollment, working with Social Security Administration,
American Cancer Society, Diabetes Association, and other
agencies. It is my opinion it seems to be a very targeted
approach in enrolling individuals. In your opinion, do you
believe this targeted approach is working? Yes or no.
Mr. Larsen. We think it is showing results and working,
yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, how do you know that this targeted
approach is working?
Mr. Larsen. Well, as I mentioned and referenced, we have
seen significant increases in the rate of enrollments in the
period between November and February, in addition to the
overall enrollment. There were several states in which the
number of individuals in the program doubled, five or six
states that doubled their enrollment in that period, so it is
very encouraging.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you.
Now, is every PCIP program conducting a public campaign to
recruit eligible individuals? Yes or no.
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, has CCIIO shared the best practices with
the states who have lower enrollments than others to help them
recruit eligible individuals they may be missing? Yes or no.
Mr. Larsen. Yes, we are in constant contact with the
States.
Mr. Dingell. Is--in your opinion, has CCIIO learned some
best practices in terms of enrolling eligible individuals that
will help to ensure successful enrollment of individuals in the
exchange beginning in 2014? Yes or no.
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, am I fair in observing that when the
situation in 2014 when everybody is covered in the exchanges,
am I assuming correctly that at that point it will no longer be
necessary to have this high risk pool?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Mr. Dingell. OK. Now, would you like to comment, if you
please, sir, in the very brief time that we have on what are
the best practices or any other comments that you might like to
make with regard to the previous questions?
Mr. Larsen. Well, as you mentioned we have learned that it
really is a targeted outreach campaign. This is not necessarily
mass marketing so that you work closely with high volume
providers, hospital associations, medical associations. We have
worked with the insurance companies that issue denial notices
to take note of the availability of the PCIP program----
Mr. Dingell. One very quick question. The companies that
you have helped have had no responsibility, other than their
contractual responsibilities to cover either their active
employees or their retirees, is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One second left.
Mr. Stearns. Thank the gentleman from Michigan.
The gentlelady from Tennessee is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Larsen, I am going to cut right into this. What are the
standards on your application, and what does your application
look like for these companies that apply for this many--for the
early retiree process?
Mr. Larsen. Well, first they have to submit an application
to be a planned sponsor, requiring basic information about the
plan, about the company and their retiree plan, and then in the
process of submitting claims, then they have to submit claims
information. As you may know----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Let me--OK. They submit a claim to be--
they submit an application to be a planned sponsor, so do they
need to show financial need when they submit an application to
you, that they need this money, that they are short of money,
that they are not going to be able to cover the cost of those
that are enrolled in the plan that they are choosing to
sponsor? Do they have to demonstrate that financial need?
Mr. Larsen. The statute doesn't require a need----
Mrs. Blackburn. How long is the application they submit?
Mr. Larsen. It is not particularly long. I don't recall
exactly.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK, so they don't have to demonstrate any
financial need, they just need to show that they want to set up
a plan for their early retirees, is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. They need to demonstrate that they have a
current program to cover their early retirees.
Mrs. Blackburn. So they have a current--that they have a
current program.
OK, let me ask you this. Some of these companies have early
retirees that they may have incentivized to take early
retirement. Do you ask them how they achieved their universe of
early retirees? Did they incentivize these people, give them
early parachutes--early retirement parachutes, give them extra
benefits if they chose to retire? Did you ask them if they are
doing that?
Mr. Larsen. I don't believe that is part of the
application.
Mrs. Blackburn. It is not part of the application, so
therefore, in order to make their bottom line look better, they
could actually go to a universe of employees and say we are
going to incentivize your early retirement, and then move them
into this plan that they are going to submit an application to
sponsor, then come to you with their hand down and say hey, we
need your millions, Federal Government. Do you not see why the
American people are so frustrated with what you all are pouring
out of these bureaucracies every day on the American taxpayer?
I mean, does this--is this lost on you?
Mr. Larsen. Well first of all, I don't think we have seen--
--
Mrs. Blackburn. You have spent $100 million in setting up a
program we don't want for services we don't need, giving money
to corporations that are profitable corporations, giving money
to people like GE who are exporting their power job growth,
giving money to people like GE who are no longer making light
bulbs in the United States, but have shipped all those jobs to
China, and you think this--you think we should be happy and
pleased and applaud you for creating new federal jobs to take
money out of the taxpayer's pocket?
Let me ask you something else. Let me move to the PCIP. Let
me move to the PCIP program. I don't want to run out of time.
Did you have any existing program that you used for a model
when you set up PCIP? Was there any program in existence that
you went to? You already said you didn't think the states were
doing a very good job with their high risk pools, so----
Mr. Larsen. Well, I don't think that is quite what I said.
I said that there are 35 state programs----
Mrs. Blackburn. You said it was incomplete.
Mr. Larsen. I am sorry?
Mrs. Blackburn. I think you said they were incomplete.
Mr. Larsen. No, they have different sets of standards, and
the federal standard is different. So we certainly looked to
the way that the high risk pools were administered.
Mrs. Blackburn. Yes, yours has a different design element,
were your exact words.
Mr. Larsen. That is right.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Is there any program that you have
looked at that you think has been successful? When you have a
State like Tennessee, and you and I have discussed Tennessee
before, we have been down this road. We know public option
healthcare does not work, that it breaks the bank, and we know
where some of the pitfalls are, but you all are not willing to
listen to some of that guidance. So, did you work from a model
that has actually yielded a savings?
Mr. Larsen. Well, high risk pools by definition will not
yield savings. They----
Mrs. Blackburn. They should reduce costs.
Mr. Larsen. Well, here is the problem. When you are
insuring sick people, you can't collect enough premiums to
cover the costs, and so high risk pools are always subsidized
in some way. Typically in States, it is subsidized through
assessments on insurance companies or general revenue. In this
case, it is subsidized through the PCIP program for the federal
and State----
Mrs. Blackburn. Do you think that putting a federal program
along side a state program, even though it has, in your words,
different design elements, is redundant?
Mr. Larsen. No, I don't.
Mrs. Blackburn. You don't?
Mr. Larsen. I do not.
Mrs. Blackburn. You don't see a problem with the
duplications?
Mr. Larsen. No, because I said I think we attracted a
different element of the population that has preexisting
conditions, so it is complimentary to the program.
Mrs. Blackburn. So in other words, you think the Federal
Government needs to pick these programs up and pull them to the
federal level, not trust the states for oversight, and then
turn around and out of your $5 billion, give it to corporations
who don't need the money who are firing American workers and
shipping the jobs overseas?
I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. Gentlelady yields back.
The gentlelady Jan Schakowsky is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, I am just loving this debate. I
particularly appreciate Dr. Burgess quoting Karl Marx in his
rationale on why this program really doesn't work, and I
appreciate hearing the fury about companies that don't pay
taxes and then outsource jobs. I would certainly endorse those
concerns and would certainly welcome an opportunity to work
with my colleagues across the aisle to address just that. The
problem we have is that these greedy companies that legally
don't pay any taxes also are not going--are not providing, are
increasingly dropping early retirees from these healthcare
programs. Is that not true, Mr. Larsen?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Ms. Schakowsky. So we have seen that while all of this
outrage may be going on with no solutions, you know, we could
sit down and establish criteria for companies that, when they
make a certain amount of money, must provide this kind of
coverage for early retirees. I welcome that conversation.
But in the meantime, are we going to sit here and say the
burden, then, will be on the shoulders of those very retirees
who, in many cases in the past, used to get help from their
companies who aren't. And the problem is that these are, in
fact, you know, expensive people to insure, these high risk
people, and that is precisely why we passed the Affordable Care
Act, and why, in 2014, we are going to prevent discrimination.
Is this not a bridge program, Mr. Larsen?
Mr. Larsen. That is exactly right.
Ms. Schakowsky. And what would happen to those retirees if
we did not provide that?
Mr. Larsen. I think they would have great difficulty
finding coverage in the individual market.
Ms. Schakowsky. So if there is another solution that my
Republican colleagues would like to find to require
corporations to pay their fair share of taxes, to come up with
a way to force them to cover their retirees, then why don't we
talk about that? I haven't heard anything like that, except to
criticism now in Marxian language of what these nasty,
outsourcing corporations are doing.
Would the Chairman----
Mr. Stearns. I would be glad to, I think, repeal Obamacare
and start anew and try to come up with a healthcare plan that
every American would support.
Ms. Schakowsky. And put every American at risk again, when
we have a plan that we would be happy to look at various ways
to make it better.
In the meantime, Mr. Larsen, I congratulate you on this
program to make sure that we aren't setting adrift the victims
of some of these very corporations that the Republicans have
supported.
In the Medicare--let me find it--there was a loophole
created in 2003 with the Medicare Modernization Act that
allowed companies--this was a Republican initiative--to receive
a 28 percent subsidy from taxpayers to help cover the cost of
prescription drugs for retirees without counting the money as
income. When they spent the money, then the companies were
allowed to turn around and get a deduction for it on their
taxes, even though the money was a gift from taxpayers. There
was no outrage from the Republicans who wrote that provision
into the legislation that the Obama Administration saw as a
double subsidy from the taxpayers. But now at the very moment
we are looking how to get these vulnerable employees to make it
to 2014, now we are looking at these rich corporations and how
are we letting them get away with it? Well, if there is a way
that they suggest that we can get GE and AT&T to cover those, I
welcome that, and until that point, we are not going to set
those employees adrift with no healthcare coverage.
I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. Gentlelady yields back.
Mr. Gingrey is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Larsen, Ms. Blackburn was just trying to point out
something to you in regard to a lot of these companies and one
in particular, I won't name the company, but the initials are
GE, in regard to these early retirement incentive packages that
they give to their advantage to the advantage of their bottom
line. That is the only reason why a company would do something
like that. But what it amounted to was a lump sum early
retirement bonus worth 75 percent of their annual pay, and her
outrage, of course, was over the fact that when these companies
do that and then they come to you, to the Federal Government
with this ERRP program and say, oh, sign us up for the money to
help us now pay these same people for their health retirement
benefits. So that is where the outrage is coming from.
CMS just released a new report yesterday announcing that
this program, Early Retiree Reinsurance Program, ERRP, created
under Obamacare, spent nearly $1.8 billion in reimbursements
which have helped preserve the availability of health benefits
for early retirees and reduce increases in plan participant
costs. In deference to my limited time, I have a series of
questions, and if you don't mind, please try to answer yes or
no on these, Mr. Larsen.
Number one, does the Center for Consumer Information
Insurance Oversight oversee this Early Retiree Reinsurance
Program for CMS?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Gingrey. And you are the deputy administrator and
director of the Center for Consumer Information?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Mr. Gingrey. Was the Early Retiree Program created in
PPACA, otherwise known as Obamacare, was it created?
Mr. Larsen. It was part of the what we call the Affordable
Care Act.
Mr. Gingrey. The answer is yes, thank you. Next question.
The law appropriated $5 billion to pay the claims for early
retirees, correct?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Gingrey. That is the same amount appropriated to the
high risk pools for people who cannot obtain insurance. Is that
correct?
Mr. Larsen. Yes, there is a separate appropriation----
Mr. Gingrey. It is essentially the same amount. CMS just
released a report yesterday announcing that it has spent nearly
$1.8 billion of the 5 billion appropriated to date, is that
correct?
Mr. Larsen. For the Early Retiree program?
Mr. Gingrey. Yes.
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Mr. Gingrey. Next question. I would like you to go over
some of the payments made in the $5 billion Early Retiree
Program with you. My staff has presented you with a copy, and--
thank you, Robert--tabbed, numbered, highlighted. Again, a
simple yes or no answer, please. Did AT&T receive $140 million
from this retiree fund?
Mr. Larsen. That is my recollection from----
Mr. Gingrey. Are you aware that AT&T filed a billion-dollar
loss with the SEC on March 26 of last year, and in papers
accompanying the filing charged the losses stemmed from the
passage of Obamacare?
Mr. Larsen. I am not familiar with the reference.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, the answer is yes, they did.
Are you also aware that AT&T stated in its March 26 SEC
filing that it would be forced to evaluate prospective changes
to the active and retiree health plan benefits offered to their
employees?
Mr. Larsen. Again, what we focused on is trying to make
sure that these companies that get this money continue to----
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Larsen----
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. Provide it to retirees.
Mr. Gingrey [continuing]. In the interest of my time, the
answer to that question is yes, they did.
Did Valero Energy Corporation receive over $1 million from
this retiree fund? You have got the information in front of
you.
Mr. Larsen. If you want me to flip through the list, I can.
I don't have all the recipients memorized.
Mr. Gingrey. Well in the interest of time, I will answer
that one for you, too. Yes, they did.
Are you aware that Valero Energy Corporation filed a 15 to
$20 million loss with SEC on the same day as AT&T, once again
citing Obamacare as the reason? And the answer to that, since
you are a little slow on it, is yes, they did.
The whole point here of my line of questioning, Mr. Larsen,
is this system, this ERRP, Early Retiree Reinsurance Program,
to me is just a makeup for the money that was taken away from
corporations that was given at the time of the Medicare Part D
prescription plan was put in place to keep them from dropping
their retiree health insurance plans. It is a kiss and make up,
which is ridiculous. They should have left that program as it
existed, but they had to have money to generate and a score
from the CBO to pay for this whole new entitlement program. So
that is the line of my questioning and the point of it.
I am over time now, so unfortunately I will have to yield
back.
Mr. Stearns. Gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am glad my good
friend from Georgia pointed out two Texas companies. Valero is
headquartered in San Antonio and AT&T used to be San Antonio.
Now they are Dallas, somewhere up there, but they got that
assistance.
I served on this committee in 2003 when we considered the
prescription drug plan, and you know, it is almost like deja vu
all over again because the same issues were brought up then,
that a lot of companies has retiree prescription drug plans
were all of a sudden benefiting from this. So I just want to
point that out, but the shoe is on a different foot this time.
I appreciate you being here, Mr. Larsen. Thank you for
appearing.
I am from the State of Texas, as I said, and we already
have a high risk pool that has been operational since 1992 and
covers 27,000 Texans. How many states currently operate their
own separate pool from those established by the PPACA?
Mr. Larsen. Right, I believe it is about 35 States.
Mr. Green. OK. Were these states given the option to move
the individuals currently in their high risk pool program over
to the new high risk pool established by PPACA?
Mr. Larsen. Because of the different rules between the
state and the federal, it runs in parallel to the state pools,
but states can set up a PCIP pool.
Mr. Green. And if the states set up a PCIP pool, they would
not have to have their own pool?
Mr. Larsen. Well, they have their own pool which has one
set of rules, and they have the federal--they have the PCIP
pool that they run under a contract with HHS, and they design,
subject to the standards in the ACA, the rates and the benefit
design. So there are--there is a State-run pool and then a
different type of insured, if you will, is eligible for this
pool.
Mr. Green. One of the concerns I have is the slowness in
the number of people who are signing up for high risk plan, and
I will give you my understanding what happens in the State of
Texas.
Texans are given the option to establish the high risk plan
under health reform, and our governor declines, citing a
financial burden on the amount of federal funds received and
Texas continues to operate its own high risk program. Last
year, a number of us sent a letter to Secretary Sebilius asking
states who opt out of PPACA to establish high risk pools that
we would have a similar to exchange in Texas. We would have an
option for PPACA in Texas, and I will go into that in a few
minutes on the benefit.
In 2009, before we passed the Affordable Care Act, Texas
received $10.5 million to run their current high risk through
grant program funding through Congress. That is nearly 6
million more than any other State to fund their program. What
we found out under the state program, the average program for a
Texan participating in the high risk program must be twice the
average premiums for healthy individual in the market. Is that
true with the other 29 States, if they have something like
that?
Mr. Larsen. Something like that. Not all of them are 200
percent or twice as much, but they are generally substantially
above the market rate, and that can create affordability
issues.
Mr. Green. And that is the problem we have. For example,
the premium for a 40-year-old woman in Houston, where I
represent, under the Texas high risk pool is about $750. Under
the PPACA plan, that same woman would only pay $387 a month.
Why would anybody sign up for a state plan when they can
actually save almost 300 or $400 a month?
Mr. Larsen. Yes, well there is one limitation that was in
the ACA regarding the PCIP program, that is that you not have
insurance for 6 months. So the people that are eligible for the
PCIP program are people that have had nothing up until the
implementation of the program.
Mr. Green. So if somebody was under the state plan, they
would have to wait 6 months before they could apply for PCIP?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Mr. Green. How many states have that 6-month plan, do you
know, in their current program and their separate program? Do
you have to be without insurance for 6 months?
Mr. Larsen. Well, every State that administers a PCIP pool
has to abide by that same 6 months.
Mr. Green. But what about their separate state plan? Do
they have--do states have something comparable to that----
Mr. Larsen. Typically it is more that there are waiting
periods or exclusionary periods so that you can sign up right
away, but you may not have coverage. That is to avoid people
circulating in and out of the pool when they are sick, so there
are waiting periods for coverage for your high risk condition.
Mr. Green. Well, I understand, although, you know, I have
folks on Social Security disability, once they receive
disability they have to wait 24 months before they can get
Medicare, so 6 months is a long time, but not near 24 months
like we have under Medicare for disabled folks.
Under the PCIP, Texas would have benefited by about 493
million to run a high risk pool, is that true?
Mr. Larsen. I am sorry----
Mr. Green. Four hundred ninety-three million under the PCIP
program, Texas, would have benefited by received about 493
million to run a high risk pool from the Federal Government.
Mr. Larsen. Well, that may be the allocation to Texas
across the life of the program. I would have to go back and
look at the numbers that you are referring to.
Mr. Green. OK.
Mr. Stearns. Gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was just asking some
information because it is--so we can find out what we need to
do to make sure our constituents get the cheapest program in
the high risk pool. Thank you.
Mr. Stearns. I advise all the members, we have a series of
votes. We will reconvene right after the votes, probably
between 12:00 and 12:15. Mr. Larsen, we are going to continue
with another series of questions, and then we will reconvene--
recess and come back.
Mr. Bilbray is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilbray. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It was interesting,
the reference you made right off, I think it was the second or
third paragraph where you were pointing out that U.S. citizens
or otherwise those who are legally residing in the United
States, and I think you clarify that all U.S. citizens reside
in the United States are legally present. But my question is
about the verification.
First of all, let me back up. You made a reference to the
fact that there were how many states that were allowing you to
administer their program?
Mr. Larsen. Twenty-three states and the District of
Columbia.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. Do you realize that about 65 percent of
those states are states that have basically told us to go to
hell and are engaged in the blocking, so a lot of that
participation, 65 percent of the participation, looks like it
does not trust in the Federal Government to administer the
program, but basically a position that they don't want to
participate in the program in any form?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I can't speak to their motives for not
participating, but I know that we administer in 23 States.
Mr. Bilbray. But 65 percent sounds----
Mr. Larsen. Yes, I don't know.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. The verification system, you made a
statement that only those legally in the country are to
participate in the system. Is there a reason why we didn't use
the same verification that we use for all other programs--
benefit programs in this country?
Mr. Larsen. I am not sure what your question is.
Mr. Bilbray. My question is why aren't we using the
verification systems for this benefit that we use in other
benefits in the federal system?
Mr. Larsen. I am not sure that we aren't.
Mr. Bilbray. OK, let me double-back here. Do you require
biometrics for identified foreign nationals to participate in
the program?
Mr. Larsen. I would have to get back to you on the details
of the verification.
Mr. Bilbray. OK, I would----
Mr. Larsen. What we work through----
Mr. Bilbray [continuing]. Question the fact that because we
don't, you say no, there is no biometrics. Now, I understand
that U.S. citizens or people who claim to be U.S. citizens just
have to state their name, their Social Security number, and
their date of birth, right?
Mr. Larsen. I think we still verify that information.
Mr. Bilbray. You verify them through which documents?
Mr. Larsen. I will have to confirm with you exactly how
we----
Mr. Bilbray. OK. I am just saying that you don't use
biometrics on the United States, but you do not use--are you
aware you are not using biometrics for stated foreign nations
to participate in this program?
Mr. Larsen. I don't know the answer to that question.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. Well let me just say for the record, there
is no reason why anyone who says they are a foreign national of
the United States that we should not have biometrics as a
requirement, because every foreign national that I know of--and
somebody correct me--but at least the overwhelming majority of
foreign nationals in this country have biometric confirmable
identification, and we are not using that technology right now.
This is one of those issues of someone saying just because you
say that somebody legally in the country is not participating,
if you don't have appropriate verification, you can't sit here
before this committee and make a statement like that with any
degree of certainty. It is what you may think might happen or
you hope may happen.
But I think we need to clarify, without the verification
systems, we are lying to the American people. I don't care who
it is, the guy at the top or the guy at the bottom, to look at
the American people and say that I can assure that people
illegally in this country are not participating----
Mr. Larsen. I will be happy to follow up with you on that.
Mr. Bilbray. OK, I appreciate that.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. OK. Will the gentleman allow me just to----
Mr. Bilbray. To the gentleman.
Mr. Stearns. We are going to recess, but I just have a
question for Mr. Larsen. If it turns out a company gets--or a
State gets a waiver from Obamacare, would you still give money
to early retirees, even thought they got a waiver from all the
healthcare provisions? Just yes or no.
Mr. Larsen. Well, I don't--which waiver are----
Mr. Stearns. Let us take----
Mr. Larsen. There is only really one----
Mr. Stearns. Like the State of New York got $47 million, so
the question is, the State of New York is putting in for a
waiver. Did they get their wavier yet, the State of New York?
Mr. Larsen. You mean the waiver from their annual limits--
--
Mr. Stearns. Yes.
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. Requirement? I am not sure.
Mr. Stearns. OK, but let us say hypothetically if the State
of New York got the waiver, would you still go ahead and give
money to early retirees who are----
Mr. Larsen. Right, but the waiver that they get or a state
can get on behalf of insurance carriers in the state is not a
waiver from the provisions of the Affordable Care Act. It is a
waiver from that one narrow provision----
Mr. Stearns. OK, I understand.
Mr. Larsen. So they wouldn't be ineligible, for example.
Mr. Stearns. So the waiver does not apply then--extend to
the requirement----
Mr. Larsen. Yes, it is a very narrow provision.
Mr. Stearns. Thank you for that clarification.
With that, the subcommittee will recess and come right
after the votes, which hopefully is between 12:00 and 12:15.
[Recess.]
Mr. Stearns. The subcommittee will reconvene, and if the
witness will come to the table, I think our next member is Ms.
Christensen. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Mr. Larsen, for not only being here, but the work that you are
doing to make sure that our--those who could not receive
insurance otherwise are receiving it.
I just want to say for the record, though, that I really
regret that we were unable to include the Territories in this,
because we are U.S. citizens and there are many of our
constituents in the Territories who are unable to get insurance
because of preexisting disease.
Before they had even heard your testimony, the majority of
this committee was already attacking the PCIP program for being
too expensive, but the fact of the matter really is that it is
going to run very efficiently, as I see it. In fact, it is my
understanding that the administrative costs for the program are
capped at 10 percent over the life of the program. Is that
correct?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Mrs. Christensen. And do you expect to stay within that
cap?
Mr. Larsen. We will stay within the cap, and we are
ensuring that the states will stay within the cap as well.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you. There have also been some
concerns that the startup costs have pushed the initial costs
above projections. So can you give us some perspective on these
startup costs and how they compare to startup costs for other
programs, like Medicare Part D?
Mr. Larsen. Well, first let me clarify that I am not
concerned that the startup costs will push us over any
projections, it is simply that they represent in the first 6
months of a program a disproportionate amount, but over the
life of the program, which is the statutory standard for the 10
percent, we will be within the 10 percent.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you.
Mr. Larsen. But the startup costs are things you might
imagine programming, hiring people initially, getting the
scripts ready for the call center, so there are a lot of one-
time things that you have to put into place.
Mrs. Christensen. Can you compare them, your setup costs
with the Medicare Part D program?
Mr. Larsen. I am probably not in a position to do that
because I am not as familiar with those startup costs.
Mrs. Christensen. And how does a 10 percent administrative
cost compare with what we would see in the private insurance
market?
Mr. Larsen. Well, in fact, under the medical loss ratio
standard, we provided, you know, headroom, if you will, for a
20 percent of administrative costs and 80 percent, so it is
quite a bit tighter than what we are even requiring for the
private insurance market.
Mrs. Christensen. Right. So this sounds like an example of
government-run healthcare working pretty well, and it is
providing critical access to health insurance for people with
preexisting conditions, and doing so in what I think is a lean
and efficient way.
There have been certain media accounts of the program, as
well as some of the comments I have heard from across the aisle
that suggest that at the current rate, the PCIP plans in some
states will run through their funding before the program ends
in 2014. Are you concerned about that happening?
Mr. Larsen. I am not concerned about it. We have the
ability to address the specific rates that states draw down on
their initial allocation. Certainly, as I think we announced,
New Hampshire was a State that was running ahead of
projections, but we have other states that are running behind
projections, and again, we have the ability to manage the funds
within the allocations and within the 5 billion, so I am not
concerned about the fact that there may be one state or a small
number of states that are ahead of projections.
Mrs. Christensen. So thank you, Mr. Larsen. It sounds to me
like the program enrollees and the American people will be
getting a substantial bang for their buck with this program.
In your testimony, you talked about the thousands of
Americans who were locked out of the accessible private
insurance coverage before the Affordable Care Act, and then you
talked about the difference in what they would have had to pay
in the regular high risk pools versus what they pay for us. You
talked about Mr. Garner, who was reported on in the New York
Times and how his insurance might have cost, you know--been
prohibitive, but this program helped him. Do you have any other
examples that you would like to share with us?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I don't have a specific example. I can
only tell you that for people that have conditions like
diabetes, heart conditions, heart diseases, cancer of course,
that if coverage is available, and in some cases, it simply
isn't other than through a State-run high risk pool, they are
going to pay a lot either way, and that creates significant
affordability issues for individuals. So they are really in a
no-win situation, and that is why this program is so important.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back the
balance of my time. Thank you for your quick answers.
Mr. Stearns. Gentlelady yields back the balance of her
time.
Mr. Gardner is recognized from Colorado for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Larsen, for your time here today.
I just wanted to talk a little bit more about this issue of
the Early Retiree Reinsurance Program. You previously stated
your position, and I just want to double check on that. Is it
really your position that these corporations that you have
listed on your Web site, who have billions of dollars in
profits needed to get taxpayer money in order to fund their
early retiree program?
Mr. Larsen. My position is we want to make sure that
companies that are currently providing early retiree benefits
continue to do so, and this program helps ensure that they do
that.
Mr. Gardner. This is all programs in the United States, or
just a few that you have listed on your Web site?
Mr. Larsen. Well, these--this program helps the sponsors
who come in for reimbursement requests to be able to continue
their retiree program, so this helps cover the costs that they
would otherwise incur.
Mr. Gardner. So companies like Shell Oil Company that had a
contractual obligation that they would otherwise incur were
given $4.4 million too?
Mr. Larsen. Well, ultimately the money is for the benefit
of the retirees.
Mr. Gardner. But it is money that taxpayers have that we
are just giving to Shell Oil Company?
Mr. Larsen. Well, we are helping make sure that Shell Oil
and other companies continue their retiree program.
Mr. Gardner. So other companies like General Electric, the
Boeing Company, AT&T, Verizon, DuPont, Mars, those kinds of
companies?
Mr. Larsen. Well, there are many other smaller companies, I
think if you look through the list, there are a large number of
companies that got, you know, $1 million or less in
reimbursements. So it is not all just big companies, and in
fact, the biggest recipients are state and local government for
this program.
Mr. Gardner. Do you think they should have had to pay for
their own?
Mr. Larsen. I think that we want to make sure that retirees
of the ages between 50 to 65 before Medicare have an option for
coverage, because if they don't, they are in a very hard place
in the marketplace.
Mr. Gardner. Do you think it is the government's
responsibility, then, to pick up the obligations of a
privately-agreed to contract?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I don't know in which cases there are
specific obligations or not, but we, in any case, want to make
sure that there are funds available to make sure that these
programs are continued.
Mr. Gardner. Was that part of the discussion, though, in
who got this bailout, was which companies had an obligation or
a contract to do that, or did it just--the money came because
they asked?
Mr. Larsen. No, the way the program is established under
the ACA is they apply as a sponsor, we review it, and once
approved as a sponsor, then they submit the claims for
reimbursement.
Mr. Gardner. So you would know which of these companies
were contractually obligated to make these payments anyway?
Mr. Larsen. That is not part of the, you know, the
provisions of the ACA.
Mr. Gardner. So you just gave this money without knowing
whether or not they may be under contractual obligation? So the
United Auto Workers, who got $207 million, weren't
contractually obligated to pay for these healthcare costs?
Mr. Larsen. Well, it is actually--and I think we have
corrected that. It is the United Auto Workers Trust Fund, so
the United Auto Workers didn't get the money, the trust fund
that administers the early retiree benefits gets it. But
whether or not they are contractually obligated to do it, it
just provides benefits to the early retirees.
Mr. Gardner. So what standards were many of these Fortune
500 companies had in order to get this free money?
Mr. Larsen. Well, they have to demonstrate that they have
claims experienced between the threshold that is set up in the
Affordable Care Act, so the ACA requires or provides that under
this program, 80 percent of the costs for retirees between the
$15,000 and $90,000 limit is reimbursed under the reimbursement
program.
Mr. Gardner. So pretty much anybody who applied was
accepted in this program for free money?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I wouldn't say that, although I think
that the--most of the companies that applied were approved as
sponsors. There were some that weren't.
Mr. Gardner. So if--you issued the regulations for this
program, correct?
Mr. Larsen. CCIIO issued the regulations, yes.
Mr. Gardner. Was there a need for more restrictive
regulations, or----
Mr. Larsen. Well, we issued the regulations that were
called for under the language in the Affordable Care Act for
the program.
Mr. Gardner. Do you think they needed to be more
restrictive?
Mr. Larsen. I think the program is working well as it is.
If Congress wanted to revisit the program, we would be happy to
work with people to make sure that we continue to be able to
provide ongoing retiree benefits.
Mr. Gardner. I mean, do you think it is right, though, that
the taxpayers gave free taxpayer money to GE, that is making
billions of dollars, not paying any taxes, needed another $36
million of Federal Government money?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I think it is hard to look at this
program in isolation. I mean, we have got a number of bridge
programs in place. We have got the PCIP program, we have got
ERRP, all of which help get us to 2014 that avoid uncompensated
care, avoid the burden that some particularly sick or
vulnerable populations may experience if they don't have
coverage.
Mr. Gardner. Now, you said get us to 2014, but you are
ending the program soon, correct?
Mr. Larsen. Well, not soon. It could--the money could run
out in fiscal year 2012.
Mr. Gardner. So the money is going to run out soon, and
then what happens?
Mr. Larsen. Well then that is the end of the program,
unless Congress appropriates additional money to the program.
Mr. Gardner. Is it your opinion that Congress ought to
appropriate, and will you be asking for more money?
Mr. Larsen. We would be happy to work with Congress, you
know, should they choose to look at other options to extend the
program.
Mr. Gardner. But you think continuing these bailouts is the
proper role for the Federal Government?
Mr. Larsen. Well again, I think we disagree on the bailout
terminology, but we think this is a good program.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. The gentleman's time has expired. Before I go
to the next speaker, I just ask unanimous consent to put into
the record the ERRP memos that are issued by CCIIO on March 2
and March 31, our staff memo of March 23, the Chief Actuary
report of April 22, HHS response to the committee on high risk
pools February 28, and the New York Times article on GE. No
objection, it is agreed upon.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Stearns. And at this point, we recognize the
gentlelady, Ms. Myrick, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Myrick. Thank you. I really have a lot of similar
questions to what Mr. Gardner asked because of the same type of
concerns that this $5 billion in money in the Early Retiree
Reinsurance Program has gone to corporations and unions. Again,
I just have a hard time understanding when companies like one
of them that made $20 billion in profit can't afford to do
their own programs. And if the healthcare plan wasn't there,
that they can dump their employees on anyway if they chose to
do that. I mean, all of this just doesn't make any sense to me,
and so I guess how do you justify--you said and I heard you
when you answered Mr. Gardner, that you say well, it is because
you want them to continue to have coverage. But it just doesn't
make any sense that we are using taxpayer money to fund their
early retirement program so they are making huge profits. And
he mentioned the United Auto Workers Trust Fund, which you
clarified, but they reported assets last year of over $1
billion, and only 4.5 million liabilities, so why was it
necessary to give it to them?
Mr. Larsen. Well, and as we have, I think, discussed
earlier, history shows that the number of large employers that
are even offering retiree benefits, health insurance coverage
for their early retirees has dropped dramatically from, I
think, two-thirds to about one-third. So I don't know whether
those companies were profitable or not. I am sure many of them
were, and yet, many of them continued to drop their retiree
coverage. So this provision of the ACA is a way to ensure, as
best we can, that that rate of dropping of retiree coverage
does not continue.
Mrs. Myrick. Well again, I just go back to the fact that I
am willing to bet that people in my district who--our
unemployment is 11.1%, and they are having a heck of a time
making it today, and they are giving their tax money to the
Federal Government and now that tax money has gone to these
corporations to pay for their retirement programs. I don't
think they think very highly of that, and it really aggravates
me, too, quite frankly.
Mr. Larsen. Well again, as I have said earlier, the benefit
of this is for the retirees themselves and to ensure that they
have continued coverage. The money can only be used to reduce
the costs for the retirees, like coinsurance, or the cost of
the company as it relates to the provision of the retiree
benefits.
Mrs. Myrick. But there really weren't any real specific
guidelines they had to follow to apply for this program? I
mean, pretty much most of them--you said a few of them didn't
get it but most of them----
Mr. Larsen. Well, they had to send in a list of how many
people they covered, who their retirees were, so there's
documentation certainly that goes along with becoming an
approved sponsor in the program.
Mrs. Myrick. To me, again, this program proves that the
notion that healthcare reform--the law is going to lower the
cost is just preposterous. You take $5 billion to allocate for
what I think is a dubious program, because the Administration
is just anxious to give it away, and it already looks like it
won't last until, you said 2012. I thought it was 2014. There
are commitments made to like 5,000 entities already, $1,8
billion has been paid out, so how is that $5 billion going to
be nearly enough for the corporations and the unions that you
are giving it to?
Mr. Larsen. Well, at the rate now, it is unlikely that it
will last until 2014, certainly. I think we did announce
yesterday that we would stop taking new applications for
approved sponsors after--I think at the end of April, so we are
going to stop the pipeline, if you will, of eligible companies
and State and local governments that can apply.
Mrs. Myrick. I know you have already talked and I am sorry
I was unable to be here earlier. I was in another hearing about
the high risk pools, but I did have a question particularly
relating to North Carolina, because they have had a functional
high risk insurance pool in operation prior to the passage of
the health reform law, and when the new law went into effect,
they were required to set up a new pool alongside the state
pool they already have which is functioning. It is very
confusing to consumers, but it just seems kind of odd that the
federal program would essentially require the operation of
these two separate pools, and why couldn't North Carolina just
have had the option to take the federal money and expand the
pool that was already working, because it has been working for
them?
Mr. Larsen. Well, there is certainly no requirement that
they set up a separate pool. For the states that declined to do
so, HHS through our contractors operates pools in 23 states and
the District of Columbia, and the statutory provisions relating
to the federal PCIP are different than the terms that apply
under state law for the state high risk pools.
Mrs. Myrick. Right.
Mr. Larsen. So for example, there is no waiting period for
coverage for a high cost condition in the federal program, so
it really serves as a compliment to the existing state
programs. And states have been able to leverage off their state
pools in terms of advertising and knowledge about this pool as
another alternative for individuals to be able to go into if
they have been denied coverage for preexisting conditions.
Mrs. Myrick. I am a little confused. What I was told in
North Carolina, a person must go without insurance for 6 months
before he is eligible for federal coverage----
Mr. Larsen. Correct.
Mrs. Myrick [continuing]. But the state pool doesn't have
this requirement.
Mr. Larsen. It is a little confusing, because they sound
the same but they are different requirements. For the federal
pool, you are not eligible if you have had insurance for the
preceding 6 months. Typically in a state pool, there isn't a
requirement like that, but there are often requirements that
when you come into the pool that you may have coverage for your
preexisting condition excluded or there is a ``waiting period''
for coverage for your condition. So they each have different
provisions relating to waiting periods and insurance coverage.
Mrs. Myrick. Yes, I----
Mr. Stearns. I think the gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Chair, I move to strike the last word. I
just have----
Mr. Stearns. The gentlelady is recognized.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. I think that my colleague from
North Carolina is onto something, but--and maybe we can work to
figure this out. Here is the problem. She is absolutely
correct, and Mr. Chairman, you are correct and everybody is
correct. These large companies and unions that have very high
assets and profits are taking advantage of this program. The
problem is there is no legal requirement that these companies
offer insurance to their early retirees, and so what is
happening is as the economy went down, people took early
retirement, then the companies discontinued their health
insurance. And we can't make them offer health insurance, it is
a contractual obligation that they have with their employees so
if they don't have that, then they can't make their--we can't
make them give their early retirees health insurance. So then
they won't have health insurance. But I think maybe something
we can work on, especially since this program is running out of
money, is maybe we can find some other way to incentivize
employers giving health insurance to their early retirees that
doesn't consist of just simply subsidizing it.
Short of that, what we would have to do is we would have to
pass some kind of legal requirement that they offer insurance
to early retirees, and I don't think that is going to be
acceptable to Republicans or most Democrats. That is--I am just
brainstorming, because I think we can probably modify the
program so that we wouldn't just be paying out the money, but
maybe some kind of incentive. I would love to work with----
Mr. Stearns. Well, I am very glad the gentlelady, the
ranking member is also as outraged as we are that taxpayers'
money is being spent on large corporations who are very
profitable who----
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Chairman, you don't need to characterize
what I just said.
Mr. Stearns. Certainly I can characterize what you just
said, so I am glad you agree with us that this is obscene. Let
us see. The next--you mentioned before that companies were
rejected from the ERRP program. Will you be kind enough to
submit this list for us for the record?
Mr. Larsen. For applications that weren't accepted?
Mr. Stearns. Yes.
Mr. Larsen. I will.
Mr. Stearns. OK. We are going to Mr. Scalise, the gentleman
from Louisiana, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scalise. I thank the chairman for yielding, and I thank
the gentleman, Mr. Larsen, for coming before us to testify.
One of the things, as I look through this list, back during
the beginning of this whole debate, I think everybody
recognized there were problems with the cost of healthcare and
problems that needed to be fixed, like preexisting conditions
being discriminated against, that those of us that supported
alternative legislation addressed directly without these taxes
and mandates that are creating all of these problems. In fact,
our bill was scored to lower the cost of healthcare by 10
percent. What we are seeing now, and I think one of the reasons
you are seeing so many of these companies on this list come to
the Federal Government saying give me taxpayer money so that I
can fund early retiree programs is because what these companies
are seeing is since Obamacare passed, the cost of healthcare
has dramatically increased. It is something we have seen. There
is a consolidation in the industry. We have already seen a
number of other problems from it, but you, yourself, just
testified earlier that some of these companies that got
millions of dollars, tens of millions of dollars in some cases,
could have just been giving early retirement to their employees
that otherwise would have been still working for the company,
but because of the high cost of healthcare and the things that
they had to do to contract, they pushed some people into early
retirement. I will ask you to clarify if I am incorrect, but
you did say there is nothing you saw in the reports that you
got, the requests for these companies, could they have done
that? Could the companies have said because of the high cost of
healthcare and these new burdens and mandates and taxes because
of Obamacare, we are now going to have to squeeze some of our
employees out into early retirement? And if they did that and
they packaged those employees and put them into early
retirement and asked for money from you from this program, they
could have gotten the money. Is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. What I said was that we didn't evaluate as part
of the process----
Mr. Scalise. So they could have done that, is that correct?
Or did you prohibit them from doing that?
Mr. Larsen. We didn't evaluate the process by which they
have an early retiree program. If they have a program----
Mr. Scalise. So if they did what I just said, if they moved
some employees that would today be working but now were pushed
into early retirement because the company couldn't afford the
higher cost of healthcare because of Obamacare, and then they
pushed them and sought State--federal taxpayer money for the
ERRP program, they could have gotten it, and some probably did.
Right?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I don't know. If it cost money to provide
them health insurance and as employer it is going to cost money
to provide them early retiree health insurance----
Mr. Scalise. You didn't even ask that question when they
asked for the money. If they did what I just categorized, they
could have gotten the money and you would have no way of
knowing that. Is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. If I am understanding what you are saying, we
didn't evaluate the process by which they ended up with----
Mr. Scalise. That is exactly right, so basically if a
company said because of the higher cost of healthcare due to
Obamacare, we have got to consolidate----
Mr. Larsen. Well, that is where we part company.
Mr. Scalise. Well, but I mean, the marketplace has shown
that healthcare has gone up, and in fact, you are seeing
consolidation of health insurance providers----
Mr. Larsen. It has been going up for decades.
Mr. Scalise [continuing]. Who are saying it happened
specifically, but the consolidation that is occurring right now
they will tell you is because of Obamacare. Talk to business
owners, I mean, maybe you don't ask those questions when you
review these forms. I talk to businesses every day. Small
businesses will tell you, medium size and even large companies
will tell you that the mandates and new taxes from Obamacare is
one of the things that is pushing them to have to cut costs in
other ways, including pushing people into early retirement.
And so when I look at this list, first of all, the
largest--unless you have got somebody higher, the largest
recipient was 206 million to the United Auto Workers Trust
Fund. Was there anybody that got more than that?
Mr. Larsen. Well collectively state and local government
was the largest recipient.
Mr. Scalise. Well right, you bailed out the State of
California to the tune of $57 million, you bailed out the State
of New York for 47 million.
You talked earlier in your testimony that you categorized
this as a successful program. I mean, the program is going
bankrupt because you are giving away so much money to bail out
states and unions. I mean, did you really think it was going to
be hard to give that money away? I mean, how was that a
successful program when companies who were making big profits
and corporations and unions and states took tens and hundreds
of millions of dollars from you? How is that successful?
Mr. Larsen. The program is not going bankrupt. Congress
allocated $5 billion----
Mr. Scalise. You said in the press yesterday that you have
allocated $1.8 billion----
Mr. Larsen. I don't think that is the word----
Mr. Scalise [continuing]. Already and that you are going to
have to close the enrollment period earlier than expected
because you are going to run out of money.
Mr. Larsen. Sure, but that is not a bankrupt program.
Mr. Scalise. Well, it is a program that is running out of
money.
Let me ask you this. Do you know how much money we spend
every day that is borrowed money?
Mr. Larsen. I don't know the answer to your question.
Mr. Scalise. OK. Forty-two cents--from the numbers I have
seen, 42 cents of every dollar that the Federal Government
spends is borrowed money, and when you look at this program, I
don't know if you can appreciate how offended some of us are,
that you are giving away $57 million to bail out a State like
California. You are giving away $206 million to bail out United
Auto Workers Trust Fund. I understand you gave $5 million of
taxpayers' money to BP. Is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. You can't lose sight of the millions of----
Mr. Scalise. Did you give $5 million to BP?
Mr. Larsen. If it is on the list, then we did.
Mr. Scalise. I mean, my God, you wonder why people are
offended by this program when they are seeing all of this money
going out the window, money that we don't have, 42 cents of
every dollar, and correct me if I am wrong on that number. But
this shows that the program is broken and that the law itself
has created more problems. We have already seen companies are
dumping prescription drug programs because of the taxes in
Obamacare where you increased taxes on them, so people are
dumping their prescription drug programs because of the law.
Mr. Larsen. This program will help----
Mr. Scalise. And so again, you have got a program here----
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. Them continue that for retirees.
That is exactly right.
Mr. Scalise. Right, and so now we are seeing that companies
are pushing more people into early retirement because of the
higher costs due to Obamacare, and now you are giving them
taxpayer money, 42 cents of every dollar which we don't have.
Maybe you don't understand why that offends some of us, but it
is very offensive.
I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. Gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. I might be the last, I might not. Who knows.
But hopefully it is.
Let me ask you a question. You were talking earlier and you
said you can't look at this in an isolated situation, that
there are lots of things going on out there. That was in
response to a question related to the money given to GE. Has GE
gotten more money from you all under different programs?
Mr. Larsen. No, no. I just meant that we have a number of
bridge programs to get us from kind of the broken market, the
preexistent healthcare to 2014. This is one of them. PCIP is
one of them until we have full reform implemented in 2014.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Here is my problem with this
program as I have been listening to the testimony here today.
It sounds like that as long as you provided employees with--
retirees with health insurance plan, you were eligible to get
money. I am just wondering, you all set up the regulations for
this. Why wasn't there a requirement that there at least be
some indication that the company, following what you have said
was the reason for it--that the company was not going to
provide it? Because it sounds like to me from what I have heard
that what you all have said is if they provide the benefits,
they get the money, but we did it because we were afraid they
were going to discontinue. So we may very well as taxpayers
have given an awful lot of money to big companies like GE and
AT&T and all of the other ones that have been mentioned here
today who had no intentions. But like any good business, if the
Federal Government is handing out candy for free, they are
going to take it, and they have the people who are able to go
out there and look for it, where we may have actually
shortchanged--if this is what you were trying to do--some small
businesses or micro-businesses even that might have been
wanting to do this but had no clue there was a program like
this.
I am just wondering why you didn't have regulations that it
would have at the very minimum required that the company state
they were going to discontinue their program if they didn't
receive assistance within 90 days?
Mr. Larsen. Yes. Well, we tracked the statutory provisions
when we put the regulations together, but I am not sure we
would have been able to get those representations in advance of
the program.
Mr. Griffith. So we were so--in such a big hurry to get
Obamacare on the books, to get Obamacare into place that we
didn't bother to take a look at what was going to happen to the
taxpayers? Is that what I just heard you tell me?
Mr. Larsen. We----
Mr. Griffith. We had to get the program started. We
couldn't take time to make sure that we weren't just giving
money to giant corporations who had no intentions of
discontinuing their health insurance to retirees. That is what
I heard your answer say.
Mr. Larsen. Well, we had statutory deadlines under which we
wanted to get the program operational, but that is not why we
didn't do as you suggested. We implemented the program as it
was set out in the provisions of the Affordable Care Act.
Mr. Griffith. How much notice was there--you said that most
of the beneficiaries were state and local governments, and I am
just wondering, did the Virginia VRS get any of this money?
Mr. Larsen. I can--I would have to go back and look at the
list. I am not sure if they did.
Mr. Griffith. I am just wondering, because, based on your
criteria they would have qualified.
Mr. Larsen. I think all----
Mr. Griffith. That is all right. They will get me an answer
later.
Other than just looking at the bill itself--and I am glad
you found yourself constrained by the bill, because we have had
some other agencies in here that seem to think they can make up
the rules as they go--but in that regard, you don't think you
had the ability to create a regulation or rule that would say
that you had to be getting ready to discontinue your benefits
in order to hand out these checks?
Mr. Larsen. I will confirm back to you, but I don't
believe--and I wasn't here when we drafted those regulations--
but I don't believe that we saw the statute as creating the
type of program that you just described.
Mr. Griffith. OK.
Mr. Larsen. But I will--we will confirm that with you.
Mr. Griffith. And you just came in in what, December or
January?
Mr. Larsen. Well, as the head of the CCIIO. I was running
oversight but not ERRP.
Mr. Griffith. OK. So these regulations would have been the
previous initialed name, which what was that, CCIIO before they
changed the name?
Mr. Larsen. OCCIIO.
Mr. Griffith. OCCIIO, and so that would have been--the
regulations would have been created by that administrator at
that time?
Mr. Larsen. Well, it was the same individual. I am just
saying I wasn't personally involved in the regs at that point.
I am just saying I believe that we did not conclude that we
could have created a--kind of a needs-based program as you just
described.
Mr. Griffith. That would have been the same fellow who got
hired 5 weeks before the bill passed but was hired under the
authority of the bill that had not yet passed, would it not?
You were here for that testimony earlier. I was too, so I am
correct, am I not?
Mr. Larsen. I think I know who you are referring to. I am
not sure I agree with the characterization.
Mr. Griffith. I am just repeating what he said.
All right, Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
Mr. Stearns. I thank you, and--my colleagues, we are going
to go one more round here, so Mr. Larsen, I appreciate your
patience staying until we voted.
Following up with what Mr. Griffith just said, is there any
way you can confirm that all these companies that my colleagues
have talked about, that when they said that they are going to
drop their coverage, do you have the ability to go back and
certify what they say is correct?
Mr. Larsen. Well under the current program, they did not--
they are not required to certify----
Mr. Stearns. My question is GE comes to you and said that
we cannot pay for all these employees that are doing an early
retirement and we need 36 million. And you say OK, you look at
it and you give them the money, but you certified that----
Mr. Griffith. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. All these people would lose--yes?
Mr. Griffith. Mr. Chairman, if you would yield for just a
second. My concern was and I think his testimony was was that
they didn't even ask that question.
Mr. Stearns. Right, so I am following up----
Mr. Griffith. Oh, OK.
Mr. Stearns. Not only did they not ask, the question is do
you have anything in statute that says you should have
certified this and you didn't? So my question is is there
something in statute that says you have to certify that they
will lose their coverage----
Mr. Larsen. No.
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. And did you do that?
Mr. Larsen. There is nothing----
Mr. Stearns. So there is nothing in statute that says you
have to certify that they will indeed lose their----
Mr. Larsen. No, the only thing--the CEO has an attestation
that the information that they are providing in connection with
the application----
Mr. Stearns. So the CEO does this and that----
Mr. Larsen. No, just to be clear, the CEO doesn't attest
nor does the statute provide for a requirement----
Mr. Stearns. Well how do you prevent somebody from telling
you that these employees are going to lose it----
Mr. Larsen. No, all they have to do is tell us that they
have an early retiree program----
Mr. Stearns. Right.
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. And provide the documentation for
the claims that satisfy the statutory threshold. They, of
course, must continue the program----
Mr. Stearns. Can an outside source or anybody that confirms
in your office that what they provide in these papers is
accurate?
Mr. Larsen. Oh, yes, we audit and validate the claims data
that they provide, but again, they are not representing to us
nor does the statute require them to represent that if they
don't get the money, they won't continue their program.
Mr. Stearns. I mean, is it possible that a lot of companies
will come in and say they need the money--after they see this
list will come in and say I need the money, they will submit
the papers to you, and they really have a profit that they can
cover it themselves. How do you know that they can't cover it
themselves is my question.
Mr. Larsen. Well, the premise of the program is that the
best way to ensure that these programs continue is to provide
the assistance that is set out in the program, because again,
we know that many companies have continued to drop this----
Mr. Stearns. Let me interrupt you.
Mr. Larsen. Probably many that were profitable----
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Larsen, you told the press yesterday that
you are closing enrollment for this program, and you just said
it to Mr. Griffith and Mr. Scalise.
Mr. Larsen. Right.
Mr. Stearns. You reported that you have already spent $1.8
billion, is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. Right, that is correct.
Mr. Stearns. OK. Is that all that is accounted for today,
or are there additional claims that have not yet been included
in that report?
Mr. Larsen. You mean of the 1.8 billion?
Mr. Stearns. No, no. OK, you have already spent that.
Mr. Larsen. Right.
Mr. Stearns. But are there other claims out there that have
not been included in this report that you are going to approve
and are going to make the list longer? Yes or no.
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Stearns. OK.
Mr. Larsen. But can I--may I----
Mr. Stearns. Has all the $5 billion of the program already
been obligated?
Mr. Larsen. No.
Mr. Stearns. And how much is left?
Mr. Larsen. Well, that is what I am trying to say. So we--
--
Mr. Stearns. Just approximately.
Mr. Larsen. I am going to tell you.
Mr. Stearns. OK.
Mr. Larsen. We have gotten 1.8 billion in paid claims----
Mr. Stearns. Right.
Mr. Larsen. At any given point, we can tell you what has
been paid, and then there are claims being processed that we
know about but haven't yet been paid. They have to be verified.
The decision that we made to close--it is not to enrollees, but
it is to plan sponsors. So all of the companies that have been
approved as plan sponsors--and sponsors just means you are
eligible to----
Mr. Stearns. Are you going to have enough money?
Mr. Larsen. What is that?
Mr. Stearns. Are you going to use up all the $5 billion?
Mr. Larsen. Oh, I think we will use up the $5 billion.
Mr. Stearns. OK.
Mr. Larsen. But I think that will happen----
Mr. Stearns. How many have not been verified and are
waiting?
Mr. Larsen. It is a small number. We have----
Mr. Stearns. One hundred, 50, 10?
Mr. Larsen. It could be.
Mr. Stearns. One hundred? It could be 100?
Mr. Larsen. It is not 100. I think it is----
Mr. Stearns. It could be 1,000?
Mr. Larsen. I don't think it is 1,000, no.
Mr. Stearns. How much money is left or waiting to be
verified?
Mr. Larsen. I just want to be clear, when you say waiting
to be verified, do you mean claims or applicants? Applicants to
me is a company.
Mr. Stearns. Claims.
Mr. Larsen. Oh, it is not a large amount.
Mr. Stearns. OK.
Mr. Larsen. I mean, we can get that to you, but it is not
like there is another billion dollars in claims that are out
there. We have reported what claims are out the door. There is
always going to be a small amount of claims that are in
progress.
Mr. Stearns. You are really in a position of being Santa
Claus, and here we are at Easter. So I think a lot of us just
find this unbelievable that you can just hand out this kind of
money based upon a criteria that is not clear and based upon
not certifying, except through your staff, their word of mouth
that they cannot pay these early retirees.
I think you said you are going to close this down, but
refresh my memory. Wasn't this program supposed to go to 2014
originally? Isn't that true?
Mr. Larsen. Yes, ideally.
Mr. Stearns. OK. So the fact is that you have run out of
money, so that is why you are forced to close it. So I mean,
isn't this a bad reflection on this program that the fact is
that you are running out of money that is supposed to----
Mr. Larsen. I think it is a reflection of the success of
the program, because there are a lot of companies that have----
Mr. Stearns. Well, can I tell you an honest----
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. Secret? Everybody takes free
money. If you get free money--I think you and your friends and
your neighbors would take the money if it is free, so you are
going to always run out of money if it is free.
With that, my time is expired. I will recognize the ranking
member.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So the title of this hearing today is ``The PPACA's High
Risk Pool Regime: High Cost, Low Participation.'' So really,
the entirety of the questions on the other side have been about
the Early Retiree Reinsurance Program, so I guess we can
stipulate that the PPACA's high risk pool regime is in pretty
good shape.
So the first thing I want to do, Mr. Larsen, is thank you
for answering all of these questions that I don't know how
prepared you were to come and answer them, but I certainly had
not been brief by the Majority staff that they would be
focusing this hearing on this topic. So I think you have done
an admirable job trying to answer these questions about this
other program.
I want to try to clarify some things for some of the
members who perhaps don't understand the basic facts of the
Early Retiree Reinsurance Program, and maybe even for my own
edification, what is the purpose of the program, briefly, Mr.
Larsen?
Mr. Larsen. The purpose is to ensure the continued
availability of health benefits for early retirees that are
provided by the range of applicants that we see.
Ms. DeGette. OK, and that is people between 50 and 65----
Mr. Larsen. Typically, yes.
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. Who have retired from their jobs?
Mr. Larsen. That is right.
Ms. DeGette. Many of them are employed by large
corporations or--correct?
Mr. Larsen. But many are not.
Ms. DeGette. Many are not. About how many individuals have
enrolled in this early retiree program?
Mr. Larsen. Well to clarify, we don't enroll individuals,
per se.
Ms. DeGette. Right, you enroll the companies, but how----
Mr. Larsen. There are about 5,000 plus, maybe 5,900
sponsors.
Ms. DeGette. And how many people--how many employees are
involved in----
Mr. Larsen. Well, I think at least four million early
retirees are in programs that have benefited from ERRP.
Ms. DeGette. Right, so by----
Mr. Larsen. Millions of people.
Ms. DeGette. The way the law was set up as this bridge
program until 2014 is that the companies and the union trust
funds and others could sign up for the program and then they
would use that to insure the employees. So there is like four
million people who might not have insurance right now who are
getting insurance, right?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. And if those four million--and as far as you
know, the companies are not obligated to offer insurance to
those early retirees. You don't know one way or the other,
right?
Mr. Larsen. We don't know, but I also believe that even
profitable companies are known to stop providing retiree
benefits, health insurance benefits to their retirees.
Ms. DeGette. Right. So you know, this program is modeled on
the Part D Medicare drug benefit that Republicans passed last
time they were in the Majority, which gave $70 billion to
companies to provide drug benefits to seniors. Isn't that
correct?
Mr. Larsen. There can be parallels there, yes.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Now, do you know that large firms who
provide workers with retiree health coverage dropped from 66
percent in 1988 to 29 percent in 2009?
Mr. Larsen. Yes, it is a big problem.
Ms. DeGette. It is a big problem because it leaves people
between 50 and 65 who are not eligible for Medicare yet, but
many of whom have preexisting conditions or health problems
going out into the individual insurance market and trying to
buy policies, right?
Mr. Larsen. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. So if we hadn't have done some kind of a
bridge like this, then that would have potentially left
millions of Americans out there with--it would have added to
the number of uninsured until 2014 when they can enroll in the
exchanges and so on, right?
Mr. Larsen. That is exactly right.
Ms. DeGette. Now look, I am not sure that--even though
maybe this is modeled on the Part D program which just gave $70
billion to companies, maybe the way we have got it structured
is not perfect. Maybe as we go forward, since it has been so
popular, we should require employers to certify somehow that
they are not going to be able to offer these benefits. But the
bottom line is, the benefits ultimately inure to the employees,
not to the employers, correct?
Mr. Larsen. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. And that is four million people that might not
otherwise have health insurance, correct?
Mr. Larsen. That is right.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. All right, gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from Virginia for the second round of
questioning.
Mr. Griffith. Thanks. Well, I thought I was going to be
last, but we are going to do a couple more rounds, apparently.
I think that in response to my colleague, I think that the
reason you have gotten so many questions today is that the news
didn't break until yesterday about the other program, and so a
lot of folks were a little bit surprised that we were giving
away the free money so to speak, and that was the concern that
you have heard a lot today. But I do think that there are some
concerns that overlap with the program that initially this
hearing was about, and that--and what I am hearing in this is
that you said that the program for the retirement money, you
know, it will go until the 5 billion is used up and then it is
over with. But for the high risk pools, however, it looks like
you all are spending money on that to a point where it may
actually--that 5 billion may not be able to survive, and I
look----
Mr. Larsen. Not able to survive, meaning run out?
Mr. Griffith. Run out of the 5 billion before----
Mr. Larsen. For the PCIP program?
Mr. Griffith. For the PCIP program, because you have got--I
mean, I am looking----
Mr. Larsen. We are going to work within that, but we are
off to a slower start than was projected. But we believe that
we are going to continually increase the rate of enrollment.
Mr. Griffith. Well, let us touch on that before we get back
to the money issues.
Mr. Larsen. OK.
Mr. Griffith. You are off to a slower rate than
anticipated, and in fact, wasn't it anticipated that there
would be about 375,000 people who would be involved in that
program in 2010 alone, but there were only 12,000? So isn't it,
in fact, at least for 2010 and even into early 2011, isn't it,
in fact, the program has been a failure?
Mr. Larsen. No, I wouldn't at all characterize it that way.
Mr. Griffith. Well, OK, I disagree but that is OK. That is
what life is about.
Now that being said, let us go back to the money issue
because it appears, according to--and I am looking at some
notes here that say Washington Post reported on December 27
that New Hampshire has only about 80 members but they spent
double the $650,000, and then HHS agreed to give New Hampshire
more money and is basically taking it out of money that they
anticipated that they would be spending in later years----
Mr. Larsen. That is right.
Mr. Griffith. California has indicated that they think they
will spend over the life of the program $1 billion, and Alaska,
while only anticipates having 132 enrollees, anticipates
spending $7 million or $56,000 per--56,000 plus per enrollee.
Looking at those numbers is why it looks like to me that even
with the failed numbers coming into the high risk pools, that
you are not possibly going to be able to do it on $5 billion.
Isn't that a fair assessment?
Mr. Larsen. I understand your point, but I don't agree and
here is why.
Mr. Griffith. You don't agree, but it is a fair assessment.
Reasonable people can disagree, but you would agree it is a
fair assessment coming from my philosophical position, would
you not?
Mr. Larsen. I would not.
Mr. Griffith. All right, well go ahead with your position.
Mr. Larsen. So it is very early in the program, and there
are certainly some states that are running ahead of their
projections. Every state had to provide within their allocation
projections regarding the number of members and the costs, and
that was part of the contract. There are certainly some states
that are running ahead of projections, meaning like New
Hampshire. The people that they have are much more costly than
they projected, so they are running through their money faster.
There are many other states that are not running ahead of
projections, so we will continue to monitor exactly how they do
with monthly reports that we get from the states each month
where they are in terms of their costs and their enrollment,
and we will work within the $5 billion appropriation through
the cycle that we have.
Mr. Griffith. So then doesn't that mean that if you are one
of the states that is looking at this thing that you are much
better to spend your money now and get your up front money,
because at some point you are going to have to marshal the
funds and not give as much to the states that might come in
late?
Mr. Larsen. Well----
Mr. Griffith. Isn't that what you just said?
Mr. Larsen. States can't run ahead and spend the money. It
is a function of at what rate people come in to the program.
Mr. Griffith. So if New Hampshire is spending more money
than they were allocated in the first year and you allow them
to have more money coming in, and if a few other states start
doing that, isn't it possible that if enrollees in a state that
is not doing that right now come in too late in the process,
there may not be money there to take care of them? Isn't that
accurate?
Mr. Larsen. Not to be argumentative, I suppose it is
theoretically possible. We don't envision that happening,
though.
Mr. Griffith. Yes, if you envisioned that happening, you
would have put more money in the program.
Mr. Larsen. We are limited to the 5 billion.
Mr. Griffith. It is not only theoretical, but based on the
early data it is possible.
Mr. Larsen. I don't think it is likely.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I yield back my time.
Mr. Stearns. Gentleman yields back. I am going to ask some
more questions, and certainly give the ranking member, if she
wants additional questions.
She brought up the fact that the hearing was really
scheduled dealing with the high risk pools, and I think it is
important also to recognize that we have been asking for all
this information on the Early Retirement Reinsurance Program.
We just got it, so--the breaking news on it, so we thought
since you are here you could accommodate both. But I think her
point is well taken that we are also here because of the high
risk pool, so I have a few questions for you before you go.
How many people are enrolled in the high risk pools today?
Mr. Larsen. I believe that the number that we posted in
March as of February 1 was 12,000 plus, and since that time
there have been additional enrollments. Enrollment continues to
grow at a pretty fast clip, so----
Mr. Stearns. How many people enroll solely in the plan that
is run by the Health and Human Services?
Mr. Larsen. I think it is over 3,000 of the 12,000.
Mr. Stearns. OK. Does HHS publicly disclose the number of
individuals enrolled in each State's high risk pool? Do you
publish that?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Stearns. OK, and is it easy to get access to find--go
to each state and find----
Mr. Larsen. I will confirm, but I believe that we do.
Mr. Stearns. So I could go--I could find in the State of
Florida----
Mr. Larsen. Yes, actually, I am sorry. Of course we do,
yes. We do. In the posting that we put up in November and the
posting that we put up in March for February, it lists the
state enrollments and then it lists the number for the federal
PCIP enrollment. So you can go back and you can see what is
happening in each State.
Mr. Stearns. And towards that end, will HHS please submit a
detailed breakdown of the number of individuals currently
enrolled in each state pool and the federal high risk pool for
the record?
Mr. Larsen. We can, but I am pretty sure that is what
posted on the Web site.
Ms. DeGette. If the chairman will yield, healthcare.gov--I
have got the listing right here and I would ask unanimous
consent to put it in the record.
Mr. Stearns. All right, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Stearns. Now we have been talking on this side,
obviously, and you have admitted that you are going to run out
of funds dealing with the Early Retirement Reinsurance Program,
isn't that correct?
Mr. Larsen. It is likely at the pace that we are going.
Mr. Stearns. And in fact, you are going to--you indicate
you are going to shut down the program?
Mr. Larsen. No, just to be clear, we will----
Mr. Stearns. I mean, if you run out of money you are going
to shut down the program.
Mr. Larsen. Well, if I can just clarify. We announced we
would stop taking new applications for new sponsors.
Mr. Stearns. Which is an indication you are slowing down or
stopping the program.
Mr. Larsen. But for existing sponsors we will continue to
process claims until the $5 billion appropriation runs out.
Mr. Stearns. OK. Dealing with the high risk pool program,
you have about $5 billion in funding, is that correct?
Mr. Larsen. Correct.
Mr. Stearns. OK. To date, how much funding has been spent
of this 5 billion?
Mr. Larsen. I think that was the number that we were
discussing earlier, which is the 33 million and roughly 25
million minus the startup costs, so it is in the $60 million
range total.
Mr. Stearns. It is safe to say that this program is going
to run out of money before 2014?
Mr. Larsen. I don't think so. I don't think so.
Mr. Stearns. But you are not sure?
Mr. Larsen. Well, I don't think we are going to run out of
money.
Mr. Stearns. We have asked you for a number of documents
related to creating a waiver process, and we have had previous
hearings. Your response has been very slow in this process.
Will you commit to getting these documents and e-mails to us
next week? Is that--Mr. Larsen, can that be possible?
Mr. Larsen. We are committed to continuing to produce the
records that you have requested. We have continued to
prioritize our production in response to requests from the
committee. I know we have responded to many of them but not
all. I will do my best to get them to you as soon as we can. I
am not sure for those particular records I can commit under
oath that I will have them next week.
Mr. Stearns. Do you know it has been over 2 months since we
requested them?
Mr. Larsen. We have had many, many requests from you and
others that we are really trying to work on. We respect the
committee's ability to get this information and we will
continue to push to get it to you.
Mr. Stearns. We have also asked for Medicare fraud
estimates. Is that in your----
Mr. Larsen. I will take it back to my colleagues.
Mr. Stearns. OK, you can ask them.
OK. Let me say thank you for your attendance here, and
ranking member, would you like to close with anything
additional?
Ms. DeGette. No, just thank Mr. Larsen for coming.
Mr. Stearns. OK. We appreciate again your forbearance here
as we went through our voting process, and again, it is very
helpful for us to have you here to answer our questions.
And so with that, nothing further, the subcommittee is
adjourned.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 1:52 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Thank you, Chairman Stearns, for holding this hearing on
the high risk pools included in last year's health care law. We
all know the administration rushed to push the bill over the
finish line with a very narrow margin of support. Apparently in
that haste, there was not time to conduct studies on the
economics of their plan. For this program and others, the
numbers just don't add up.
am troubled by how this program seems to have been vastly
oversold. Shortly after passage of the health care law, the
administration's own Chief Actuary for Medicare and Medicaid
Services estimated that in the first year alone 375,000
individuals would enroll in this program. Today, only
approximately 12,000 have enrolled.
This is a shocking difference from what was originally
promised, and it raises a number of questions: Was the need for
this program oversold, perhaps as a way to strong-arm moderate
Democrats into voting for a trillion dollar expansion of the
government? Or is the need for the program real, and it was the
ability of the federal government to understand and administer
such a system that was oversold?
What should concern everyone in this room is that even
though only four percent of those expected to enroll in this
program have actually done so, it appears that this program
will still have no problem spending the entirety of its $5
billion budget between now and 2014. If we expected 375,000
enrollees and only got 12,000-shouldn't we be getting some of
that money back? I am interested in hearing whether our witness
can explain this today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the balance of my
time.
----------

Prepared Statement of Hon. John D. Dingell

Today's hearing offers a great opportunity for this
Subcommittee to learn more about how Director Larsen and the
Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight or
CCIIO is implementing the temporary high-risk insurance pools
created in the Affordable Care Act.
These high-risk insurance pools are designed to help those
most in need in our society--those with cancer, diabetes or
asthma--who are routinely denied insurance in the private
market. For those not denied in the private market, they often
find that the cost of insurance still makes health coverage out
of their reach.
Starting in 2014 insurance companies will no longer be able
to deny coverage to any individual with a pre-existing
condition, but until then the Pre-Existing Condition Insurance
Plan is serving as a temporary bridge to help those receive
coverage until the Exchanges open in 2014.
CCIIO faced an enormous task in front of them in setting up
the PCIP programs, and I would commend Director Larsen and
CCIIO for meeting the 90-day deadline and for aggressively
working with the states to assist them in setting up PCIP
programs.
Enrollment in PCIP is now over 12,400 and has grown 50
percent from November 2010 to February 2011. While this is an
achievement, there is much more we need to do.
I am pleased to see CCIIO conduct a unique and targeted
outreach campaign to help enroll individuals most in need. The
Center has reached out on the grassroots level through the
American Cancer Society and the American Diabetes Society, and
partnering with government agencies such as the Social Security
Administration. In addition, the Center has offered webinars
and has met with various stakeholders including providers,
hospitals, and consumer groups, among others. These steps are
necessary to target eligible individuals, and I believe these
steps show CCIIO's commitment to bridging the gap for the
sickest of the sick.
Now I know some of my friends on the other side of the
aisle are critical of PCIP. I would remind them that the
creation of high risk pools was proposed by Congressional
Republicans. In fact, Members of the Energy and Commerce
Committee have offered their own legislation appropriating far
more money than laid out in the Affordable Care Act to
implement high risk pools nationwide.
High risk pools and PCIP are designed to ensure that our
constituents across the country suffering from chronic disease
are not bankrupt due to their medical bills or forced to
foreclose their home to pay for the medical bills that continue
to stack up. This vulnerable population deserves our help.


