- PROMOTING BROADBAND, JOBS, AND ECONOMIC GROWTH THROUGH COMMERCIAL SPECTRUM AUCTIONS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROMOTING BROADBAND, JOBS, AND ECONOMIC GROWTH THROUGH COMMERCIAL
SPECTRUM AUCTIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 1, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-53

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
71-057                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                     Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida                JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois                EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania         FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
MARY BONO MACK, California            BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                   ANNA G. ESHOO, California
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                   ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                 GENE GREEN, Texas
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina    DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
Vice Chairman                       LOIS CAPPS, California
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma               MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania              JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas             CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee           JAY INSLEE, Washington
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California          TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire        MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                 ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana              JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                 G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington    JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi             DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey             DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

(ii)
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
LEE TERRY,                           ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Vice Chairman                      EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               DORIS O. MATSUI, California
MARY BONO MACK, California           JOHN BARROW, Georgia
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California             Islands
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              HENRY A. WAXMAN, California, ex
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois                 officio
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan, ex officio

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     4
Hon. Lee Terry, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Nebraska, opening statement....................................     5
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     7
Hon. Edolphus Towns, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New York, prepared statement................................   100

Witnesses

Todd Schurz, Chief Executive Officer, President, and Director,
Schurz Communications, Inc.....................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Answers to submitted questions...............................   119
Burt Ellis, President, Titan Broadcast Management................    32
Prepared statement...........................................    34
Answers to submitted questions...............................   128
Christopher Guttman-Mccabe, Vice President, Regulatory Affairs,
CTIA--The Wireless Association.................................    38
Prepared statement...........................................    40
Answers to submitted questions...............................   133
Michelle P. Connolly, Associate Professor of the Practice,
Department of Economics, Duke University.......................    44
Prepared statement...........................................    46
Answers to submitted questions...............................   137
Dean Brenner, Vice President, Government Affairs, Qualcomm
Incorporated...................................................    52
Prepared statement...........................................    55
Answers to submitted questions...............................   151
Harold Feld, Legal Director, Public Knowledge....................    61
Prepared statement...........................................    63
Answers to submitted questions...............................   155

Submitted Material

Articles by Radio Ink, May 27, 2011, submitted by Mr. Kinzinger..   102
Letter of April 6. 2011, from 112 economists to President Obama,
submitted by Mr. Walden........................................   105
Letter of May 31. 2011, from 10 groups representing minority
interests, submitted by Mr. Walden.............................   111
Letter of May 31. 2011, from 33 IT equipment innovators,
submitted by Mr. Walden........................................   114

PROMOTING BROADBAND, JOBS, AND ECONOMIC GROWTH THROUGH COMMERCIAL
SPECTRUM AUCTIONS

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 1, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 12:03 p.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Greg
Walden (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Walden, Terry, Stearns,
Bilbray, Blackburn, Scalise, Latta, Guthrie, Kinzinger, Eshoo,
Matsui, Barrow, Rush, DeGette, Dingell, and Waxman (ex
officio).
Staff present: Caroline Basile, Staff Assistant; Ray Baum,
Senior Policy Advisor/Director of Coalitions; Nicholas Degani,
FCC Detailee; Neil Fried, Chief Counsel, Communications and
Technology; Debbee Keller, Press Secretary; Carly McWilliams,
Legislative Clerk; Andrew Powaleny, Press Assistant; David
Redl, Counsel, Telecom; Charlotte Savercool, Executive
Assistant; Alex Yergin, Legislative Clerk; Roger Sherman,
Democratic Chief Counsel; Shawn Chang, Democratic Counsel; Jeff
Cohen, Democratic FCC Detailee; Sarah Fisher, Democratic Policy
Analyst; Phil Barnett, Democratic Staff Director; and Alex
Reynolds, Democratic Legal Intern.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. I would like to call the Subcommittee on
Communications and Technology to order, and begin our hearing
on ``Promoting Broadband, Jobs, and Economic Growth Through
Commercial Spectrum Auctions,'' and welcome all of our
witnesses who are here today.
Spectrum legislation presents a tremendous opportunity to
promote wireless broadband to spur economic growth, to create
jobs, and generate significant revenue for the American
taxpayer. This hearing will focus not only on how we might
advance our goals by auctioning currently available spectrum,
but also how we might create a marketplace where licenses can
voluntarily return spectrum for broadband in exchange for a
share of auction proceedings.
The communications industry in America is in a time of
massive change. Americans' voracious appetite for mobility has
made wireless service an overwhelmingly popular way for
Americans to stay connected. In fact, nearly one in four
Americans has cut the cord, as it were, relying solely on
wireless for their voice communications needs. Similarly,
wireless is the fastest growing area of broadband connectivity.
The convenience of mobility that moved us towards wireless
voice is having the same effect in the broadband arena.
Last week we had our hearing on public safety spectrum, and
I continue to have concerns that reallocating the D block
rather than auctioning it may be a mistake. The Advanced
Wireless Services 3 spectrum is another block already available
for auction, although many believe it would best be paired with
spectrum currently occupied by federal users. All of this
spectrum needs to be part of the discussion.
Another avenue for consideration is voluntary incentive
auctions, something that both the FCC's National Broadband Plan
and the President's budget identify. Current license holders,
such as some television broadcasters and satellite operators,
might be willing to relinquish spectrum and use the auction
proceeds to fund operations of new innovative ventures. For
example, the DTV transition has allowed broadcasters to
transmit in high-definition and add additional over-the-air
channels. Additional funding could help pay for expanded
mobile, Internet, and even broadband offerings. We can, and
should, act to preserve and promote this important service.
I support incentive auctions. But any incentive auction in
which a licensee forfeits spectrum rights must be voluntary.
This is not only good spectrum policy, it is good economic
policy. Incentive auctions help match willing buyers and
willing sellers. If a broadcast station values its spectrum
more than a potential wireless broadband provider is willing to
pay, the station will not be forced off the air. However, as
Mr. Ellis will attest in his testimony today, there are
broadcasters interested in participating in incentive auctions.
This opportunity for broadcasters presents opportunities
for our Nation's economy, as well. Broadcasters who agree to
surrender their licenses through an incentive auction, or those
who choose to only return a portion of the license and channel
share with another broadcaster, could provide the U.S.
government with the opportunity to re-auction their licenses to
wireless providers who desperately need additional spectrum to
meet consumer demand. Those auctions will generate revenue for
the Treasury for debt reduction. Moreover, they will help
create badly needed jobs. Build out of wireless networks is an
infrastructure project that requires the labor of Americans
across a broad cross-section of geography, education, and skill
levels. And of course increased wireless broadband will boost
productivity and create new and innovative lines of business.
The wireless industry's track record for innovation is
second-to-none. But wireless is not the sole venue for
innovation. As we move forward with additional changes to the
broadcast television service, we should work with broadcasters
to identify regulations that are hindering additional
innovation within their service. Over-the-air broadcasting
remains a vital and important part of the communications
infrastructure of America-fostering its innovation is in
everyone's interest.
I remain confident that a properly crafted incentive
auction can benefit broadcasters, whether they participate or
not, as well as wireless providers, the U.S. Treasury, and the
American economy. So today's hearing is designed to help
explore how the auctions can be structured to ensure a positive
outcome for everyone involved.
I thank the witnesses for their participation today. I look
forward to your testimony and your responses to the questions
that our subcommittee has.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Spectrum legislation presents a tremendous opportunity to
promote wireless broadband, spur economic growth, create jobs,
and generate significant revenue for the American taxpayer.
This hearing will focus not only on how we might advance our
goals by auctioning currently available spectrum, but how we
might also create a marketplace where licensees can voluntarily
return spectrum for broadband in exchange for a share of the
auction proceeds.
The communications industry in America is in a time of
massive change. Americans' voracious appetite for mobility has
made wireless service an overwhelmingly popular way for
Americans to stay connected. In fact, nearly one-in-four
Americans has ``cut the cord,'' relying solely on wireless for
their voice communications needs. Similarly, wireless is the
fastest growing area of broadband connectivity. The convenience
of mobility that moved us toward wireless voice is having the
same effect in the broadband arena.
Last week we had our hearing on public safety spectrum, and
I continue to have concerns that reallocating the D block
rather than auctioning it may be a mistake. The Advanced
Wireless Services 3 spectrum is another block already available
for auction, although many believe it would best be paired with
spectrum currently occupied by federal users. All of this
spectrum needs to be part of the discussion.
Another avenue for consideration is voluntary incentive
auctions- something that both the FCC's National Broadband Plan
and the President's budget identify. Current license holders,
such as some television broadcasters and satellite operators,
might be willing to relinquish spectrum and use the auction
proceeds to fund operations or new innovative ventures. For
example, the DTV transition has allowed broadcasters to
transmit in high-definition and add additional over-the-air
channels. Additional funding could help pay for expanded
mobile, Internet, and even broadband offerings. We can, and
should, act to preserve and promote this important service.
I support incentive auctions. But any incentive auction in
which a licensee forfeits spectrum rights must be voluntary.
This is not only good spectrum policy, it is good economic
policy. Incentive auctions help match willing buyers and
willing sellers. If a broadcast station values its spectrum
more than a potential wireless broadband provider is willing to
pay, the station will not be forced off the air. However, as
Mr. Ellis will attest to in his testimony, there are
broadcasters interested in participating in an incentive
auction.
This opportunity for broadcasters presents opportunities
for our nation's economy, as well. Broadcasters who agree to
surrender their licenses through an incentive auction-or those
who choose to only return a portion of the license and channel
share with another broadcaster-will provide the U.S. government
with the opportunity to re-auction their licenses to wireless
providers who desperately need additional spectrum to meet
consumer demand. Those auctions will generate revenue for the
Treasury for debt reduction. Moreover, they will help create
badly needed jobs. Buildout of wireless networks is an
infrastructure project that requires the labor of Americans
across a broad cross-section of geography, education, and skill
levels. And of course increased wireless broadband will boost
productivity and create new and innovative lines of business.
The wireless industry's track record for innovation is
second-to-none. But wireless is not the sole venue for
innovation. As we move forward with additional changes to the
broadcast television service, we should work with broadcasters
to identify regulations that are hindering additional
innovation within their service. Over-the-air broadcasting
remains a vital and important part of the communications
infrastructure of America-fostering its innovation is in
everyone's interest.
I remain confident that a properly crafted incentive
auction can benefit broadcasters-whether they participate or
not-as well as wireless providers, the U.S. Treasury, and the
American economy. Today's hearing should help explore how the
auctions can be structured to ensure a positive outcome for all
involved. I thank the witnesses for their participation today
and look forward to your testimony.

Mr. Walden. And with that, I would yield back my--I only
have 36 seconds left. I will yield back the time and will go to
Ms. Eshoo for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon
everyone and thank you to all the witnesses that are here
today. I am looking forward to your testimony and to the Q&A.
Today's hearing continues our in-depth examination on
spectrum reform. As we evaluate ways to promote broadband,
jobs, and economic growth, we should be guided by, I think, a
simple principle. Use spectrum to its maximum efficiency, and
be fiscally responsible in the plan that we commit to.
Thirty years ago, most Americans relied on over-the-air
broadcasting as their only means for news, information, and
entertainment. Then cable and satellite established an
alternative vehicle for delivering television into the home,
giving consumers access to hundreds of channels.
The world is changing once again, and today, broadband is
enabling a new set of programming options like Hulu, Amazon
Instant Video, Netflix, that can be watched at home or on the
go. Voluntary incentive auctions are one such way to address
the growing demand for wireless while providing a financial
incentive for broadcasters wishing to give back spectrum.
Legislation developed in this subcommittee, I think, should
incorporate feedback from impacted stakeholders and provide the
FCC with sufficient flexibility to carry out an auction and
handle the repacking process. We should also consider the
significant benefits of dedicating spectrum for unlicensed use.
Unlicensed spectrum has unlocked tremendous innovation, and in
the coming years will drive the growth of smart grid, access to
patient records in hospitals, and much, much more. By one
estimate, unlicensed applications could generate between $16
and $37 billion per year in economic value for the U.S. economy
over the course of the next 15 years.
The TV white sp ces and 5 megahertz band are two areas
which I hope today's witnesses will address. Our panel provides
a broad range of views, and I look forward to hearing their
thoughts on how best to structure a voluntary incentive auction
while providing fair compensation to broadcasters who chose to
relinquish their spectrum or must relocate as part of the
repacking process.
And with that, I will yield the balance of my time to
Representative Matsui.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Ranking Member Eshoo, for
yielding to me, and I would also like to thank the witnesses
for being with us today. Thank you very much.
We all know there is a looming spectrum crisis and we must
get additional spectrum into the marketplace. The FCC should
have the flexibility to structure and conduct incentive
auctions that would truly maximize the economic and social
values of the spectrum.
I also believe that comprehensive spectrum policy moving
forward should offer our innovators and entrepreneurs an
opportunity to be creative and have a forum to develop advanced
technologies and applications.
To help spur greater innovation, I am working on spectrum
legislation that incentivizes R&D efforts and promotes
unlicensed spectrum use, not only for emerging wireless
technologies and applications, but also as a way to support and
further advance American leadership in existing unlicensed
technologies. It is important that we continue to promote
policies that lead to greater innovation and the ever-evolving
telecommunications and technology sectors.
And with that, I yield my time to--I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. Walden. The gentlelady yields back the balance of the
time, and now I would recognize the gentleman from Nebraska,
the vice chair of the subcommittee, Mr. Terry.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LEE TERRY, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE
STATE OF NEBRASKA

Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is our
responsibility to ensure that the process by which we allocate
the lifeblood of wireless information delivery, spectrum,
promotes the needs of broadband carriers while simultaneously
recognizing the value of this spectrum to the existing license
holders, not only for existing critical uses, but for the
future innovations. This process must be fair, economically
sound, and provide certainty and predictability to existing
holders of spectrum licenses. By doing so, economic growth will
lead to job creation, innovation can flourish, and critical
broadcast resources will remain secure and available.
This hearing is a great opportunity for us to learn more
about how to best structure this process. Any spectrum auction
must be--must account for several important factors. First, we
must ensure that we are not coercing existing license holders
into giving up spectrum they wish to continue to utilize. If
and when existing holders do choose to participate in either an
auction or reallocation, not only must we compensate them
fairly and be consistent with the spectrum's value to the
existing holder; any repacking of spectrum should be done in
such a way that the consumer's access to critical information
and resources is not adversely affected by interference or
signal degradation.
With these goals in mind, I look forward to working with my
colleagues in crafting solutions. Our witnesses today here
bring much expertise from across stakeholder community, and I
look forward to listening and learning from then here today.
I yield back.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Stearns, do you have comments?
Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will just take a
little over a minute.
Last October, the FCC estimated that a spectrum deficit
approaching 300 megahertz is likely by the year 2014, not very
far away. Simply the benefit of releasing additional spectrum
is unlikely to provide $100 billion to the Treasury, not a very
small figure, in fact. So I think we should, Mr. Chairman, act
quickly to draft legislation that provides the FCC with
authority to conduct commercial auctions so that by 2014 we
will not face this crisis of shortage.
We know that the convergence of the smartphones and tablets
and TVs and broadband is continuing onward, and we see that day
to day. They continue to guzzle up the broadband. So the demand
for these devices is increasing, and we need to get more
spectrum. I would like to emphasize that the incentive auctions
is the way to go, so it is truly voluntary, and when
broadcasters are repacked, they should be able to maintain the
same service areas that they originally held, and be
compensated for switching channels.
So I look forward to our testimony, and I think everybody
on the panel should provide some recommendation of what type of
flexibility the FCC should have. Should Congress specify to the
FCC on how to do the auction, or should the FCC be unfettered?
I think that is the key question we have today.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to have my
opening statement.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Latta or Mr. Guthrie, do you have any
comments?
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate
it.
Just real briefly, I thank you very much for having these
hearings today. I recently introduced legislation for a
voluntary incentive auction, and the revenue sharing, and we
are looking at the jobs and the technology out there that we
can be moving forward. Also, additional revenue then to the
Treasury to reduce the deficit. I applaud you for the hearings
today. Thank you.
Mr. Walden. Thank you. Mrs. Blackburn, do you have an
opening statement you wanted to share?

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do, and I will
submit my full statement for the record.
I just wanted to say, I think that when it comes to
spectrum that we have to make some bold, tough decisions. I
think one thing that we should all be focusing on a bit is the
FCC has demonstrated that what they call a spectrum deficit
approaching 300 megahertz is likely by 2014. We need to be
looking at that and be serious in how we go about approaching
this and resolving that need for spectrum.
I was visiting with someone last week and they were talking
about how we will soon have 1 trillion devices attached to the
broadband, and why it is so important for us as we look at the
use of the spectrum to think in terms of how we accommodate
whether it is through the line or wireless, all of the use that
is coming toward us.
So I thank you for the hearing, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Blackburn follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Marsha Blackburn

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Policymakers must make bold, tough decisions on spectrum.
Congress should allow for auctions and repackaging so
commercial broadband can facilitate capital investment, job
growth, and deficit reduction.
Instead of underutilizing spectrum to serve a diminishing
number of Americans, Congress should put spectrum to its most
efficient use.
Consumer demand for mobile broadband has exploded. Everyone
agrees that we are facing a spectrum crisis.
The FCC has demonstrated that ``a spectrum deficit
approaching 300 megahertz is likely by 2014, and that the
benefit of releasing additional spectrum is likely to exceed
$100 billion.''
Inaction is too costly. Let's focus our spectrum policy on
what Americans are asking for--more opportunities, jobs, and
deficit reduction.
I look forward to today's testimony.

Mr. Walden. Thank you. All time is expired for opening
statements--no, we go to Mr. Waxman. I almost did that again, I
am sorry. Mr. Waxman?

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Since April 12, the Communications and Technology
subcommittee has held three hearings on the spectrum policy.
Last week, we focused on public safety spectrum and needs for
public safety spectrum, while this week we will examine how we
might make additional spectrum available for commercial
broadband through incentive auctions. I am pleased that
Chairman Walden and Ranking Member Eshoo are working together
to focus the subcommittee's attention on spectrum matters.
Smart spectrum policy can help improve public safety,
promote broadband, create jobs, and reduce the deficit. I know
members on both sides of the aisle recognize what a rare
opportunity we have to accomplish several important policy
goals by enacting legislation in this area.
Incentive auctions are not the only element of smart
spectrum policy that we need to address. We also should
consider how to utilize federal spectrum resources better, how
to encourage spectrum sharing, how to maximize spectrum
efficiency across all spectrum bands, and how to balance our
mix of licensed and unlicensed spectrum. But authorizing the
FCC to conduct incentive auctions, that should be the
foundation of our spectrum policy efforts. This is a concept
that has bipartisan, bicameral support. At the Energy and
Commerce Committee, Representatives Barrow and Latta have both
introduced measures that would grant the FCC the ability to
conduct incentive auctions. It is also backed by economic
experts. In April, more than 100 prominent economists with
varying political perspectives wrote to President Obama to
endorse incentive auctions as a good way to repurpose spectrum
while minimizing transaction costs. Notably, these economists
believe that Congress should give the FCC great flexibility to
design appropriate auction rules to maximize the benefits of
incentive auctions. They note that in 1993, Congress took the
then-controversial step of authorizing spectrum auctions and
allowing the FCC flexibility to design how spectrum auctions
should work. The result was a huge success.
Since Congress authorized spectrum auctions, the increase
in consumer welfare has been dramatic, and the economic
benefits to our Nation substantial. The system implemented by
the FCC has been replicated around the world.
As we move forward towards authorizing incentive auctions,
and I hope we will do so soon, we need to be wary about
limiting the FCC's flexibility to design an efficient auction.
We should take full advantage of the FCC's world-class
expertise on auction design, and give the Agency the ability to
work with auction experts to set up the best possible incentive
auction. We should not micromanage the Agency in this area.
I recognize some are concerned about whether we can ensure
that incentive auctions are truly voluntary. I remain confident
that we can find a way to avoid unfairly disadvantaging
broadcasters in this process, and I appreciate that
broadcasters' stated willingness to work with us to figure this
out. Broadcasters provide vital services that should not be
interrupted or degraded. Our job should not be to focus on the
specific legislative language that would provide--our job
should be to focus on the specific legislative language that
would provide assurances to broadcasters that they are not
being forced to sell spectrum in the voluntary auction.
We have an excellent panel today. I look forward to hearing
testimony from them. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for recognizing
me for this opening statement.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Waxman. We look forward to
working with you and others on both sides of the aisle on this
issue.
Now I think all members have had a chance for opening
statements, so we will now go to start with Mr. Todd Schurz,
who is the Chief Executive Officer, President, and Director of
Schurz Communications, Incorporated. We look forward to your
testimony, and thank you for coming today.
You may want to push that microphone button, and just for
everybody on the panel, these microphones, for those in
broadcasting, you actually have to work very closely. If they
float away we don't hear as well, and then the little button
should light up, I think. Then the little boxes in front of you
should light up and tell you as your time is running out, you
will get a yellow and then a red, and then I can't tell you
what happens after that. It is not pleasant.

STATEMENTS OF TODD SCHURZ, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, PRESIDENT,
AND DIRECTOR, SCHURZ COMMUNICATIONS, INC.; BURT ELLIS,
PRESIDENT, TITAN BROADCAST MANAGEMENT; CHRISTOPHER GUTTMAN-
MCCABE, VICE PRESIDENT, REGULATORY AFFAIRS, CTIA--THE WIRELESS
ASSOCIATION; MICHELLE P. CONNOLLY, ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF THE
PRACTICE, DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS, DUKE UNIVERSITY; DEAN
BRENNER, VICE PRESIDENT, GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS, QUALCOMM
INCORPORATED; AND HAROLD FELD, LEGAL DIRECTOR, PUBLIC KNOWLEDGE

STATEMENT OF TODD SCHURZ

Mr. Schurz. Thank you very much. Good afternoon, Chairman
Walden, Ranking Member Eshoo, and members of the subcommittee.
My name is Todd Schurz, and I am the President and CEO of
Schurz Communications, based in Mishawaka, Indiana. I am
testifying today on behalf of the National Association of
Broadcasters.
Schurz Communications began broadcasting in 1922, which
makes me a fourth generation broadcaster. Today, we have 10
televisions stations and my company has a presence in 14
States, including Michigan, California, Florida, Georgia, and
Pennsylvania.
The beauty of television broadcasting is its one-to-many
architecture. For high demand programming, like the Super Bowl,
there is no limit to how many viewers can tune in. The same
programming delivered on a broadband system would overload the
network. The transition to digital television has thrown open
the doors of opportunity and innovation. Whereas in analog, I
can only provide a single stream of programming; today with
digital, I can provide that same programming in high
definition, and at the same time, offer additional multicast
channels and mobile DTV.
Hundreds of broadcasters are taking advantage of new
multicast opportunities, providing viewers with niche foreign
language programming, religious programming, emergency local
weather information, and even high school sports. The Bounce TV
network recently launched by majority owners Martin Luther
King, III and Andrew Young is the country's first broadcast
network aimed at African American audiences. It is set to debut
this fall on many multicast channels.
Going digital has also delivered on the promise of mobile
television. With mobile DTV, viewers can tune in to live local
news, emergency information, weather, sporting events, or
entertainment programs from the convenience of their car, at
the beach, wherever they may be. Today, over 70 stations are
offering mobile DTV service, and hundreds more are moving
forward with the nationwide rollout of mobile DTV.
Since the digital television transition, our company has
added local news in high definition, multilingual newscasts,
and expanded weather programming in our Tornado Alley stations.
All of this is available for free.
The future offers additional possibility, such as data
casting and 3D TV. Broadcasters want to make sure that viewers
continue to be the beneficiaries of broadcast innovation, and
innovation is necessary for us to stay competitive with an
ever-growing number of new competitors.
Now remember, it was just 2 years ago that television
broadcasters completed the digital television transition. As
part of the DTV transition, television broadcasters returned
108 megahertz of spectrum, nearly 30 percent of our spectrum.
This freed up spectrum for both public safety and new
commercial wireless services. But as part of that give-back,
the FCC repacked broadcasters under fewer channels, which is
complex and disruptive for our viewers.
Now, just a couple of years later, the FCC has returned to
broadcasters, asking us to do it again and asking for another
40 percent of our spectrum. We are committed to being a part of
the broadband solution, but there is only so much that the laws
of physics will allow us to do without crippling our ability to
serve our local communities, now and in the future.
Broadcasters have never objected to truly voluntary
incentive auctions, but we do feel strongly that protections
need to be built into the spectrum legislation to ensure the
future competitiveness and viability of local television
broadcasting.
Here are four important safeguards.
One, no broadcaster should be forced to relocate to an
inferior spectrum band. Two, any repacking by the FCC is to
protect viewers by maintaining the current reach of a
broadcaster's signal. Three, no station should be subjected to
increased interference, and four, broadcasters should be held
harmless from the cost of repacking.
Importantly in the drive to advance broadband and relief
network congestion, you cannot and should not focus only on the
spectrum supply. There also needs to be a comprehensive
examination of how we can capture more efficiencies from
wireless carriers in the consumer electronics industry,
including cell splitting and wi-fi technology, improved
receivers, and--to voice over Internet protocol. We all know
that the pace of technology is unrelenting, and tomorrow's
innovations will help solve many of the anticipated wireless
capacity issues.
In conclusion, we appreciate the committee's thoughtful and
deliberate approach to the spectrum issue. Remember, once we
reallocate the spectrum, once broadcasters who want to continue
to provide service are repacked in a harmful way, there is no
going back. We get only one shot at this. We need to do it
right to ensure that viewers do not lose access to the news,
entertainment, and vital emergency programming that
broadcasters provide.
I am as excited about broadcasting's future as we are proud
of our heritage. Our company has no plans to return our
spectrum. For that reason, I ask that any spectrum legislation
crafted to protect our ability to continue to serve the viewers
of our local communities.
Thank you, and I would welcome any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schurz follows:]

Mr. Walden. Mr. Schurz, thank you for your testimony, and
for your family's long history of serving your communities.
Now I would like to go to Mr. Burt Ellis, who is President
of Titan Broadcast Management. Mr. Ellis, we welcome you here
today and look forward to your testimony as well.

STATEMENT OF BURT ELLIS

Mr. Ellis. Good afternoon, Congressmen and Congresswomen.
My name is Burt Ellis, and I am the President of Titan
Broadcasting. We currently own and/or operate 13 television
stations.
The FCC would like us broadcasters to repack down to
channels 14 to 30 to free up an additional 120 megahertz of
spectrum. There are several major problems with this proposal.
First, there are just too many broadcast signals currently
on the air and primarily, the top 10 to 20 markets, to repack
into these 17 remaining UHF channels. Consequently, some small
number of television stations, 75 by my count, must be
purchased and shut down, presumably through a voluntary
incentive-based auction. Now if Dr. Connolly and the FCC can
design a reserve auction system that is to their advantage, so
be it, so long as the broadcaster's decision to sell or repack
is still totally voluntary. Voluntary means the FCC cannot set
the selling price for these stations via cap, via percentages,
or any other such valuation restriction, only via market
forces.
As the chairman said, my company is under certain
circumstances willing to sell the spectrum for some of our
stations. We are open to this consideration. However, the FCC
still needs to repack all the remaining stations, such that the
stations are not impaired financially or via signal. Mr. Schurz
has already addressed this, so I will not rehash that, but I
stand by those concerns as well.
But finally, in my view, the FCC needs to use this whole
process to provide a win/win for the broadcast industry and for
Americans in general. Fortunately, the FCC and Congress does
have the power to offer up two very powerful incentives to the
industry that also advance the national broadband plan.
Option number one, the FCC and Congress can either mandate
or use their bully pulpit to convince the wireless carriers and
the handset tablet manufacturers to incorporate mobile tuners
into all new handsets and tablets. This would help the
broadcast industry fast launch mobile services, and not just
mobile services for personal entertainment, but also mobile
services that could be the basis for a national emergency alert
communications network. We have incorporated plans for just
such a national emergency network into the mobile 500 rollout
plans that were announced only yesterday.
Now I have been told over and over and over again that this
tuner option is DOA, but I just don't believe it. It would seem
very simple to me to make this a condition of the wireless
companies participating in the spectrum auctions, as well as in
the AT&T/T-Mobile merger approval. I am sure Qualcomm, to my
left, would gladly make these new chips.
Option two, the FCC can finance and facilitate the
transition from our current 8 BSB broadcast modulation
technology to OFDM. A new OFDM broadcast standard would come
with three huge advantages for the FCC, the broadcast industry,
and the consumer. One, the FCC--OFDM would the FCC to much more
densely repack broadcast stations, allowing more channels in
each market to be used. Two, the broadcast industry--it will
allow one broadcast channel to broadcast almost twice the
current capability of 19.4 megabits. This would enable
broadcasters to support a national LTE-based emergency alert
network. Mobile broadcasting offers the best and fastest means
for the U.S. to create such a national emergency network.
Third, to the consumer, OFDM allows broadcast signals on
any device to be picked up by one chip. Consequently, this chip
can be manufactured in large numbers very cheaply and can be
imbedded in handsets, tablets, computers, and televisions. This
will allow a seamless mobile viewing methodology. A person can
watch a newscast, a ballgame, anything on their handset, then
their tablet, then their television, in a seamless manner. They
will not miss a frame of viewing. This is the holy grail of
future mobile. This is what the consumer wants.
Broadcasters have a great deal to offer, but much of the
current thinking seems to want to relegate us to the technology
trash bin. We want to be part of the emerging digital future.
The four--soon to be three, maybe--major wireless carriers
already control 90 percent of the available mobile spectrum.
You want to sell more of our broadcast spectrum to these
wireless guys and give us broadcasters the opportunity to fully
compete with them on the mobile front. If they want to go down
in numbers, let us get in the game with them. Do not let them
close us out of the mobile--from the mobile consumer.
All of us in the media business want to be in the mobile
video business in order to survive and thrive in the future.
The more competition is better for the consumer. The FCC needs
to compensate broadcast stations to repack. By their own
estimate, it will cost about $1 million per station, about $1
billion. For about $2 billion, $2 to $3 billion, the stations
cannot only be repacked, but can also switch over to this new
OFDM technology that can support a broadcast overlay for LTE,
as I said. This is the time to do both, repack and upgrade our
technology, and also mandate the mobile DTV chips. Then we can
have a totally mobile broadband enabled population.
With such a system in place, we broadcasters can and will
create an immediately accessible mobile video network for
instantaneous communications to all of our citizens in the
event of a local, regional, or national emergency. Mobile
broadcasting was the technology that worked in Japan during
their crisis. The one-to-one architecture of the cellular
system failed, but mobile broadcasting worked.
There is a win-win agenda here. I support such. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ellis follows:]

Mr. Walden. Mr. Ellis, thank you for your suggestions, your
testimony, and your service.
Now we will go to Mr. Christopher Guttman-McCabe, who is
Vice President for Regulatory Affairs of CTIA--The Wireless
Association. We appreciate your testimony today, and look
forward to it. Thank you for being here.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER GUTTMAN-MCCABE

Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Sure, thank you. Good afternoon,
Chairman Walden, Ranking Member Eshoo, and members of the
subcommittee. On behalf of CTIA, thank you for the chance to
speak to you today about promoting broadband, jobs, and
economic growth through commercial spectrum auctions. CTIA
believes these objectives are achievable, and mutually
reinforcing. For that reason, we urge you to act at the
earliest possible date to enact legislation that will authorize
incentive auctions and allow additional license spectrum to be
made available for commercial wireless use.
Today, we are the world's clear leader in wireless
broadband. Although the United States is home to less than 5
percent of the world's population and just shy of 6 percent of
global wireless subscribers, the U.S. claims more than 20
percent of global high speed wireless broadband subscribers.
This leadership helps to create a competitive advantage to the
United States.
But to maintain this advantage, we need to ensure that
there is a sufficient pipeline of spectrum available to meet
the exploding demand for wireless broadband services. We urge
you to address this with dispatch. A delay puts at risk not
only our world leadership in this critical industry, but also
lost or delayed investment, innovation, and productivity that
are critical to our Nation's economy.
The growth and the demand for mobile broadband and the
corresponding need for additional spectrum has been well-
documented both by the government and respective private sector
parties. Even conservative estimates project U.S. mobile data
traffic to grow by a factor of more than 20 between the end of
last year and 2015. This demand is being driven by consumer's
migration from feature phone to smartphone and tablets that
while employing advances in spectral and computing efficiency,
allow consumers to demand more and thus strain wireless
networks to an unprecedented manner. The evolution of machine
to machine communications will only exacerbate this challenge.
Efficiency gains and infrastructure investment will help, but
neither will be sufficient to answer the challenge we face in
delivering the critical infrastructure for the economy of the
21st century.
The good news is that there are ways to help meet the need
for additional spectrum. By authorizing incentive auctions and
repacking the bands allocated for television broadcasting, by
directing NTIA to facilitate access to bands currently
occupied, but often underutilized by government, and by
enacting improvements to the spectrum relocation process,
Congress can provide the wireless industry with a path to help
America stay ahead of its Asian and European competitors in
this critical industry.
Taking these steps will produce manifest benefits to our
Nation. The last two auctions produced more than $32 billion
for the United States Treasury. While I cannot project what
future auctions might produce, the bands discussed in my
testimony have significant value and would likely be highly
desired at auction. Auction revenues, however, are just one of
the benefits that flow from facilitating the movement of
spectrum to its highest and best use. Once spectrum is in the
hands of those who value it, significant investment,
entrepreneurial activity, and productivity will result.
Since 2006, CTIA's carrier members have been directly
responsible for nearly $111 billion in network investment.
Because a dollar invested in wireless deployment is estimated
to result in as much as $7 to $10 in expanded GDP, this past
investment has contributed to keeping the U.S. economy afloat
during a difficult economic period.
Going forward, wireless investment and this multiplier will
be critical to helping create sustainable economic growth in
the United States. Perhaps more importantly, unlocking
additional spectrum can help to create new employment
opportunities, from the forging of steel for new towers and the
construction of additional cell sites to the development of new
network equipment, and the writing of our next must-have
application. Bringing spectrum to market will create thousands
of American jobs. Some economists estimate that the job growth
related to the investment in next generation wireless
technologies could be as high as 200,000 new positions, and
that estimate does not account for positions in adjacent
fields, as wireless becomes a key input into areas such as
healthcare, energy, education, transportation, and logistics.
Enabling the next generation of service and ensuring our
world leadership in wireless should be a national imperative.
Done properly, we can make needed spectrum available for
ubiquitous mobile broadband, treat relocated broadcasters and
government users fairly, produce significant revenue for the
U.S. Treasury, and help grow the U.S. economy.
CTIA looks forward to working with you to achieve these
objectives, and I look forward to your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Guttman-McCabe follows:]

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Guttman-McCabe. We appreciate
your testimony.
We are now going to turn to Dr. Michelle P. Connolly, who
is an Associate Professor of the Practice, Department of
Economics, at Duke University. We look forward to your
comments, Dr. Connolly, and thank you for being here today.

STATEMENT OF MICHELLE P. CONNOLLY

Ms. Connolly. Thank you Chairman Walden and Ranking Member
Eshoo, and other members of the subcommittee. My name is
Michelle Connolly. I am an associate professor of The Practice
at the Department of Economics at Duke University. I also
served as the chief economist at the FCC from 2006 to 2007, and
then again in 2008 to 2009. I would like to note that I was
serving under a Republican Administration, so my support for
this proposal has nothing to do with my political affiliation.
It is simply because as an economist, I believe that this as a
great gain economically and socially for our economy, and it is
in that capacity that I am testifying today.
From this perspective, when everyone is looking at policy,
I want to make sure that the gains of choosing this new policy
outweigh any costs to our economy and to our society, and
specifically, we are concerned about the cost to the
broadcasters, and the costs to the people who rely on over-the-
air broadcasts.
So when I am looking at this, I wanted to bring a little
bit of information to the discussion. Firstly, we know that
over-the-air viewing is done by less than--10 percent or less
of the current TV-viewing population, so we are talking about a
small and declining population. Secondly, the--two of the three
options that would be provided to broadcasters do not involve
cessation of over-the-air broadcasting, so this would minimize
any impact on television viewers. And thirdly, with an
incentive auction, broadcasters will only participate if the
benefits to them outweigh the costs. And to that extent, I
think this will help minimize any costs to implementing this
plan. And by costs, I mean welfare costs.
In terms of the benefits, there has been a lot of
macroeconomic evidence that suggests that information can lead
to technology has a great benefit to our macroeconomy. In the
late 1990s, several studies confirmed that between 56 to 67
percent of labor productivity growth could be attributed to
information communications technology. And then from 2000 to
2006, that estimate was about 38 percent.
One thing to note is that when firm level studies have been
done, the gains in terms of productivity are not equally
spread, so gains in terms of productivity are specific to
certain communities who are able to take advantage to certain
industries and certain communities who are able to take
advantage of broadband. That is on the production side.
On the consumption side, of course, this is nothing--all
the gains are to consumers equally and there is no region
specificity to it.
I also want to talk a little bit about incentive auctions,
simply because this is an area that is very complicated. I
still don't understand it entirely, and I thought it might be
useful to give a little bit of background on what is really
being proposed here.
So the idea is that there would first be what economists
would call a reverse auction for broadcasters, and in this, the
FCC would specify certain actions that could be taken, they can
discuss before, and the broadcasters would offer bids for being
willing to undertake these different auctions, should the bid
be accepted. So if the bid is accepted, they would be required
to then undertake that action. If the bid is not accepted, they
would not be required to take one of those three actions. And I
think that this is useful for the broadcasters, because this is
what makes it a voluntary action.
I was asked by the committee to try and estimate a possible
range of bids that broadcasters might make. I am smart enough
to know that my estimate will be incorrect, but I would
estimate based on the fact that they have these options that
the range might be in the range of about $0.05 per megahertz
POP at the low end, to maybe .08 megahertz POP on the high end.
This is assuming that there is sufficient competition in the
auction, and this is, I think, a key point. So there will be
markets where there may not be--there might be a broadcaster in
a channel that is in the key area that we need to have
continuous spectrum. The FCC must be allowed to move people
involuntarily out of that spectrum to another location, because
otherwise, you will get holdouts. There won't be enough
competition. Someone knows that they are placed strategically,
and they can bid five times their valuation in an attempt to
extract that extra money because then they know if they don't
get their bid, they won't be able to be moved, and then the
whole auction will serve no purpose.
So the reason why the FCC is requesting that after the
bidding process occurs that they be allowed to relocate people
who are still located in that key region, and compensate them
economically for the cost of the move so that they aren't
burdened by that is because without that, you will not get a
true auction. You will not get a true competition. There--even
with that, there may be other things that might interfere with
the bids, but if we don't have that bidding we will get true
valuation bids. There are no two ways about that, so I think
that is a crucial thing to mention.
The last thing is the forward option. Once this occurs, we
can estimate a supply curve that we would need to generate the
amount of spectrum, conceded spectrum that the FCC would want.
At that point, there is the forward option. I assume that the
range of values would be at least on par with the 700 megahertz
spectrum auction that we had recently, so the range might be
anywhere from $0.03 per megahertz POP to up to $3.86 per
megahertz POP. That is a huge range which shows you that
markets matter. But one keeping is the more rules that are
imposed on the usage for the winning bids, the lower the
valuation will be, and any rules that increase uncertainty over
the usage will lower the value.
So overall, I think the revenue resources to the government
can be large, but dwarfing any revenue to the government I
think is the economic value to our economy, and I think that
will outweigh any of the gains that the government will have in
revenue, but those are also greater costs.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Connolly follows:]

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Dr. Connolly. We appreciate your
comments.
Mr. Brenner, we are going to go to you next, Vice President
of Government Affairs for Qualcomm, Incorporated. Thank you for
being here, and proceed with your testimony, sir.

STATEMENT OF DEAN BRENNER

Mr. Brenner. Good afternoon, Chairman Walden----
Mr. Walden. OK, now you got to push the button and bring
the mic closer. There you go.
Mr. Brenner. Good afternoon, Chairman Walden, Ranking
Member Eshoo, and members of the subcommittee. It is a special
honor for me to testify here this morning. Thirty years ago to
the day, I began working as an intern for this very
subcommittee. What a great experience that was for a college
student.
I am here today, along with my colleagues, Alice Turnquist
and John Cozin on behalf of Qualcomm, a company that didn't
exist 30 years ago. Five years after my internship here,
Qualcomm was formed. Today, Qualcomm is the world's leading
manufacturer for cell phones, smartphones, and other wireless
devices.
The policies pursued by this subcommittee, in particular,
the move to spectrum auctions in the early 1990s, the
reallocation of spectrum for the first PCS auctions, and the
DTV transition have helped fuel the enormous growth in the
American wireless industry. At Qualcomm, we spend over $2
billion each year in research and development to invent the
most spectrally efficient technologies, to achieve the greatest
capacity and best performance from every sliver of spectrum,
licensed and unlicensed.
We know that spectrum is precious and expensive, based on
our own experience with spectrum auctions. Although our main
business is developing wireless technologies, licensing them to
other companies, and selling chips based on those technologies,
we purchased licensed spectrum at auctions held in the United
States, the United Kingdom, and India to facilitate the
deployment of our new technologies.
Qualcomm's technologies are used in the 3G and 4G devices
that Americans just can't get enough of. We all want our mobile
devices to work all the time and wherever we happen to be, and
that requires the use of licensed spectrum. Let me explain why
I say that.
We make chips that support wi-fi, Bluetooth, and other
unlicensed technologies to provide wireless connectivity in
local areas, such as inside homes or on college or corporate
campuses. In those settings, these chips enable wireless
traffic to be offloaded from the licensed spectrum that
wireless carriers use for their 3G and 4G networks.
This is an important growing business for vendors like
Qualcomm, and we are excited about it. Just this week we
announced the new line of wi-fi chips using spectrum in the 2.4
gigahertz, 5 gigahertz, and 60 gigahertz bands. But to provide
ubiquitous wide area wireless coverage all over the Nation on a
cost effective and interference-free basis, licensed spectrum
is required.
And that brings me to the topic of today's hearing, because
there isn't enough licensed spectrum available to keep pace
with the exploding demand for mobile broadband. The FCC's
October 2010 report found that by 2014, total U.S. mobile data
traffic is likely to be 35 times the 2009 level. We are working
on many new wireless technologies, but we don't have any
technology on the drawing board that can increase capacity 35
times. More licensed spectrum is needed. The FCC doesn't have
nearly enough new spectrum in its inventory to meet this gap.
To promote broadband jobs and economic growth, we have got to
close this gap.
A number of steps must be taken and are being taken in
parallel to help solve the spectrum crunch. These steps include
things that the private sector is doing, such as developing and
deploying new technologies, and things the government is
working on, such as as reallocating underutilized U.S.
Government spectrum. But these steps won't be nearly sufficient
to solve the spectrum crunch. To do that, it is crucial that
Congress enact legislation to allow the FCC to conduct
voluntary incentive auctions to reallocate more licensed
spectrum for mobile broadband.
The legislation that we support would allow the FCC to
conduct a two-sided auction, composed of sellers who
voluntarily decide to sell their spectrum because they think it
would be worth more to a mobile broadband provider, and buyers
who want to use the spectrum for mobile broadband. No one would
be forced to participate as a seller or a buyer in a voluntary
incentive auction, but under current law, there is no way for
the FCC to get the spectrum out of the hands of the sellers who
are willing to sell and into the hands of the mobile broadband
buyers.
Current law permits a TV station owner to sell its spectrum
only to someone else who would use the spectrum to run a TV
station. A TV station owner cannot sell its spectrum to a buyer
so that the buyer can use it to provide mobile broadband. The
legislation would allow the FCC to run a two-sided auction with
all the station owners who want to sell on one side, and all
the mobile broadband providers and new entrants who want to buy
on the other.
Qualcomm, both on our own and as a member of a group of
companies who sell wireless equipment, including Alcatel
Lucent, Apple, Cisco, Ericsson, Intel, Nokia, and Research in
Motion, urges Congress to pass legislation to give the FCC
authority to conduct voluntary incentive auctions to free up
much-needed additional licensed spectrum for mobile broadband.
Now, our group includes companies that compete against one
another in the marketplace all the time. We make equipment
using both licensed and unlicensed spectrum, but we all agree
on three points. First, the spectrum crunch is real. Second,
more licensed spectrum is necessary to solve the spectrum
crunch. And third, authorizing the FCC to conduct voluntary
incentive auctions is essential to solving the spectrum crunch.
Passage of legislation authorizing voluntary incentive
auctions would be a win-win-win-win. The first win would be for
the sellers in a voluntary incentive auction, those who decide
that their spectrum is more valuable for mobile broadband than
in its current allocation will win because the legislation
would allow them to sell. The second win is for the buyers. The
buyers will win because they are going to get the additional
licensed spectrum from mobile broadband so they can keep pace
with consumer demand. They need the certainty and speed of an
FCC-conducted incentive auction in which the auction itself
efficiently and quickly aggregates spectrum. The third win
would be for the U.S. Treasury. Voluntary incentive auctions
will raise significant revenues without raising anyone's taxes
or cutting any programs. Finally, the fourth win is the most
important win of all. The real winners will be the American
public. Mobile broadband has the potential to improve so many
facets of American life. Giving the FCC authority to conduct
voluntary incentive auctions is essential. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brenner follows:]

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Brenner, both for your testimony
and for your internship, although I was not here to enjoy that.
We are going to go now to Mr. Feld. Harold Feld is the
Legal Director for Public Knowledge. We appreciate your input
in this matter. We look forward to your testimony.

STATEMENT OF HAROLD FELD

Mr. Feld. Thank you, Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Walden. Before you start, I am just going--they are
going to ring bells here for a vote, a 15-minute vote. We are
going to have you finish your testimony, and then when you are
done we will plan to resume at about 1:25. So that will give
everybody a little break here before we go into Q&A.
Mr. Feld, please continue.
Mr. Feld. My thanks to you, Mr. Chairman, Ms. Ranking
Member, the subcommittee. I am the Legal Director of Public
Knowledge. I am pleased to speak to you this morning on behalf
of the Public Interest Spectrum Coalition about buttons and
buttonholes.
Buttons are tangible objects. They are things that people
easily understand and think about. Buttonholes are designated
empty space. Most people don't think about the importance of
buttonholes when they are buttoning their clothes, but without
those empty spaces, you are not going to keep your coat closed.
You need both. That is what I am here to talk about in terms of
spectrum policy, which is the empty spaces in the spectrum, the
white spaces, particularly in the broadcast spectrum.
The policy objectives that we have all talked about here
today of encouraging innovation, increasing economic activity
which helps to reduce the deficit, as well as improving all of
our lives, all of these things are critically important and we
can achieve them, but we must not look at this just through the
lens of a Congressional Budget Office score. In fact, I will
state further that if we focus only on raising revenue or more
precisely, what we think sitting here now, years out from an
auction, a very complicated structure that we think will raise
revenue. The spectrum prices will become a spectrum Armageddon,
resulting in higher costs, stifled innovation, and reduced
global competitiveness. The worst thing that could happen is
what if they gave an incentive auction and nobody came because
we structured it poorly?
White spaces are unique in spectrum policy. They have been
enthusiastically supported by Republican FCC chairmen and
commissioners, and today's Democratic chairmen and
commissioners. White spaces exist without preconceived uses,
and so are open to any entrepreneur technologist with a good
idea. They are the most deregulatory approach to spectrum
policy we have. As FCC Commissioner McDowell said, ``The
Commission's actions of proving TV white spaces help to bring
more broadband to consumers as quickly as innovation, rather
than as quickly as government will allow.''
The results have been spectacular for the U.S. economy. The
short history of unlicensed spectrum has allowed the
development of what were considered junk bands to yield tens of
billions of dollars in economic gains and activities. The
unlicensed spectrum now being considered in the prime broadcast
bands promises to surpass that previous success. This is truly
unlicensed 4G.
Allowing for additional allocation of national unlicensed
spectrum under the 1 gigahertz band with its superior
characteristics of penetration in long distance allow for the
creation of gigabit capacity wireless LANs in offices, schools,
high density residential areas, mesh networks capable of many
miles of coverage at a fraction of the cost of current wi-fi
technology. Such gains don't show up in a CBO score, but they
result in increased revenues for the Federal Government through
investment, job creation, and economic productivity on an
annual basis.
Rural areas will be able to be served with high capacity
wireless broadband service. Low barriers to entry for
unlicensed allow these rural providers to serve their
communities without winning licenses at auction, which they
cannot afford to do. Indeed, areas that cannot be profitably
served with licensed spectrum because of the cost of winning
licenses are now being served with existing wi-fi without
universal service subsidies, and will be better served and more
broadly served with white spaces spectrum.
Already we are starting to see the fruits of projects like
these in places as diverse as Claudville, Virginia, with a
population of 916 to the much larger city of Houston.
In order for this future to come about, for there to be a
spectrum for smart grid coordination, machine to machine
communication, inventory tracking and the rest, Congress has to
make certain that the white spaces are protected by giving the
FCC discretion in structuring and conducting auctions. The
investors and companies that are building this technology today
must believe there is a future for this here in the United
States. United Kingdom is also looking at white spaces
technology, as are China and Brazil, and its investors and
companies do not believe there is a future here for this
innovative new technology. They will take their investment and
their jobs elsewhere.
Providing the FCC flexible authority to conduct incentive
auctions and allowing the Agency to pursue a broad approach to
spectrum policy that is not exclusively tied to raising revenue
will be the most effective means of promoting broadband, job
creation, and economic growth. I just want to add that this is
not an either/or. Rarely in policy do we have a chance to have
it all. We can keep broadcasting as a vital service for this
country. We can have significant new licenses for auction, and
we can have a vibrant white spaces which will provide us with
exciting new technologies for the benefit of all Americans.
Mr. Brenner just said he doesn't have the technology right
now that would allow them to increase their capacity by 35
times. I don't have one either, but by creating a test bed, a
place where these technologies can develop at very low cost and
be deployed quickly and effectively, such as the white spaces,
I have a very good suspicion of where that technology will come
from.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Feld follows:]

Mr. Walden. Mr. Feld, thank you very much for your comments
as well. We appreciate the testimony of all our witnesses.
We are in the middle of a vote now, so again, please plan
to return no later than 1:25, and we will resume the hearing at
that point for questions from the members.
With that, we stand in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Walden. We will call the subcommittee back to order,
and I think we had concluded testimony from all of the
witnesses prior to our recess for the vote on the House floor.
We anticipate another vote in about 45 minutes or so.
I am going to start with the first round of questions, and
I want to address the first questions I have to Mr. Schurz and
Mr. Ellis.
I would ask if you could elaborate on some of the efforts
by broadcasters to bring new and innovative services to the
broadcast spectrum. One of the purposes of this hearing was
really to evaluate since DTV conversion, you know, what is
happening out there in the marketplace? What are you able to
do? I know Mr. Ellis, you touched on this a bit, but I would
also like to explore what the hurdles are in the way of
innovation in the spectrum that you have going forward.
So if you could each take a minute or so just to kind of
address what you are doing with it now, and what you think you
could do with it.
Mr. Schurz. I think what we have done with it now in almost
all of our markets, we have multitasked channels, serving
different audiences. We have three stations, two are right in
the middle of Tornado Alley, one is on the edge. All of them do
a 24-7 weather channel with regular forecasts so people who are
very interested in the weather can always get that.
What has also happened--the DTV transition happened 2 years
ago. Mobile television, the standard was developed with that.
Both Mr. Ellis and I are involved in those efforts. And so you
are seeing that just starting now. A little over 70 stations
are in mobile television.
But I think the other thing is I don't want to not talk
about high definition in terms of the clarity and the quality
of the picture and what that means for our constituents. High
definition local news takes a lot of bandwidth, but is also a
great consumer value proposition.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Ellis, do you want to use a minute or so to
comment on new technologies?
Mr. Ellis. The company we are putting together this time--
this is my third broadcast group. The first couple groups I bet
on the emergence of new programming. That was the trend I was
trying to follow. This time, we are betting on the emergence of
new technologies. The mobile technology is the most unique and
different technology for broadcasters. That is where--you know,
use the sports analogy, go where the puck is going. Mobile is
where it is going. We are spending an awful lot of time on
that, and the inhibitions of that business is the ability to
get, you know, a signal into the mobile device. This is where
the consumer is going we want to be able to access that device.
Mr. Walden. All right. Mr. Brenner, I want to go to you,
because Mr. Ellis I believe mentioned OFDM and the ability to
put chips in. Tell me what that would take and whether there
would be acceptance of that in the market?
Mr. Brenner. Yes, I am not exactly sure what Mr. Ellis is
referring to, Chairman Walden. OFDM refers to an interface that
is at the core of long term evolution, LTE, which is the 4G
technology. OFDM is also used in wi-fi. OFDM is a modulation
technique, and so it can mean all kinds of different things.
I think what Mr. Ellis was suggesting is that Qualcomm
would incorporate some kind of mobile DTV capability into our
chips. Obviously, we look very hard at the business pros and
cons of adding a new capability to our chips. Our chips support
multi-frequency bands, multiple technologies, and we strive to
pack the most power into our chips at the least cost.
Mr. Walden. Is that capability you have now today to put
mobile TV in a chip?
Mr. Brenner. No, we have looked at it. We are--mobile DTV
has been talked about--I looked back through my e-mail--since
at least 2007 was the first announcement about it. We have
looked at it extensively. We haven't seen a business case for
it in our end. Whenever we consider putting a new technology
into our chips, Chairman Walden, it is a very interactive
process. We go back and forth with the device manufacturers,
with the carriers and with application providers. We don't just
make that decision in a vacuum, and we--it is not mature. We
just don't see demand.
Mr. Walden. All right. Mr. Ellis, do you want to comment
briefly on that?
Mr. Ellis. In essence, if the carriers are not going to pay
Qualcomm to put this thing in their chip, he is not going to
make it.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Brenner?
Mr. Brenner. That is a little too simple, quite frankly. So
it is true, someone is going to have to give us a return on our
investment when we put a new capability into our chips, but
there is a web of relationships. There are folks who make
devices, there are folks who come up with applications. We are
also in a highly competitive market. If I don't put a
capability--I shouldn't say I. When Qualcomm decides to pass on
a capability, we consider very carefully the competition.
Qualcomm is the leading chip set manufacturer, but it is hyper-
competitive, so it is a little too simple to just say the
carriers won't pay us. We have to see a business case to make a
rate of return.
Mr. Walden. I want to go to Dr. Connolly now on a different
issue. I am trying to get a rough range of what this spectrum
is worth.
You say in your testimony that similar spectrum was sold
for between 3 cents and $3.86 per megahertz POP, as I
understand it. Is this correct?
Ms. Connolly. Yes.
Mr. Walden. With approximately 300 million people in the
country, that means that even on the low end, each megahertz of
a licensed spectrum could raise $9 million, and on the high
end, each megahertz could raise $1 billion. Is that correct?
Ms. Connolly. Yes.
Mr. Walden. OK, all right.
My time has expired. I would turn to the gentlelady, my
ranking member, Ms. Eshoo, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
each one of the witnesses. I think you did a terrific job
coming from where each of you is coming from, but it was really
valuable, valuable testimony.
To Mr. Feld, I loved your button and buttonhole analogy. I
think we will remember that one for a long time. In your view,
how much spectrum is needed to make the white spaces
commercially viable for applications like smart grid and RFID
tagging?
Mr. Feld. Well, the most important thing is to ensure that
there is white spaces available, particularly in the largest
urban markets, because that is what is going to drive economies
of scale is the ability for people to put this into their
laptops and their wi-fi routers.
In terms of an amount, the National Broadband Plan said we
would like to have 20 megahertz of contiguous pure unlicensed
spectrum. That would be real nice, but the beauty of unlicensed
is it's a technology. You don't need that. As long as you have
at least one or two available channels in the largest urban
markets and sufficient--by which I mean not directly next to a
broadcaster so you could use full power, and then sufficient in
the rest of the country, which I think is not where the
challenge is. There will be interest in developing and
investing in this technology.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you.
To Mr. Ellis, is Titan Broadcasting planning to offer
mobile broadcasting, and what is your assessment of the
potential market demand for this type of service?
Mr. Ellis. Yes, we do intend to offer mobile broadcasting
in our assessment. You know, it depends on whether the consumer
can actually see our signal on a mobile device.
So we have to figure out whether you are going to start
with the handset, which is controlled by the wireless carriers.
Do you go to laptop, do you go to the N-card device, and how do
you get the mobile consumer to actually see our signal?
Ms. Eshoo. You stated in your testimony that you are
testifying as a broadcaster that may sell of the spectrum of
some of your stations under the right conditions. Can you tell
us what the right conditions are, in your view?
Mr. Ellis. The right price.
Ms. Eshoo. There you go. Everybody has their price, right?
And to Mr. Guttman-McCabe, Thank you for your testimony and the
work that CTIA does.
The DTV transition freed up spectrum in the 700 megahertz
band that's been auctioned. But in some cases, has yet to be
deployed on a commercial basis. I think it's Mr. Barrow that
has legislation that also mentions as part of the bill that
there has to be an inventory done.
I'm concerned about those who have purchased spectrum and
have yet to use it, 3 years after the auction was completed. So
while we know that the wireless usage is growing at an
exponential rate, how do we determine future spectrum needs
when there is still spectrum sitting unused?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Sure. Thank you, Congresswoman.
That is sort of a broad question and I will take it
piecemeal, if you don't mind.
First of all, while the 700 megahertz auction was completed
a little while back, it wasn't cleared until about a year ago.
And it takes time to--Mr. Brenner and Qualcomm and companies
like that, and Ericcson that do the infrastructure need to make
sure that this spectrum is available and clear, then they begin
the process of developing technology to implement on the
network side and on the----
Ms. Eshoo. What is the average length of time to prepare
the spectrum that is bought to bringing it to making use of it
on the market?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Sure. I guess it depends upon if their
standards have been developed, but it could be, you know, a
year to 3 to 4 years. You must keep in mind that these
companies spend tens of billions of dollars the last two
auctions and raised $33 billion, so they need to answer to Wall
Street. They need to have a return on their investment, and
they do move forward, and they move forward, you know, really
quickly. In the last 10 years since I have been at CTIA, we
have gone from analog to digital to third generation and now
we're looking at fourth generation deployments, all in a 10-
year period.
As far as your question about how do we determine what the
future need is in terms of spectrum, whether it's Kleiner
Perkins in your area or the folks in Silicon Valley or the
Informa Group, or you could sort of go on and on. They've all
suggested that there will be upwards of a 35 times increase in
demand. We've tried to simplify that. I've tried to simplify
that in my mind, and the simplest example I have is if someone
came to you and said that California was going to experience a
35 times increase in the amount of cars on its roads, after
you've picked yourself up off the floor, I think we would think
OK, what can we do in terms of driving efficiencies? What do we
have in terms of new roads planned? And that's what we're
asking Congress is we can work on the efficiency side of the
equation. We can implement picocells and femtocells. We need
help with the roads, and our roads are spectrum. We need help
preparing for that tremendous increase, which is happening. I
mean, you say preparing, data traffic doubled from '09 to '10,
so we're seeing that.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you very much.
Mr. Walden. Thank you. We now go to the vice chair of the
subcommittee, Mr. Terry.
Before I do that, Mr. Kinzinger has a document he would
like to put into the record with unanimous consent from Radio
Ink regarding radio stations involved in helping residents in
Joplin after the tornadoes, Clear Channel especially, so----
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you.
Mr. Walden [continuing]. Mr. Kinzinger, without objection
that will be in the record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Walden. Mr. Terry?
Mr. Terry. Thank you.
So Mr. Schurz, despite your affinity for Notre Dame----
Mr. Schurz. Yes, sir.
Mr. Terry. I think Mr. Ellis probably answered this very
bluntly, but I think a case has been made that more spectrum is
needed. TV stations have spectrum and as I said in my opening,
it is important that there is not a taking of your spectrum,
that it has to be voluntary. But what will it take to get you--
I am not negotiating here, but you on behalf of others,
generally. Define voluntary for me. What is it going to take so
that you would volunteer to give up some of your spectrum?
Mr. Schurz. The definition of voluntary means that there
are no negative ramifications for participating or for not
participating. So I think the FCC can design such an auction.
My concern principally is that for those people who choose not
to participate, that you--and kind of the things I chatted
about in my statement in terms of no one being forced to
relocate to an inferior spectrum band that all viewers can
keep, seeing the channels and stations I see now. No station is
subject to increased interference and that broadcasters should
be held harmless from the cost of repacking.
I never heard the term win-win-win-win before today's
hearing, and I like that term. I think what we are looking for
is people want to stay in the business. It is don't lose. And
really, it is not the broadcasters, it is the viewers in our
communities.
Let me also add to the don't lose, that if there are
spectrum fees and other costs, I think that is probably not in
the spirit of voluntary.
Mr. Terry. Such as?
Mr. Schurz. Such as that if we choose not to participate in
the auction, repacking is involuntary. We understand that. We
like to have the safeguards and protections on a going forward
basis so there is no harm to the business and to the viewers in
communities, but we would--we certainly don't expect or want to
see increased fees--spectrum fees if we choose not to
participate.
Mr. Terry. And how do you answer Dr. Connolly's statement
that if there isn't some mechanism for--to force holdouts, that
it will actually degrade the value of the spectrum that may be
auctioned off?
Do you agree that that could happen?
Mr. Schurz. From all the discussions I have seen about the
way the auction is being considered, and there is no definitive
auction yet, but there is a lot of discussion. My expectation
is I think that they will probably find a way that will be
equitable and maybe you would limit the holdouts.
The question is, no one is--Mr. Ellis is here because they
said GU might sell, and he said that--people ask how much
spectrum, who is selling? No one knows the answer to that
question.
Mr. Terry. Dr. Connolly, why don't we work though this a
little bit more. How do we--how do you see that we can provide
enough incentives to win-win-win or not lose-win-win, and not
have a situation where we have to engage in a taking?
Ms. Connolly. If the incentive--I mean, if the reverse
auction is correctly designed, the broadcasters will only
participate if they win. No one is going to participate and not
win, because--and that is by definition. And they can list
different prices of which they are willing to do different
things so they may be willing to do one thing and they offer a
certain price. They may be completely unwilling to do other
things, so they offer, you know, a every exorbitant price that
they know won't be accepted, or simply refuse to participate in
that auction.
The costs of any new packaging are, at least from what I
hear, the FCC is offering to cover those. And so as long as
what they are bidding on is well specified, then by definition,
if their bid is accepted, they will win.
Mr. Terry. Right. But we are talking about--and you look at
any development and you always see that one little old house on
the corner, because that person wouldn't sell out.
Ms. Connolly. And that is why we do need the ability to
relocate, because they will hold out. And even--well, there is
a possibility of hold out. There is also the possibility that
if you--I mean, when you are bidding within a market, you are
competing against the other broadcasters in that market, so if
someone is not in the range that they know they are tying to
empty, they are not true competitors to those in the range that
they are trying to vacate.
So by making relocation possible, you might have someone
say on channel 21 who is willing to give up their location--
their spectrum, go off the air or share or go somewhere else,
and if someone on channel 40 is unwilling to, then 21 can sell
their spectrum, you know, their rights to that spectrum and
then we can move someone to channel 21.
So it means that more broadcasters within a given market
will be competing for these bids to vacate spectrum, and by
having that forced relocation, then the other people outside
that key band become competitors. So not only is it an issue of
hold out, but just general competition. The more competition
there is, the more the bids are going to become true valuations
for the broadcasters themselves. So it is not just for the one
hold out, it is a general statement of overall competition in
the bids.
Mr. Walden. Thank you. Mr. Dingell, Chairman Emeritus of
the committee, we turn to you now for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you for your courtesy, and I want to
thank the distinguished gentlewoman from California, Ms.
Matsui, thank you.
This is not the first time we have visited this question.
In earlier hearings, I have expressed my strong doubt that such
auctions can, in fact, be truly voluntary. A great source of my
alarm comes from the National Broadband Plan itself, where it
states at page 79 that ``The government's ability to reclaim,
clear, and reauction spectrum is the ultimate backstop against
market failure and is an appropriate tool when the voluntary
process stalls entirely.'' I would note that we are looking at
this against a lot of actions by the Commission and the Office
of Management and Budget, which have taken place without us
having a real understanding of what spectrum is going where and
being used by who, and sat upon by who else.
So this seems to imply that the Commission's action could
be forcefully taking this spectrum away from broadcasters if
too few or none at all participate in the voluntary spectrum
auctions.
Now to all witnesses, starting with Mr. Schurz, yes or no.
Would you support such action by the Commission, yes or no?
Mr. Schurz. Which action?
Mr. Dingell. Picking and taking the spectrum forcefully
from broadcasters.
Mr. Schurz. No.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Ellis?
Mr. Ellis. No.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. We support voluntary auctions.
Mr. Dingell. Ma'am, yes or no?
Ms. Connolly. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. You, sir?
Mr. Brenner. I always talk about voluntary incentive
auctions.
Mr. Dingell. And sir?
Mr. Feld. Voluntary auctions.
Mr. Dingell. All right. Now to all witnesses again, do you
agree that broadcasters who are willing to participate in an
incentive auction should be committed to do so in exchange for
a fair share of such auctions proceeds, and set the reserve
price of the spectrum it wishes to auction, yes or no? Mr.
Schurz?
Mr. Schurz. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Ellis?
Mr. Ellis. Yes.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Ma'am, yes or no?
Ms. Connolly. Who defines fair proceeds?
Mr. Dingell. Well, I am not quite sure I can, but----
Ms. Connolly. That is the question, so I would say no
because I don't think anyone can define that, other than by the
bid value.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you. Next witness?
Mr. Brenner. I am sorry to just raise a quibble here, but
the use of the term reserve price, I don't quite understand.
Mr. Dingell. Well, I am assuming the reserve price is the
price that is fixed by the Commission as the price below which
no auction would take place and no sale would take place. Yes
or no?
Mr. Brenner. OK. Just--can I just clarify, Congressman
Dingell? The reason why I am asking is normally I have the same
understanding of a reserve price. I bid in three auctions over
the years, and there is an aggregate price for the entire
auction that the auctioneer sets. It has nothing to do with the
individual bid----
Mr. Dingell. Time is limited, please, yes or no? I will put
you down as a no.
Mr. Brenner. I am not sure.
Mr. Dingell. Next witness.
Mr. Feld. Depends on what result you want.
Mr. Dingell. All right. To all witnesses, in other words,
if the FCC is overly restrictive in how reauctioned spectrum
can be used, we will end up with a fine mess on our hands, just
like the auction of the D Block. Am I correct in that? Starting
with you, Mr. Schurz.
Mr. Schurz. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Ellis?
Mr. Ellis. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Next witness?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Yes, you are potentially correct.
Mr. Dingell. Ma'am, if you please?
Ms. Connolly. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Sir?
Mr. Brenner. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Next witness?
Mr. Feld. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you, ladies and gentlemen.
Now to all witnesses again, similarly, the goal of any
incentive auction, in addition to fairness to those who
surrender the spectrum should be to maximize the revenue to the
Treasury. Yes or no, starting with Mr. Schurz?
Mr. Schurz. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Ellis?
Mr. Ellis. No.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. That should be a significant part of
it, yes.
Mr. Dingell. Ma'am?
Ms. Connolly. No.
Mr. Dingell. Sir?
Mr. Brenner. Yes, a significant part.
Mr. Dingell. Last witness?
Mr. Feld. Absolutely not.
Mr. Dingell. All right. Now I would like to explore this
channel relocation just a bit more. Now to Mr. Schurz and
Ellis, both of you have considerable technical experience as
broadcasters. Are my concerns about shifting from UHF to VHF
valid? And I want to say that I have fears that doing so might
restrict geographic reach of a given broadcaster. Second, I
think going from UHF to VHF will impair the broadcaster's
ability to transmit digital signals.
So are my concerns about shifting from UHF to VHF valid,
yes or no?
Mr. Schurz. Yes, I know our company has had specific
incidences of that, no question.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Ellis?
Mr. Ellis. Yes, VHF does not work.
Mr. Dingell. Now, again to Mr. Schurz and Mr. Ellis.
Further, do you believe that reducing a broadcaster's ability
to transmit digital signals puts it at a disadvantage vis-`-vis
the other content provider, yes or no?
Mr. Schurz. Yes, I would agree with that.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Ellis?
Mr. Ellis. Digital means over the air broadcasting only,
yes, we are at a disadvantage to the wireless providers.
Mr. Dingell. All right, to all of the witnesses, with Mr.
Schurz's and Mr. Ellis's response and mine, do you believe it
is fair to broadcasters to require that they move from the UHF
band to the VHF band, yes or no, starting with our next
witness?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. I think there is a difference between
the upper and lower VHF bands, a pretty significant difference,
and I think, you know, that is a difficult question that we can
work through as part of this process. There are a large number
of broadcasters currently operating in both bands.
Mr. Dingell. You can't say that it is--you can't say
sitting there that it is fair at this time?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Well, Congressman, there are a large
number of broadcasters operating in both of those bands at this
moment and doing well.
Mr. Dingell. But if they have already shifted--well, we
will put you down as a no. Next witness, please.
Mr. Walden. Did you have another witness, Mr. Dingell, that
was going to----
Mr. Dingell. I don't----
Mr. Walden [continuing]. Dare answer, because we are over
the clock here.
Mr. Dingell. Well, I am willing to forego--I just want
everybody to know that we are not walking into any tea party
here. Thank you for your courtesy.
Mr. Walden. Although some of us have a time or two.
Mr. Stearns, we are going to yield to you for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stearns. Let me ask each of you, and I think this is
kind of basic to start the question off, and I will just start
with Mr. Schurz. Do you think before we do any auction off the
spectrum that we should do an inventory? Just right on down.
Mr. Schurz. As a businessman, before we determine where we
need to go, we always start with where we are. Yes, I think an
inventory is a good idea.
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Ellis, we should do a spectrum inventory
first?
Mr. Ellis. Yes, but I think it can be done in a weekend.
Mr. Stearns. In a weekend, OK. Next.
Mr. Ellis. Yes, sir, this is not that complicated.
Mr. Stearns. OK. Next?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. I don't think it needs to be done prior
to an incentive auction process.
Mr. Stearns. So your answer is no, OK. Dr. Connolly?
Ms. Connolly. My answer would be no.
Mr. Stearns. No. Mr. Brenner?
Mr. Brenner. No.
Mr. Stearns. No. Mr. Feld?
Mr. Feld. No.
Mr. Stearns. OK. Now let us say we do have a spectrum
inventory, and you find out, you know, who has what and what
they use. Do you think it is important in this layout that we
determine how effectively this spectrum that they have is being
used and what bands aren't yet deployed, and how long until
deployment? Is that an important--I mean, some of you don't
think we should do a spectrum, but it seems to me that if we do
the spectrum inventory, we could find out how efficiently it is
being used. I think members of Congress want to know that. Mr.
Schurz, do you agree with that, that if we did a spectrum
inventory we would want to find out how efficiently it is being
used and what bands aren't yet deployed and how long until they
are deployed?
Mr. Schurz. I think that what we are looking at right now
is not only the total amount of spectrum, but no question how
efficiently it is used. I think there is a question on how one
would define that. Broadcasters have 6 megahertz. We use the 6
megahertz. So there could be a lot of quibbling over the
details, but yes, I think it is a good idea.
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Ellis?
Mr. Ellis. As a prudent business man, I think you should
always know what--how you are using your product, yes.
Mr. Stearns. OK.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Yes, our concern with an inventory is
that you would--a suggestion that you might need to do it
before you move forward with incentive auctions, and so----
Mr. Stearns. That is what I am asking.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Yes, so we believe a solid legitimate
inventory of the government side of the equation, the
commercial side is fine----
Mr. Stearns. Which would include how effectively it is
being used.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Yes, although I think we would all
share concerns about who would define that and how it would be
defined. I mean, in our case----
Mr. Stearns. Is it hard to define?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Yes.
Mr. Stearns. OK. Dr. Connolly?
Ms. Connolly. I agree complete that I have nothing against
doing an inventory and trying----
Mr. Stearns. You folks have said no, but----
Ms. Connolly. No, but I disagree with conditioning----
Mr. Stearns. I think it is axiomatic, trying to decide how
efficiently it is being used and what bands are yet deployed
and how long. I think those are important questions we should
know.
Ms. Connolly. But I would not condition the incentive
auctions on doing that first, because I know that that can take
years, and the value of the spectrum to our economy----
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Ellis says it can take a weekend.
Ms. Connolly. Well, I don't know if he has worked in the
government.
Mr. Ellis. I am definitely not working in government.
Mr. Stearns. Touche. All right, Mr. Brenner?
Mr. Ellis. If I could----
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Brenner first.
Mr. Brenner. So I want to be clear, Congressman Stearns,
there should be an inventory and we should know----
Mr. Stearns. But you said no.
Mr. Brenner. I don't think we should hold up the auction
process waiting because I am concerned that it will take
forever, but just----
Mr. Stearns. How can you auction off something you don't
know anything about?
Mr. Brenner. Well, we know--we are going to auction off
spectrum that we know----
Mr. Stearns. But don't you want to know how efficiently it
is being used, by whom, and what bands aren't yet deployed and
how long until--wouldn't you want to know that?
Mr. Brenner. So Congressman, when I advise our management,
I give them a presentation once a quarter or once every two
quarters on new spectrum bands, what they are being used for,
what the likely time period would be for an auction, so I think
those facts are known. What isn't known is there are hundreds
of thousands of FCC licensees across a whole range of services,
ranging from private radio services, trucking companies, taxi
cab companies, and we should find out if they are using the
spectrum on an ongoing basis, and if they are not, let us get
it back. I totally agree with you on that.
Mr. Stearns. OK, Mr. Feld?
Mr. Feld. Just to clarify, because of the properties of the
broadcast bands, it is pretty easy to say getting more of this
stuff out there for use--for a number of different uses is a
good thing. I don't need an inventory to tell me I would love
some of that stuff. The inventory, however, is extremely useful
both on saying where else is there useful spectrum, and where
are the other services that are in the band, which just aren't
the unlicensed. It is also wireless microphones, low power
television translated, a whole bunch of things. Where are those
going to land if we start to repack the band? So don't need it
to tell me I want more spectrum out there, but I do need it for
spectrum planning.
Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Stearns. Now we will go to the
gentlelady from California, Ms. Matsui for 5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, I believe the FCC
should have the flexibility to structure and conduct incentive
auctions. Dr. Connolly, you stressed in your testimony that the
FCC must have a great deal of flexibility to design and
implement incentive auctions. In granting FCC this new
authority, how should Congress balance the need for FCC
flexibility while providing some legislative certainty to
ensure that there is enough participation from existing
licensees to ensure successful auctions, and these auctions
would bring about the maximum value and public interest
benefits for our consumers?
Ms. Connolly. That is a very interesting question. I am not
sure that there is anything that Congress could do to guarantee
that people will come to the table. They will come to the table
if it is in their incentive, and I think that that is why the
FCC should be allowed to have these incentive auctions. I can't
imagine that putting restrictions on the auction would somehow
increase the interest in selling off--or being willing to
vacate certain spectrum. I think if anything, it would decrease
it. So I cannot imagine what Congress could put in there that
would somehow increase the desire of the broadcasters to sell
these rights.
Ms. Matsui. So you are essentially saying that the
marketplace would take care of this, and that therefore even
though we have oversight, that you believe we should be a light
touch, some principles, and that is it?
Ms. Connolly. Yes, but moreover, I think that if the goal
is to make sure that the auction is as efficient as possible,
any touches are going to make it less efficient.
Ms. Matsui. But could you balance out, though, the value as
far as dollar value plus the public interest?
Ms. Connolly. I think what would maximize the dollar value
is also what maximizes the public interest in this case. Now
there are tradeoffs. For example, when it is decided what are
the bids that win on both sides, the revenue is based on the
different demand curves, how much the clients--and how much
demand. They are not going to choose a price that clears
everything 100 percent, right, so that is a decision that will
affect how much megahertz is repurposed, and it will also
affect how much revenue is given to the government.
So that will be a call to the extent that they have a
target of 120 megahertz, I think that gives a certain amount of
a restriction there in terms of how far they are likely to go.
But I have had enough experience with auctions to see that, you
know, anytime additional conditions are put on the--there are
very strong consequences, and I would say D Block is a very
good example of that.
Ms. Matsui. OK, thank you.
President Obama set out a plan to create a wireless
innovation fund of $3 billion funded through spectrum proceeds,
which would go towards research and development of emerging
wireless technologies and applications. This question is for
Mr. Guttman-McCabe and Mr. Brenner. We all know that R&D is
essential to keeping America competitive. In the context of
spectrum, what does this mean for your industry and its ability
to develop the next wireless technologies and applications?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Sure. Thank you, Congresswoman.
CTIA has a large number of members who invest billions, if
not tens of billions of dollars each year, and Mr. Brenner will
talk a little bit about his company who is a member. We tend to
try to do our best to facilitate that in the private sector,
and we believe there are probably two ways that Congress could
significantly help that. One is the purpose of this hearing
today, to talk about getting more spectrum to market and
funding the network infrastructure, such that people want to
feel comfortable putting R&D dollars to work. The second is--
and it is something that has been proposed by you and Ranking
Member Eshoo and Congressman Stearns, and that is taking the
R&D tax credit and making it permanent. Providing the ability
for companies like Qualcomm and others to say hey, we have got
a future that we understand that makes sense, and we are not
revisiting this every couple years. And for us, that sort of
making that tax credit permanent will provide a heck of an
incentive for our industry.
The last thing that I would add, which we have just
discovered recently at CTIA, is we talk a lot about R&D within
the United States, and I think we focus on U.S. companies,
which is key and important, companies like Qualcomm. But what
we have learned is because we have become the hub, the
epicenter of wireless, whether it is the apps world or the
network world or the device world, we are finding foreign
companies are moving their R&D facilities here into the United
States, and we are finding more and more foreign-based
companies with R&D facilities in California, in Texas, and in
other States. And we think that is because we have the right
ecosystem to facilitate that.
Ms. Matsui. Right. I am sorry, Mr. Brenner, I am out of
time, but a quick comment from you?
Mr. Brenner. Well, research and development is synonymous
with Qualcomm. As I said in my testimony, we spend $2 billion
every year on research and development, over 20 cents of every
dollar that we make in revenue, so we are constantly
researching new technologies. It is essential.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, and I know I have really
run out of time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. It is all right, we want to get the answers.
Thank you, Ms. Matsui.
We will go now to Ms. Blackburn. Thank you for being here,
and we look forward to your questions.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
our witnesses, and thank you for your patience.
I love hearing you all talk about innovation, and I am glad
we just touched on the R&D tax credit, because the innovators
that I am talking to in Tennessee, some of them I have been
working with for years because I ran the Tennessee Film,
Entertainment, Music and Interactive Technologies component of
our State government at one point in my career, and innovators
want that certainty, and regulatory uncertainty right now is
just a bear, and they talk about it to us quite a bit.
Listening to you all, I would imagine each and every one of
you knows somebody who is innovating some new application or
attachment for the broadband, and they are waiting to see what
is going to happen with spectrum. So let us just say Congress
sits on their hands and that nothing is done. Mr. Brenner, let
me just throw this to you. What do you think would happen if we
see this spectrum crunch get worse, because we know that
capacity demand is outpacing the capacity, and if Congress
doesn't free up some of the spectrum for commercial broadband,
what do you see that impact being on the economy and on jobs?
Mr. Brenner. It would be extremely detrimental impact on
the economy and jobs, Congresswoman Blackburn. I don't think
that there is--the world is going to end tomorrow or the next
day, but I think the FCC and the broadband plan did a very good
job of laying out short-term, medium-term, and long-term steps
and I think they have pretty much proven in a--their white
paper that by 2014, we are going to have a serious problem.
What could happen? We could have basically the effect of
brownouts. The devices won't work all the time. Your devices
won't work wherever you go. That is obviously a problem today.
The carriers are spending a fortune, billions of dollars every
year. We almost take for granted to provide better service and
better coverage. We are spending, as I say, billions of dollars
inventing more technologies. That whole ecosystem will slow
down and will ultimately stop, and then also, from an
international point of view, I was in Canada yesterday. We are
actually ahead of the Canadians, which we weren't 2 years ago.
We are ahead of the Europeans with our mobile systems and the
Asians, and we won't be if we don't have enough licensed
spectrum coming online.
Mrs. Blackburn. You know, I find it so interesting when you
equate it to the brownouts, because so many of our
entertainment industry innovators in the spectrum have become
financial service innovators and healthcare delivery system
innovators, and we are seeing a tremendous amount of parallels,
if you will, in those industries. And I know that is something
that they bring forward to us all the time is wanting the
certainty of the availability of that spectrum.
Mr. Guttman?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Yes, Congresswoman, just--I would point
you to an article, a kind of timely article in the Wall Street
Journal this week that talked about India and the impact of not
bringing enough spectrum has had on the Indian market. I think
we all think of India as a really rapidly emerging market, and
yet in the last 2 years, because of the failure to bring
additional spectrum to market, their capital expenditures have
gone down 42 percent, and they said that by 2015 they will not
be able to serve 1/3 of their mobile broadband customers, which
could have a 1 percent impact on Indian GDP.
So the article ties it directly to not bringing spectrum
and not allowing these companies to really--to move forward.
And that is a macro level, but I think it is illustrative.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Mr. Ellis?
Mr. Ellis. I do not think it is a spectrum problem; I think
it is an architecture problem. The one-to-one architecture of
the wireless industry, you know, is always going to have a
problem, no matter how much spectrum. If you--if eventually you
do run out of spectrum, either because they don't get it now or
they don't get the next load they are going to need later, what
is going to--the solution to this is a partnership between
broadcasters and wireless. We have a very efficient methodology
for delivering, you know, high content video. They have a very
inefficient methodology. The two of us could work some great
things together.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Dr. Connolly, I have got just 30
seconds left. You have talked around the issue of the auctions,
the incentive auctions, and I agree with your comment about the
D Block. We put so many restrictions on that by the time the
FCC finished, nobody wanted it. I mean, it is lying fallow.
So in your perfect world, what would those conditions for a
spectrum auction be to see revenue to the Treasury, and then
affordability to the private sector so that innovation is
carried forward on this spectrum? So if you were designing it,
what would you say it needed to be?
Ms. Connolly. I would not put conditions.
Mrs. Blackburn. No conditions?
Ms. Connolly. That is my personal.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK, and I appreciate that because that is
what we need to hear, because that is what we want to do.
I think we all agree that in a 21st century economy, making
certain that the creative economy has the space in which to
work and expand, and knowing that what you all are sitting here
talking about and representing today touches every economic
sector in this country.
When you look at my district in Tennessee, the efficiencies
that have been derived for small business manufacturing
primarily have come through looking at the advances that have
taken place around spectrum. The auto industry, the
entertainment industry, the healthcare industry, the financial
services industry, the defense technologies, the list goes on
and on and on. So I appreciate that, and I am over my time and
I yield back.
Mr. Walden. Thank the gentlelady.
Now go the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Rush, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have only a few
minutes to ask questions, so I am going to ask questions of all
the panelists. If you could respond by a yes or a no, then I
have a second question I would like to ask you also.
The FCC's record on auctions as it relates to minority,
women, and small business success has left much to be desired.
In fact, that record has led former FCC Commissioner Edelstein
to conclude that auction results have been appalling in terms
of gains that minority, women, and rural carrier-owned
businesses have made as wireless licensees. During the AWS 3
auctions, for example, large incumbents with deep pockets
walked away with almost 70 percent of the licenses. Can the FCC
design incentive auctions in a way using bidding credits, tzx
incentives, or other mechanisms to increase these appalling
numbers and indemnify broadcasters who relocate? A simple yes
or no, beginning with Mr. Schurz.
Mr. Schurz. That is a complicated question. I think you
will see less diversity in terms of ownership, and I think you
will also see--I think you will see as a part of the repacking
the Hispanic community, one in three watches television over
the air, so viewers will be hurt----
Mr. Rush. You can't give me a yes or a no?
Mr. Schurz. I will go with yes.
Mr. Rush. Yes. Mr. Ellis?
Mr. Ellis. Was the question can they design it so----
Mr. Rush. Yes.
Mr. Ellis. Yes.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. I think that is possible, and I--
Congressman, I don't know if you saw this morning, but a letter
came in from the NAACP and Rainbow Push and a number of
Hispanic groups all supporting--10 organizations in total
supporting incentive auctions.
Mr. Rush. Dr. Connolly?
Ms. Connolly. May I ask clarification? You are asking can
it be done to help diversity among licensees or among those who
are receiving the services?
Mr. Rush. The licensees, expand the pool of licensees.
Ms. Connolly. It can be done, but it can be done very
poorly, and we have had evidence of that before.
Mr. Rush. It can be done better?
Ms. Connolly. I would argue that it is----
Mr. Rush. My time----
Ms. Connolly. Scale matters here. Scale matters here. I
don't know that that should be the goal.
Mr. Rush. Can you give a yes or a no? Mr. Brenner?
Mr. Brenner. I think it is possible. I think Dr. Connolly's
point, which I think is a fair one, is this is a very capital-
intensive business for wireless business, so access to capital
is a huge determinant in who can bid in an auction and who can
win, but is it possible? Yes.
Mr. Rush. It can be done?
Mr. Brenner. It can be done.
Mr. Rush. Yes.
Mr. Feld. One of the great advantages of the white spaces
is that it allows women and minority-owned businesses to get
access to spectrum, which is why so many civil rights
organizations supported us and white spaces. With that said, I
absolutely agree, the FCC can and should do a better job in
making sure that women and minority-owned businesses have
greater opportunity in licenses at auction.
Mr. Rush. OK. Well, let me ask you this other question. Can
the FCC design incentive auctions in a way that increases
minority, women, rural ownership, entices enough broadcasters
to relocate, and also generates sufficient funds to pay for a
national public safety network? Yes or no?
Mr. Schurz. I think the answer to that is yes. I mean, you
are talking about auction design.
Mr. Ellis. Yes.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. I think it is possible, and I think the
question about funding a public safety network is going to be
one that is hashed out with you and others in this committee,
and I think that is a difficult question that is going to take
a lot of thought.
Ms. Connolly. It is a possibility to do.
Mr. Rush. All right.
Mr. Brenner. Yes, it is possible.
Mr. Feld. Yes, and they ought to.
Mr. Rush. All right. Could incentive auctions create
additional unintended consequences and problems?
Mr. Schurz. Yes, no question about it.
Mr. Ellis. Yes. Solvable, but yes.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Not if done properly.
Ms. Connolly. I think they would be minor, relative to
potential--well, they would be inconsequential, relative to the
gains.
Mr. Brenner. I think that they will be a huge success.
Mr. Feld. I think that they are complicated. We don't know
what the best model is, which is why we need to proceed
cautiously and give the experts flexibility.
Mr. Rush. All right. Mr. McCabe, give me some examples of
unintended problems that might occur under incentive auctions?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Well, I think we have talked at length
about making sure that we don't try to overly dictate what the
FCC can and should do here. I think we have seen that it is not
just the D Block. We have seen it with the C Block and other
bands of spectrum that have been auctioned, so I think that is
an unintended consequence for the auction as a whole.
I think with regard to broadcasters, I think we just have
to be considerate and think through the process and make it
something that incentivizes them. It is in our interest on the
wireless side for the broadcasters to have an incentive to
participate, and that is what we want. We want them to
participate. We believe it can be wildly successful, and we
believe we can't miss this opportunity. We have seen Germany
and United Kingdom and France and Italy and Spain and South
Korea and Japan have all identified spectrum for commercial
mobile purposes and are bringing it to market. We can't fall
behind.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I thank you. You have been very
generous with the time you have allotted me.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Rush, for your questions, and
panelists for your answers.
We go now to Mr. Latta for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
it. To our panel, thanks very much for being here today. Some
of the questions I would just like to follow up to some of the
other members who were already asked today.
If I could, Mr. Guttman, if I could start. We were talking
a little bit about the ramifications if there isn't a voluntary
auction out there, and you were talking about what happened in
India. In this country, how many jobs would be affected or how
many jobs do you predict that wouldn't be created if we didn't
have this auction?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Sure. So we have seen numbers between
100,000 and 200,000 new jobs if we can move forward with
incentive auction legislation, and that is sort of direct
employment that we looked at and viewed. But I think if you
look at sort of what we call the verticals, healthcare and
smart grid, intelligent transportation and education and areas
like that, you are talking about a ripple effect that is almost
immeasurable. We really do strongly believe, you know, no
matter who you look at who is measuring this, that the change
that is going to happen in this ecosystem is staggering. Two
years ago, 3 years ago the hottest selling handset was the
Motorola Razr. We didn't have application stores. We barely had
third generation, certainly not fourth generation. We didn't
have tablets. I think when we looked at--Kleiner Perkins study
looked at the first three quarters after the launch of the
iPod, and they went from zero to one million, the first three
quarters after the launch of the iPhone went from zero to four
million. The first three quarters of the iPad went from zero to
14 million. And so we are seeing a ramp up that is almost
vertical, and I--it is almost impossible to put a number on the
value and the jobs and the money that will flow to the
economy----
Mr. Latta. That is going to be my next question. Is there
any way to predict what that value would be in dollars?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Well, we have seen numbers that have
come out of the Administration from Mr. Summers that have said
for every dollar that goes in in terms of investment, it
results in $7 to $10 in increased GDP. And so that is a
multiplier that we think is probably a legitimate number. Dr.
Connolly might know--she just gave me that look. But you know,
there clearly is a multiplier effect, and we have seen it
measured at 7 to $10 for every dollar in investment that----
Mr. Latta. I see that Mr. Ellis would like to make a
statement on this.
Mr. Ellis. I am just wondering if anybody is going to hold
him to these numbers.
Mr. Latta. I beg your pardon?
Mr. Ellis. Is anybody going to hold him to these numbers?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Every time we see them, they go up, and
so I will say yes. I will be willing to suggest--I mean, Cisco
put out its networking numbers today, and they went up again.
We have got a company here that sells solutions to spectrum
problems saying we need to bring more spectrum to market. If
that isn't the greatest illustration that we need some help, I
am not sure what is.
Mr. Latta. Well I know Dr. Connolly--Mr. Chairman had asked
initially what that value might be, and you had thrown out a
low end and a high end. Could you say what those are again?
Ms. Connolly. Well, I had--the megahertz POP values that I
was looking at were between $.03 and $3.86 per megahertz POP.
That is purely based on the 700 auction, but if you aggregate
that up, that means that based on a 700 megahertz auction, 1
megahertz at the lowest end would generate $9 million and at
the highest end could generate $1 billion, approximately.
Mr. Latta. Mr. Brenner? Please turn on your mic.
Mr. Brenner. We need to multiply that by the number of
megahertz that would be auctioned, so if we are auctioning 120
megahertz, Dr. Connolly's high number is tens of billions of
dollars, 30, 40, $50 billion in auction revenues. I don't know
if that is going to happen, but you know, there is no question
that there is huge demand for spectrum, and if there is an
auction, there will be people with a lot of money bidding to
get more spectrum.
Mr. Latta. Mr. Schurz?
Mr. Schurz. The 120 megahertz number has been thrown
around, and I just want to give a little perspective. That was
in the National Broadband Plan, but that plan did not envision
Canada or Mexico, and so the amount of spectrum that you will
successfully get out of broadcast spectrum I would argue is
significantly less. There are some issues with the plan, and so
there are a lot of numbers going around. I just want to make
certain that Canada and Mexico do impact spectrum in the United
States.
Mr. Latta. Mr. Feld?
Mr. Feld. I just want to emphasize, we can't know today how
many broadcasters will want to participate in voluntary
auction, but when we talk about both meeting our spectrum
demand and the value that is being contributed to the economy,
it is important to consider the value of the unlicensed and the
white spaces as well. There are a lot of uses that individually
don't take up a lot of bandwidth, are a poor fit with licensed,
and when we are thinking about how we are going to meet the
spectrum demand and the spectrum crunch, particularly when we
are talking about machine to machine, smart grid, other uses
where it is really not necessarily a good fit with a licensed
service. The ability to offload all that traffic to the
unlicensed and save the licensed space with the higher
bandwidth uses that people are looking at is critical to
meeting our spectrum needs.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I see my time has
expired and I yield back.
Mr. Walden. I thank the gentleman from Ohio.
I would now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Kinzinger.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is good to be
last, always, because you guys know you get to go home maybe,
unless somebody else shows up.
I don't have a whole lot to ask because most of it has
already been asked, but to me, in a way as I am kind of really
getting to figure this out, it seems like not having the
voluntary auctions would kind of be a lose-lose. It really
reduces flexibility for everybody, really, on all sides of this
debate.
Let us say we don't move on anything like a voluntary
auction, we just keep status quo. I know this has been asked in
different ways, but just very briefly, I will give all six of
you a chance just to say, you know, what do you see as a
scenario? So you know, typical Congress, let us say we don't do
anything and we find ourselves where we are now. What is kind
of the long-term--and I know there was discussion about
brownouts, you know, and--where do we see this? We can start
over here at the--my left.
Mr. Schurz. I think there is no question that demand is
growing. I will say that we are in smaller markets, and the
capacity crunch really does not exist in our markets. So in the
smaller and rural markets, you won't--it is not a pressing
issue. I think what you will see is you will see great
innovation by broadcasters. You are seeing it today. It is 2
years since the digital transition. You will see more.
Mr. Ellis. About half my stations are in small markets.
Same answer as Todd. Half of our stations are in major markets,
Los Angeles, San Francisco, Boston, New York/Philly corridor. I
think if there is no auction, you know, and we are allowed to
do so, we will approach the wireless companies to create
partnerships where they can offload some of their high
bandwidth content, you know, their broadcasting type content--
--
Mr. Kinzinger. So you are saying----
Mr. Ellis [continuing]. And make partnerships out of that.
Yes, indeed.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. You know, I think there will be
partnerships. There are partnerships. But I don't think we
should take away from this notion that the broadcast
architecture is a perfect architecture. It is great if you want
to watch the Super Bowl when the broadcasters want to deliver
the Super Bowl, which I do, and that is one of the times I do.
But all of you and all of our customers want their content when
they want it, and so whether it is large or small, I disagree
strongly with the notion that--I mean, some of our most active
members on the spectrum issue are smaller carriers who want
wider channels, who want to be able to deliver in rural areas
what the large carriers want to deliver in urban areas. They
want broad, wide channels to deliver the video content, to
deliver the Powerpoints and things like that. So I strongly,
strongly urge, with all due speed that Congress consider
incentive auctions. I don't see----
Mr. Kinzinger. Well, and it seems like it would be creating
kind of a--as I see it, it creates a market mechanism for
broadcasters or anybody really to make a decision which best
suits them at that moment, is just kind in general how it
seems.
Dr. Connolly?
Ms. Connolly. I agree. This--the incentive auction is, I
think the most expedient way that I see in front of us to
achieve something that almost everyone believes has huge value.
So not doing it, then you are delaying any gains that your
economy could have, and as a broadcaster, I would worry that
other mechanisms might be used to get that spectrum that would
not be as advantageous to them, which is something that the
broadcasters--I think is why the incentive auction is good for
them, because they can win from it.
Mr. Brenner. So to round out my prior answer where I
referred to brownouts, I mean, what is going to happen if
Congress doesn't pass the legislation is the folks who do have
spectrum are going to continue to face this exploding demand,
and they are going to have to ration capacity. They are going
to have to assign the bandwidth in some way, and there are only
two ways to do it. That is to raise prices, and so it just goes
to the customers who are willing to pay more, and that is a bad
thing for the economy, or there will be this diminution in
service. I don't think there is a third alternative.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK, and just quickly?
Mr. Feld. There is a fine line between taking a problem
seriously and panicking. I don't think we need to panic here. I
do not believe we are going to have significant brownouts if we
don't pass legislation, and I believe that--we have seen a lot
of innovation. We have seen a lot of cleverness that has gone
on as people have confronted technical challenges. That is one
of the things that actually makes this country innovative and
great is that when we hit things like what looks like a wall on
spectrum capacity, we find ways around that.
Mr. Kinzinger. Yes, we are pretty good at that, aren't we?
We are good at being innovative, that is what is amazing. I
also, just to wrap up, I serve a fairly rural district, and you
know, one of the things I am obviously concerned about is
continuing to deploy broadband to those folks that are
underserved, just simply by fact that they don't live around a
lot of other people. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Walden. Thank the gentleman for his questions. I thank
the panelists for their answers. Your testimony has been very
helpful to our committee to hear from all of you.
I have asked unanimous consent to submit three letters to
the record, a letter from 112 leading economists, including Dr.
Connolly, to President Obama supporting incentive auctions, a
letter from 10 groups representing minority interests
supporting incentive auctions, and a letter from 33 IT
equipment innovators supporting incentive auctions. Without
objection, they will be entered into our record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Walden. Again, I thank all of our witnesses today and
in the past panels. We intend to tackle this issue head-on and
in a bipartisan and thoughtful way. I appreciate your input and
that of others in the audience, and others watching. We intend
to get this right, not only for our country to grow jobs and
innovation, but also for public safety, to make sure that they
have an interoperable network taxpayers can afford and that
they can always rely upon.
So thank you all for your participation. We stand
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:35 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Edolphus Towns

Thank you, Chairman Walden and Ranking Member Eshoo. I am
very pleased that the Sub Committee is holding this hearing. It
is very important to get the full perspective on spectrum so we
can move forward on bipartisan legislation to address this
issue.
I am a strong supporter of President Obama's goal of
improving the way this country uses its spectrum and freeing up
more for mobile broadband and a national public safety network.
Incentive auction authority is an efficient tool to put
spectrum in the hands of those companies that most want it to
roll out the latest most innovative devices our families will
rely on in the future. It is critically important that the FCC,
given its deep expertise in conducting high quality auction, be
given wide discretion in how it is designed and implemented.
I am encouraged by the energy of the high tech community
and the response from the broadcasting community to see this
through. My constituents still rely on free over the air
television, and mobile broadcasting has shown particular
promise in disaster situations. I am concerned that
opportunities for smaller and minority focused broadcasting may
be hurt if the smaller broadcasters are first to take advantage
of the incentive auctions. However, the need for spectrum for
mobile broadband by ever more users is undeniable, as FCC data
has shown. I would like to hear from our witnesses whether and
how both of their preferred outcomes can be achieved.
Again, I thank the Subcommittee for tackling this subject
in a broad and comprehensive manner. I look forward to working
with my colleagues on these and other issues as we move forward
in this Congress.
Thank you and I yield back the balance of my time.


