- AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 13: ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION ISSUES, INCLUDING TOPICS RELATED TO THE SITING, PLANNING, AND ALLOCATION OF COSTS FOR ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION INFRASTRUCTURE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 13: ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION ISSUES,
INCLUDING TOPICS RELATED TO THE SITING, PLANNING, AND ALLOCATION OF
COSTS FOR ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION INFRASTRUCTURE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 13, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-97

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
74-708                   WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

7_____

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JAY INSLEE, Washington
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  KATHY CASTOR, Florida
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             GENE GREEN, Texas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   LOIS CAPPS, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio)
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     5
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     6
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................    13
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    20
Hon. John D. Dingell, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Michigan, prepared statement................................   168

Witnesses

Jon Wellinghoff, Chairman, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission..    21
Prepared statement...........................................    23
Answers to submitted questions...............................   171
Lauren Azar, Senior Advisor, Office of the Secretary, Department
of Energy......................................................    39
Prepared statement...........................................    41
Answers to submitted questions...............................   182
Greg White, Commissioner, Michigan Public Service Commission.....    69
Prepared statement...........................................    71
Philip B. Jones, Commissioner, Washington Utilities and
Transportation Commission......................................    78
Prepared statement...........................................    80
John DiStasio, General Manager and Chief Executive Officer,
Sacramento Municipal Utility District, on behalf of Large
Public Power Council...........................................    94
Prepared statement...........................................    96
Answers to submitted questions...............................   192
Steven A. Transeth, Principal, Transeth & Associates, PLLC, on
behalf of Coalition for Fair Transmission Policy...............   108
Prepared statement...........................................   110
Answers to submitted questions...............................   202
Nicholas A. Brown, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Southwest Power Pool, Inc......................................   121
Prepared statement...........................................   123
Joseph Welch, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer,
ITC Holdings Corporation.......................................   132
Prepared statement...........................................   135

Submitted Material

Statement, dated October 13, 2011, of the American Public Power
Association, submitted by Mr. Terry............................     8
Statement, dated October 13, 2011, of Glenn English, Chief
Executive Officer, Natural Rural Electric Cooperative
Association, submitted by Mr. Whitfield........................    14

AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 13: ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION ISSUES,
INCLUDING TOPICS RELATED TO THE SITING, PLANNING, AND ALLOCATION OF
COSTS FOR ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION INFRASTRUCTURE

----------

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 13, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:36 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed
Whitfield (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Shimkus,
Walden, Terry, Burgess, Bilbray, McMorris Rodgers, McKinley,
Gardner, Pompeo, Griffith, Barton, Rush, Dingell, Engel, Green,
Matsui, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Charlotte Baker, Press Secretary; Ray Baum,
Senior Policy Advisor/Director of Coalitions; Anita Bradley,
Senior Policy Advisor to Chairman Emeritus; Allison Busbee,
Legislative Clerk; Patrick Currier, Counsel, Energy and Power;
Andy Duberstein, Deputy Press Secretary; Cory Hicks, Policy
Coordinator, Energy and Power; Dave McCarthy, Chief Counsel,
Environment and Economy; Jeff Baran, Democratic Senior Counsel;
and Caitlin Haberman, Democratic Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. Good morning, and I want to call this
hearing to order.
Today we will focus on Federal transmission issues,
including permitting, planning and pricing of electricity
transmission infrastructure.
Additional investments in transmission infrastructure
certainly will help our country meet anticipated future energy
needs. But there are hurdles, particularly for wires that cross
State lines and require agreement of multiple stakeholders.
Two recent transmission-related developments will help us
evaluate the challenges facing the buildup of transmission
infrastructure in this country. First, the Department of Energy
recently considered whether to designate to the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission certain authorities granted to DOE by
Congress in the Energy Policy Act of 2005. The proposal would
have delegated to FERC DOE's authority to designate certain
areas as National Interest Corridors. FERC already has backstop
siting authority to site transmission facilities within those
corridors, so the delegation would have placed all of the
National Interest Corridor authority under FERC's jurisdiction.
Secretary Chu's decision this week to not delegate this
authority to FERC is quite timely because I noticed in my
comments here, he had not made that decision yet when they
wrote this. So I have to change my views.
The other transmission issue before us today is FERC's
recently finalized Order 1000, which outlines changes to
regional transmission planning and cost allocation. Although
many of the implications of Order 1000 cannot be fully known or
appreciated until compliance filings are made with FERC next
year, it is important to evaluate the potential impact this
final rule may have on stakeholders. Order 1000 seeks to
provide flexibility to regions with respect to how regions
should plan and pay for new transmission. There are a number of
issues. For example, my home State of Kentucky, we do not have
a renewable portfolio standard and I have some counties in my
district that are in a regional transmission organization and
others are not, so those counties could conceivably get stuck
paying the bill for renewable energy transmission from States
that do have a renewable portfolio standard without any direct
benefit.
So we have a great panel of witnesses this morning. We have
a lot of diverse views, as a matter of fact, on this issue, but
I certainly want to thank our first panel for being here today,
the Honorable Jon Wellinghoff, who is chairman of the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission, and Ms. Lauren Azar, Senior
Advisory, Office of the Secretary, U.S. Department of Energy.
So we look forward to your testimony as well as testimony of
all of our witnesses as we set out to explore this important
issue and how it is going to work as we move forward and what
the impact is going to be and a lot of different stakeholder
interest.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.002

Mr. Whitfield. With that, Mr. Rush, I recognize you for
your opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to
also thank Chairman Wellinghoff and Ms. Azar as well as the
other expert witnesses on the second panel for appearing before
this subcommittee today.
Mr. Chairman, today we are holding a hearing focusing on
Federal transmission issues as they relate to siting, planning
and cost allocation for electricity transmission
infrastructure. The basis of this hearing is FERC Order 1000,
which was finalized in June 2011, which addresses three main
issues: planning, cost allocation and the Federal right of
first refusal for incumbent transmission provides. Order 1000
establishes three new requirements regarding cost allocation.
First, it requires that each regional transmission planning
process establish a regional cost allocation method for
transmission lines selected in the regional transmission
planning for the purposes of cost allocation. This cost
allocation method must satisfy six principles: those who do not
benefit from a transmission project do not have to pay for it.
That is the first principle. The second principle is the cost
allocation must be at least, and I quote, ``roughly
commensurate'' with estimated benefits. The third cost
allocation method is the benefit-to-cost thresholds must not
exclude projects with significant net benefits. Fourthly,
allocations of cost outside a region are not permitted unless
the other regions agree. The fifth measure is the cost
allocation methods and identification of beneficiaries must be
transparent. And lastly, number six, different allocation
methods can apply to different types of transmission
facilities.
The second requirement is that neighboring regions must
select a common interregional cost allocation method for new
interregional transmission lines based on the same six
principles that I have previously outlined.
The third and final requirement allows for participant
funding of new transmission lines where costs of a new
transmission line are allocated only to entities that volunteer
to bear those costs but under Order 1000 this cannot be the
regional or interregional cost allocation method.
Mr. Chairman, many of the issues covered under Order 1000
are very technical in nature, to say the least, but I applaud
you for holding this hearing and understanding all these
technicalities. So we are going to hear directly from many of
the stakeholders who have been charged with implementing and
who would be most impacted by these proposals. Many of these
issues surrounding Federal electricity transmission break down
by region rather than by party. I look forward to the question-
and-answer segment to learn more about how Order 1000 will
affect my State, the State of Illinois, specifically, as well
as the Midwest region in general. So I am very eager to hear
testimony from Chairman Wellinghoff as well as the other
witnesses, and I look forward to a very informative,
inspirational, education and robust discussion on these very
important issues, Mr. Chairman. It is so good to be back in a
hearing with you once again.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Rush. Mr. Rush always
complains we don't have enough hearings.
At this time I would like to recognize the chairman
emeritus of the full committee, Mr. Barton of Texas, for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is very understandable that you may not have heard the
decision that Secretary Chu made since you have been doing such
good work on the floor the last several weeks on so many
issues. It is understandable that you might not have heard that
he made the decision to keep the siting authority at the
Department of Energy. We want you to keep doing the good work
and we will send you notes as developments occur on these other
issues.
Let me say on the siting issue that I think the Secretary
made the right decision. While I think it is reasonable for
FERC to get the authority given the fact that since the court
case in Virginia several years ago the Department of Energy has
not exercised its authority that we gave them in the Energy
Policy Act of 2005. There was a reason that we had a split
responsibility, and I was the chairman of the conference
committee and we thought about it quite a bit. We wanted the
Department of Energy as an independent agency to make a
transparent decision that a certain corridor needed to have new
transmission and then we wanted the FERC once that designation
was made to be responsible for working with the stakeholders
and to develop the actual permitting process and the specific
siting process. We thought it was best to have two different
groups do each part of the process. Since the court decision,
the Department of Energy has not really tried to designate any
new corridors, and I would encourage you, Madam Senior Advisor,
to work with the Secretary and the others in the department. If
you need additional legislation language, I am sure we can do
that on a bipartisan basis. But I think the system and the
current law will work if we start to try to make it to work.
The one thing that I did question about the request or the
delegation is, I think it is Congress's role to make those
decisions and I don't think the Executive Branch can just
delegate the explicit authority given to it under law.
With regard to FERC Order 1000, as Mr. Rush indicated, that
is a fairly complicated piece of work. As a past chairman of
this subcommittee and also of the full committee, I have been
involved for over 20 years with these issues and I can tell you
folks here in the audience that it is no surprise it is very
complicated. My main problem with FERC Order 1000 is that it
appears that under certain conditions an entity could be forced
to pay for something that they don't want to participate in,
don't receive a benefit from and yet they can still be forced
to pay. I think that is a problem and I think it needs to be
looked at.
Overall, though, I think FERC Order 1000 is a noble attempt
to try to bring some order out of what has been a somewhat
chaotic system with all the various RTOs and MSIOs and
independent marketers and still some parts they are in
regulated markets. It is a miracle that anything ever gets
sited and anything ever gets done.
So Mr. Chairman, it is good for you and Mr. Rush to be
continuing these hearings. Hopefully we will shed some light on
the issue.
With that, I want to yield to Mr. Terry. I think he has got
a unanimous consent request.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman Emeritus. I do ask
unanimous consent that I may submit for the record the APPA
letter report.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
Mr. Terry. Thank you. Yield.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.010

Mr. Barton. And I would yield to Mr. Shimkus for my final
minute.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Shimkus. And just to welcome the first panel and concur
with Mr. Barton's analysis. I served on the conference
committee also in 2005. I know what our intent was. I know what
the courts have ruled, which is against the intent of Congress,
for expedited siting. Even if you believe in the new green
world, you need new transmission and we need to be able to get
across State lines. So I think there will be a lot of folks in
support of that.
Chairman Wellinghoff, good to see you again. I still have
concerns with reliability if you want most of the coal plants
in this country to be decommissioned. I also have concerns, as
you know, on the projection on the gigawatts, yours versus the
EPA, as we discussed last time, and the transmission is another
big key to this. If we want reliability, we have to have
transmission, so hopefully we will be allies on this, and I
yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back his time.
I would also ask unanimous consent to enter into the record
the statement of the National Rural Electric Cooperative
Association. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.016

Mr. Whitfield. At this time I would like to recognize the
ranking member of the full Energy and Commerce Committee, Mr.
Waxman of California.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, not only for
recognizing me but for working with us on today's hearing on
electric transmission.
This is a vital issue. One reason it is so important is the
relationship between transmission and renewable energy.
Renewable energy is one of the cornerstones of a clean energy
economy. Over the next decade, the global clean energy market
is going to be worth $2.3 trillion and we cannot afford to
surrender this market to China or other countries with
aggressive clean energy policies.
But to compete effectively, we will need to increase
dramatically the amount of energy generated from renewable
sources. The good news is that our Nation has tremendous
renewable resources. There are excellent wind resources in the
middle of the country and substantial solar resources,
particularly in the southwest. In fact, every region of the
country has renewable resources that can be tapped to expand
renewable energy generation and reduce carbon pollution.
The challenge is that some of the best renewable resources
are often located in remote areas, far from the cities and
population centers that need clean electricity. And that brings
us to the issue of transmission. We are not going to achieve
our job creation and pollution reduction goals without new
transmission to connect our renewable resources to the electric
grid. There is no question that transmission is not the only
solution. Energy efficiency and other methods of reducing
electricity demand will play a crucial role.
Distributed clean energy generation is important, but I
don't think anyone seriously questions the need for some new
transmission lines if we are going to dramatically expand our
use of renewable energy.
In approaching this issue, we need to preserve a strong
role for local and State interests and expertise but we also
need to ensure that important interstate transmission lines
aren't blocked for purely parochial reasons.
This is a tough issue. It is an issue that has been the
subject of spirited debate during the past several years. The
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission recently tackled two key
aspects of this issue in its Order 1000. FERC staff submitted a
separate proposal to the Department of Energy related to FERC's
authority to site certain transmission lines when States fail
to do so. This is commonly referred to as Federal backstop
siting authority. Right now, the Department of Energy conducts
studies of transmission congestion and then designates National
Interest Electric Transmission Corridors. Within those
corridors, FERC has authority to site lines if the State
permitting agency fails to act on a permitting application for
one year.
I opposed this provision in 2005 and I think the last 6
years have demonstrated that it was the wrong approach. It
focused exclusively on congestion rather than on other
important factors like reliability and expanding renewable
generation. It was structured in a way that interfered with the
traditional authorities of State permitting agencies. There was
no link to regional planning, and the Federal backstop siting
authority even applied to transmission that didn't cross state
lines. Under the prior Administration, DOE also abused the
process by designating massive corridors that included whole
States.
FERC staff proposed that Secretary Chu delegate DOE's
authorities to FERC so that FERC could breathe new life into
this flawed provision. Yesterday, Secretary Chu decided not to
delegate DOE's authority as FERC proposed. I think that was the
right decision. However, Secretary Chu and Chairman Wellinghoff
also announced that they will work together to improve
implementation of this provision. Today's hearing is a good
opportunity for the committee to better understand the details
of how this new approach would work.
A broad range of views is represented on both of today's
panels and I look forward to the perspectives of our witnesses
on FERC's efforts to improve transmission planning and lower
cost allocation barriers to building new transmission.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Waxman.
We have with us today the Honorable Jon Wellinghoff, who is
Chairman of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, and as I
also stated, Ms. Lauren Azar, who is the Senior Advisor, Office
of the Secretary at the Department of Energy. Welcome to both
of you. We look forward to your expert testimony, and Mr.
Wellinghoff, I will recognize you for your 5-minute opening
statement.

STATEMENTS OF JON WELLINGHOFF, CHAIRMAN, FEDERAL ENERGY
REGULATORY COMMISSION; AND LAUREN AZAR, SENIOR ADVISOR, OFFICE
OF THE SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

STATEMENT OF JON WELLINGHOFF

Mr. Wellinghoff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Rush and members of the committee. Thank you for having me here
today. My name is Jon Wellinghoff and I am the Chairman of the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
The development of an efficient electric transmission
system benefits consumers by reducing barriers to trade with
and among regions, thereby enhancing competition in wholesale
electric markets. With this goal in mind and recognizing that
significant transmission investment is likely to be made in the
foreseeable future, the commission recently issued Order 1000.
Order 1000 revisits the commission's transmission planning and
cost allocation requirements to ensure that they are adequate
to support more efficient and cost-effective transmission
investment decisions moving forward. Through these changes,
Order 1000 will foster competitive markets to benefit
consumers, strengthen our national security and help revitalize
our economy.
I would like to highlight three major points about Order
No. 1000. First, Order No. 1000 emphasizes regional flexibility
and regional action. Within a general framework, each
transmission planning region determines its own transmission
needs by building upon an open and transparent process that is
already in place and each region will propose cost allocation
methods. Order No. 1000 does not establish preset regional
boundaries not does it prescribe how those regions plan their
systems. Nothing in Order 1000 requires either interconnect-
wide plan or interconnect-wide cost allocation. Second, Order
1000 states that those who do not benefit from new transmission
facilities should not pay. Third, Order 1000 is about
establishing effective processes for transmission planning and
cost allocation, not about requiring specific outcomes of those
processes. Order 1000 does not favor renewable energy resources
nor would such a preference be consistent with the Federal
Power Act or the commission's open access transmission policy.
Order 1000 does not require or subsidize the use of green
energy.
Order 1000 also recognizes the States' vital role in
protecting consumers. Order 1000 recognizes the unique
perspective that States can provide in regional transmission
planning processes. Nothing in Order 1000 is intended to
preempt or otherwise affect State laws or regulations with
respect to construction of transmission facilities.
Through the reforms adopted in Order 1000, the commission
seeks to ensure that the Nation's electric grid is prepared to
meet the challenges and realize the opportunities of the 21st
century. Order 1000 will reduce the inefficiencies that exist
today in today's transmission planning processes and the
uncertainty created by the lack of clear cost allocation
methods for regional and interregional transmission facilities.
Effective regional transmission planning and interregional
transmission coordination along with cost allocation reforms as
required by Order 1000 will help improve reliability, reduce
congestion, increase the deliverability of existing power
supplies, allow new domestic power supplies to be developed,
and help ensure that consumers have greater access to efficient
lower-cost electricity at just and reasonable rates.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wellinghoff follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.032

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Chairman Wellinghoff.
Ms. Azar, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LAUREN AZAR

Ms. Azar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Rush.
It is a pleasure to testify before you on an issue of utmost
importance: upgrading our electric infrastructure.
Today, I start my fifth month as Senior Advisor to
Secretary Chu. The Secretary hired me primarily to accomplish
one task: build new electric infrastructure. Transmission and
storage are my focus. As an attorney involved with permitting
of new transmission lines and a former commissioner at the
Wisconsin Public Service Commission, I come from the trenches.
Transmission is akin to mortar in a foundation. This Nation
requires a robust and resilient grid to connect its building
blocks. You need look no further than your own briefcases to
understand that our Nation's demand for electricity is changing
and doing so dramatically. How many gadgets do you carry that
require charging on a frequent basis, and when did you start
carrying them?
To propel this Nation forward in the global economy, we
must build a grid for the 21st century and we must build it
fast. Everyone knows the adage that Thomas Edison could
understand the mechanics of our current grid but what most
don't realize is that our grid can be visualized as a plate
balancing on top of a stick. When something is placed on one
side of the plate, a weight of an equal amount must be placed
on the other side to ensure stability. If too much
counterweight is placed, then the plate topples. The plate is
the grid; the weights and counterweights are generation and the
demand for electricity. The placement of those weights and
counterweights happens second by second. For about the last 130
years, we built the infrastructure necessary to ensure the
plate doesn't topple. While I will talk about the need for more
transmission generally, and it sounds like this committee
agrees with that, this Nation also needs to develop a new type
of grid, one that can't be described by plates, sticks and
weights.
While my written testimony discusses some of the barriers
to building more transmission, I would like to focus my
comments on three things the DOE is currently doing to remove
those barriers.
First, the power marketing administrations. The
department's PMAs are at the forefront of our transmission
authorities. Bonneville Power, or BPA, owns more than 15,000
miles of transmission, and the Western Area Power Marketing
Administration, or WAPMA, owns 17,000. The Recovery Act
provided both PMAs with resources to, among other things, build
new transmission. Both are moving forward expeditiously yet
with due diligence to do just that. Section 1222 of EPAct 2005
granted authority to Western and Southwestern to partner with
the private sector to construct and upgrade transmission
facilities in their service territories. Both the borrowing
authority and Section 1222 allow the Secretary through the PMAs
to help build transmission.
Secondly, the backstop siting has already been discussed in
the opening statements. Earlier this week, Secretary Chu and
Chairman Wellinghoff have announced they have agreed to
collaborate in their implementation of the Federal backstop
siting law, which was also created in EPAct 2005. After vetting
a proposal that he delegate his authorities to FERC, Secretary
Chu declined to do so but is working with the chairman to
develop processes to make the law more effectively. In addition
to its collaboration with FERC, DOE recognizes that it can
administer its 216(a) powers faster, better, with more
transparency and more efficiently. Consequently, among other
things, DOE will be doing the following: identify targeted
areas of congestion based on the evaluation of existing
information and on comments submitted by stakeholders; identify
narrower congested areas than the broad areas that had been
previously studied and solicit statements of interest from
transmission developers while considering what national
corridors to designate.
Number three, the rapid response team for transmission.
Just last week, the Obama Administration announced it would
accelerate the evaluation of seven proposed transmission
applications. The RRTT leverages a nine-agency collaborative
that was established through a 2009 MOU. As an aside, that MOU
was yet another authority based on another authority granted in
EPAct 2005, Section 216(h). The nine agencies of the 2009 MOU
have agreed to do the following and agree to the pilot
projects: ID all Federal agencies with jurisdiction over
transmission, coordinate the calendars of those agencies,
establish milestones and target dates for permit evaluation,
dedicate staff, and this may be one of the most important
aspects of it, dedicate staff that is going to evaluate the
transmission permit applications, and that staff is going to be
trained in transmission issues such as transmission
technologies, transmission economies and how transmission is
developed and to create an online dashboard that will document
the status. These seven projects will serve as demonstrations
of the streamlined Federal permitting and increase cooperation.
In closing, as someone who is passionate about the need to
modernize our grid, I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Azar follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.043

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, and we appreciate your
testimony. We actually didn't have an opportunity to read your
testimony because it came in pretty late last night, but thank
you for going through it with us this morning.
Mr. Wellinghoff, would I be correct in saying that one of
the reasons for issuing Order 1000 was a result of the Illinois
decision in the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals? Was that one of
the reasons that you all decided to issue Order 1000 or was
that just one of the many reasons?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Mr. Chairman, I don't believe that court
case was a reason for issuing Order 1000. Certainly, Order 1000
talks about costs and benefits, and the 7th Circuit case talks
about costs and benefits as well, but I am not sure it was a
reason for issuing Order 1000.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, one of the reasons I bring that up, I
was reading in that decision, and the court made some
references about the lack of analysis on benefits and
reliability and so forth, and as I was reading some of the
comments of the witnesses that will be on other panels, they
were also talking about the lack of clarity in Order 1000 on
establishing benefits and calculating benefits, and I was
curious from your perspective, do you feel like it is valid to
criticize Order 1000 on the lack of clarity of the way you
determine benefits or do you feel like that is something that
you will address before it becomes final?
Mr. Wellinghoff. The order is final, although it is subject
to rehearing. We certainly will look at those comments with
respect to clarity but it is sort of the glass half empty, the
glass half full. Some people think there is not enough clarity,
other people think there is not enough flexibility. What we
wanted to try to do is preserve as much flexibility as possible
for the reasons to ultimately determine what they believed were
appropriate benefits in their bucket of benefits for that
particular region. So Order 1000 was structured in a way to
give the regions maximum flexibility. There are some people who
are asking for more clarity, but if we give more clarity, that
means more direction from Washington, more oversight from
Washington and more specificity by us, and there is a lot of
people who would then push back the other way on that. So it
can go either way on that.
Mr. Whitfield. Right. You are just trying to reach a fine
balance, right?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. Would you describe how Order No. 1000 will
impact utilities and stakeholders in traditionally regulated
regions such as the Northwest and Southeast as opposed to
organized wholesale markets?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Well, I think it will be similar in the
sense that both of those areas, those distinct areas, will have
to have regional planning authorities, and in fact, they do.
Even in the areas that do not have organized markets--the West,
Northwest, that you talked about, Southeast as well--they do
have now regional planning authorities that could qualify under
Order 1000 as part of the Order 1000 process. So I don't see
that there will be specific large differences between the two.
Both areas will have to comply with the premise of Order 1000.
However, Order 1000 as I mentioned before has sufficient
flexibility so that those regions can tailor their regional
activities to fit their regional needs.
Mr. Whitfield. Ms. Azar, you have been over there, I think
you said 5 months maybe. Is that right?
Ms. Azar. Just completing four.
Mr. Whitfield. When we talk about transmission needs of the
country, there certainly are a lot of different studies about
that, and what analysis have you seen since you have been at
the Department of Energy that would reflect exactly how many
transmission lines do we need, how many new ones do we need and
what is the condition of the transmission infrastructure in the
country in general, would you say? You know, we hear some
criticism that it is an old system, it is outdated. What is
your analysis just from your professional experience in that
area about where do we really stand today on transmission needs
in America?
Ms. Azar. There are a variety of needs, and, you know, I
don't rely on any one specific analysis because what I can tell
you is, any specific analysis is based on assumptions that are
guesses for what the future looks like, and we know it is going
to be wrong, right? But we need to figure out a way in which to
build the infrastructure that is going to work in the most of
our guesses with what the future looks like, the most robust,
the most resilient and the most flexible.
Our needs are great, not just to build transmission itself
to convey the electrons but we need a lot of different kinds of
technologies for the grid to make it more resilient against
things like what happened in San Diego, and I don't like to be
an alarmist but what happened in San Diego with regards to the
blackout in Arizona, California and New Mexico should never
have happened. That was--you know, we plan the electric grid to
accommodate at least one bad thing happening, and one bad thing
happened but the grid went down there and so that tells me that
we do have issues more than just meets the eye.
Mr. Whitfield. And that was a result of one individual
mistake being made, right?
Ms. Azar. That is correct.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Ms. Azar. And he was not intending harm.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Mr. Rush, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Wellinghoff, what role does Order 1000 provide for
as relates to State regulators in the regional transmission
planning process?
Mr. Wellinghoff. It actually provides for a robust role for
State regulators. In fact, includes in there a provision for
cost recovery for allowances for State regulators to actually
participate. So we are making every provision we can to ensure
that they are included as part of the stakeholder process. They
are included in the process in regional planning. In fact, I
have had discussions with State regulators and I explained to
them that they in fact can decide what their region will look
like. I mean, they are the ones who really have the power. I
have literally told them, they have the power to determine how
these regions are formed and what the regions will consist of,
and so as such, they really can step up and take the ball and
run with it, and we have given them that opportunity in Order
1000.
Mr. Rush. So what has been their overall general response?
Are they generally in favor of Order 1000?
Mr. Wellinghoff. The ones I have talked to in the West have
been pretty enthusiastic about that idea because they have sort
of flexible regions in the West that have changed over time,
and so this is an opportunity I think for some of the
regulators in the non-RTO regions in the West to take hold. In
the East, they have already more established RTO regions so
usually those market regions are the planning authorities, and
in fact, in those areas in the East, the regulators are
participating in those RTO regions very heavily already, so
they seem to be oK with it.
Mr. Rush. And that would also include most of the Midwest
also?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Yes.
Mr. Rush. Order 1000 relies heavily on regional
transmission planning processes to develop and implement cost
allocation methods for new transmission facilities. How will
FERC ensure that it does not delegate too much authority to
regional stakeholders?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Well, through a number of ways. Certainly
by the overall guidelines that we have set forth in Order 1000,
by the review process that we have with respect to the planning
processes that will come back and the cost allocation processes
that will come back. We have to approve those in a compliance
order and also through the complaint process where if any of
the regions are engaging in this planning in a way that goes
outside of those boundaries, anyone can come to FERC, file a
complaint and we can resolve the issue. So we ultimately have
the ultimate decision-making authority with respect to those
activities, even though we have given the regions all this
flexibility. I mean, we let them go off and hopefully they can
solve their own problems but if they can't, FERC is the
ultimate arbiter of the final activity there.
Mr. Rush. The courts have held that cost allocation methods
must satisfy, and I quote ``cost causation principle.'' Can you
explain what your understanding of that principle is? How does
the emphasis on beneficiaries in Order 1000 meet that test?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Yes, I can. It is my understanding that
the D.C. Circuit and also the 7th Circuit case have indicated
that people who benefit can be in essence those cost causers.
So to the extent, and again, we have made it very clear in the
rule, to the extent that there are benefits, then costs can be
allocated to individuals that benefits are determined but the
determination of those benefits, and this goes back somewhat to
the clarification question of the chairman, the determination
of those benefits and how those benefits will be structured
will be up to the individual regions of how they will determine
what will actually be benefits, but there can be that causation
link between costs and benefits, as I understand it from a
number of circuit court decisions.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you, and I yield
back the balance.
Mr. Wellinghoff. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Rush.
At this time I recognize Mr. Terry for 5 minutes.
Mr. Terry. Thank you.
Mr. Wellinghoff, help me, because I am uncertain what a
region is and how it is developed, and it is all interstate? Is
it allowed under the order for States to band together? I just
can't get my mind around the definition of region, so work me
through that.
Mr. Wellinghoff. Certainly. I would be happy to. The way we
have defined a region in the Order 1000 is pretty open. It
allows the States to determine what they want to be a region.
The minimum we have said, it has got to be at least two
utilities, so you can't just have one utility be a region. You
have to plan with more than another utility. But ideally, it
can be as large as PJM, which is a very large regional
transmission organization that goes all the way from New Jersey
to Chicago, extremely large, 133,000 megawatts of power under
control, or it could be as small as two utilities in the
Southeast. I believe that there is two or three utilities in
the Southeast that have decided to form themselves into a
region. I think South Carolina Electric and Gas and one other
utility, I believe, have decided to form themselves into a
region, and again, this is ultimately with the approval and
assent of their State public utility commissioners. Those
utility commissioners make determinations----
Mr. Terry. But they can only do within the one State so if
it is multi-State, is that where FERC comes in and organizes?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Well, no. If it is within one State, it is
still only related to interstate transmission, and transmission
in that State of a certain voltage----
Mr. Terry. And you are saying----
Mr. Wellinghoff (continuing). And certain characteristic in
nature is determined to be interstate transmission. So you
could have, you know, within one State transmission that is
still interstate transmission under FERC's jurisdiction. But
with respect to a utility's participation in that particular
entity, a State commission is going to have a big say in that
as well.
Mr. Terry. Ms. Azar, does DOE have any concerns about the
unyielding nature of the definition of region?
Ms. Azar. DOE is supportive of the Order 1000. We think it
is a good step towards getting transmission built. As the
chairman has indicated, they had to weigh and balance a lot of
different interests in this and are trying to give flexibility
at the same time being prescriptive, and I think we will be
able to tell with time if they reached the balance
appropriately that allowed us to build transmission.
Mr. Terry. Mr. Wellinghoff, does FERC Order 1000 allow for
a preference in energy depending on how it is generated? For
example, will clean energy have a preference over, let us say,
coal-generated electricity?
Mr. Wellinghoff. No.
Mr. Terry. None at all?
Mr. Wellinghoff. The regions will determine how to plan for
the transmission they need, and that transmission will be
driven by market forces. So whatever the market forces are with
respect to the particular resources that are developed in that
region, those will be the resources that will get on those
transmission lines.
Mr. Terry. OK. So there is no mechanism to say public
policy requires that clean energy be used?
Mr. Wellinghoff. The market forces will be driven by market
things like fuel prices and other characteristics and also will
be driven by both State and Federal public policy
determinations as they are in all the States in this country.
There are some 30-odd States that have renewable portfolio
standards, for example. Those are in essence market forces that
have been created by State legislatures that set forth certain
resource decisions in the markets.
Mr. Terry. Ms. Azar, any comment?
Ms. Azar. No. With regards to public policy, public policy
when it is required and mandated is used in transmission
planning to determine what sort of infrastructure we need, and
whether it be, you know, a requirement that, you know, a
certain State complies with a renewable portfolio standard,
that would be one thing that the utilities have to comply with.
So in order to predict what the future looks like, you are
going to assume that that is true. The same thing that if, for
instance, a State would come up and say look, you need to
assume that clean coal technology is going to work and that is
what our future is going to look like, transmission planning
would incorporate that kind of public policy and Order 1000
requires that.
Mr. Terry. Thank you. Yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
At this time I will recognize the gentleman from Michigan,
Mr. Dingell, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your courtesy and I
commend you for this hearing.
These questions are to Mr. Wellinghoff. First, welcome.
Second, I hope you will answer these questions yes or no
because that will enable us to get a lot more on the record.
One, does Order 1000 provide subsidies for renewable energy or
transmission lines to carry renewable energy? Please answer yes
or no.
Mr. Wellinghoff. No.
Mr. Dingell. Does Order 1000 provide incentive rates for
renewable energy lines? Yes or no.
Mr. Wellinghoff. No.
Mr. Dingell. By the way, thank you for your cooperation. No
disrespect is intended here.
Mr. Wellinghoff. I am happy to answer for you.
Mr. Dingell. Does Order 1000 require anybody to pay for
transmittal for which they receive no benefit? Yes or no.
Mr. Wellinghoff. No.
Mr. Dingell. Does Order 1000 require anybody to use or
build renewable energy generation? Yes or no.
Mr. Wellinghoff. No.
Mr. Dingell. My home State of Michigan has a renewable
portfolio standard that must be met by in-State generation. In
other words, a wind farm in South Dakota cannot be used to meet
Michigan RPS requirements. Would a regional planning evaluation
under Order 1000 take into account laws like that of Michigan?
Yes or no.
Mr. Wellinghoff. It would be up--that is a hard yes or no
one. It would be up to the regional planning group to make that
decision.
Mr. Dingell. OK. And wherever we get to the point where we
have some difficulty on this yes or no, I would expect that you
would submit some additional comments for the record if you
please.
Mr. Wellinghoff. I would be happy to do that, Mr. Dingell.
Mr. Dingell. Now, in Order 1000, FERC notes that after
Order 890 was issued in 2007, conferences and requests for
comments were held in 2009. Did these conferences or comments
include discussions of issues that were ultimately included in
Order 1000?
Mr. Wellinghoff. I believe so but I will have to submit
something to you on that to make sure.
Mr. Dingell. And again, I apologize for this, but time is
so limited here.
Were public utilities allowed to participate in the
conferences or requests for comments?
Mr. Wellinghoff. I believe so.
Mr. Dingell. By delegating much of the responsibility for
transmission planning and cost allocation to multiple and
diverse regions, do you risk dilution of consistence and
supportable national energy policy? Is that a risk?
Mr. Wellinghoff. I don't believe so, no. I believe that I
have a lot of faith in the regions.
Mr. Dingell. And I in you and I hope that you will feel
free to add additional comments.
Order 1000 states FERC's intention was not to disrupt the
progress made with respect to transmission planning and
investment in transmission infrastructure. However, isn't the
act of requiring regions to develop inter- and intraregional
planning processes disruptive?
Mr. Wellinghoff. There is an assumption to your premise of
your question that is incorrect. Order 1000 does not require
interregional planning.
Mr. Dingell. OK. And I don't want you to be hesitant about
disagreeing with me if you do.
Claims have been made on both sides of this issue that the
policies in Order 1000 will either greatly increase rates on
consumers or will help keep rates down. Which do you think will
be the case?
Mr. Wellinghoff. I think it will improve efficiencies and
keep rates down.
Mr. Dingell. Well, we have completed this in 1 minute--or
rather we have 1 minute and 15 seconds.
Ms. Azar, do you have any comments to make on the points
that we have just had?
Ms. Azar. No. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Wellinghoff, the statutory authority for
Order 1000, is that the Federal Power Act or is that other
enactments that we have made such as some of the conservation
energy legislation that we have passed in the last couple
years?
Mr. Wellinghoff. It is the Federal Power Act, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Only?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. OK. Do you need additional statutory authority
to make this work or to enforce that properly or to see to it
that the process goes forward?
Mr. Wellinghoff. I do not believe so.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I yield back 26 seconds. Thank
you.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Dingell.
Mr. McKinley, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I haven't had a chance to read your 620 pages of this order
yet, but from what I can gather, everyone else is going to have
trouble understanding that as well and some of the questions
that have already come up suggest there are still a lot of
questions, like the regional planning. In your testimony, you
say it does not establish regional boundaries but yet in the
testimony you said there has to be regional planning. Who is
going to set that? I am a little confused, just like
Congressman Terry, as to who sets these boundaries. Are these
going to be like the football conferences that they keep
changing all the time? Can we have overlapping regions? I
thought I gathered a little of that earlier. Can you describe
just a little bit about what those councils could be, these
planning groups? If it is not set up, who sets them up? The
companies themselves, these two companies?
Mr. Wellinghoff. To my knowledge, everyone in the country,
these are already set up. In some places, they are part of the
processes of the organized wholesale markets, the regional
transmission organizations or the independent system operators.
In other places where those don't exist and there is six of
those under our jurisdictions, where they don't exist, which is
primarily the Southeast and the West except for California,
they have the States and the utilities and the transmission
owners and other stakeholders have already formed themselves
largely into regions, but if the State utility commissioners or
other----
Mr. McKinley. So is West Virginia-which one are we in?
Which region are we in then if you say that they are already--
--
Mr. Wellinghoff. I believe you are in PJM.
Mr. McKinley. And PJM would be?
Mr. Wellinghoff. A regional transmission organization that
goes all the way from New Jersey to Chicago.
Mr. McKinley. OK.
Mr. Wellinghoff. It has been in place for many years.
Mr. McKinley. One of your answers I found was interesting
because it was back to Congressman Dingell's question. You said
there is no subsidy, but I am a little confused about it and
you can help me out here with this because of the Caparden
article that came out in July. So what you are saying is that
prior to renewables the cost is X to the customers in West
Virginia, but then when we bring renewables on and it becomes
cost X plus something else, isn't that a subsidy?
Mr. Wellinghoff. I am sorry. I am not familiar with the
Caparden article
Mr. McKinley. Well, it was published on July 28th and it
said this is going to be the--that your ruling will be the most
progressive clean energy action the Federal Government will
take this year resulting in thousands of miles of new line to
bring renewable energy to your home. I am not opposed to new
energy but I think that we all have to--you said there is no
subsidy but it sure smells to me like in these 620 pages that
there is a subsidy in here somehow for renewable energy because
if the cost prior to renewables is X, it is going to increase
once we put a new transmission line into a wind farm that that
cost is going to increase, so why isn't that a subsidy? Is that
just Washington talk?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Mr. McKinley, I have read all 620 pages
and I can assure you there is no subsidy in there for
renewables.
Mr. McKinley. If their cost goes up by having renewables
because we are putting a line in for a wind farm and now I have
to pay more, why is that not a subsidy?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Again, I take you back to the 620 pages.
There is nothing in there with respect to one kind of----
Mr. McKinley. Is this about the definition of benefit?
Mr. Wellinghoff. No, it is not about the definition of
benefit at all. It is ultimately about what is in the 620
pages, which has nothing to do with a particular resource. It
has to do with planning and allocation of transmission costs.
Ms. Azar. Congressman, can I weigh in here?
Mr. McKinley. Please.
Ms. Azar. I just wanted to point out in PJM alone, the lack
of transmission cost your constituents and the other
constituents in PJM, $1.4 billion in 2010 alone, and by
building more transmission and getting the system to be more
efficient, we are not going to be letting that money on the
table anymore and so there is ways in which, you know, money is
going to be saved as we are bringing on new generation that is
moving us into the new economy.
Mr. McKinley. I am just trying to understand the effect,
what the likelihood of increased cost is going to be under
Order 1000 to the residents of West Virginia.
Ms. Azar. I actually think they will go down.
Mr. McKinley. Mr. Wellinghoff, can you tell me, is it
likely? What is the cost going to be to the residents?
Mr. Wellinghoff. I think as Ms. Azar has indicated, to the
extent that we can reduce congestion in West Virginia, we can
provide access to West Virginia to lower cost resources,
ultimately your costs will be lower.
Mr. McKinley. So Order 1000 you think is going to lower
utility costs?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Order 1000 will allow for the planning and
cost allocation of efficient transmission. Efficient
transmission can in fact lower cost.
Mr. McKinley. Do you think it will?
Mr. Wellinghoff. I can give you one particular example in
northern New Jersey, for example.
Mr. McKinley. I don't care about northern New Jersey.
Mr. Wellinghoff. Well, it is an example----
Mr. McKinley. I asked about West Virginia, the 1st District
of West Virginia.
Mr. Wellinghoff. Again, efficient transmission and markets
will lower your cost.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Griffith, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Our districts don't touch but I am in the
same neighborhood as Mr. McKinley, so I do have concerns there
because, you know, it is hard to cheaper than what we used to
have, and I understand some environmental concerns, and I if
understood you correctly, Mr. Wellinghoff, the 620 pages, and
I, like Mr. McKinley, have not had an opportunity to get
through all 620 pages of it, but as I understand from your
testimony previously, the 620 pages doesn't have anything to do
with that, that has to do with public policy decisions made at
the State and Federal level. Is that correct?
Mr. Wellinghoff. I am sorry. I don't understand the
question.
Mr. Griffith. Doesn't the fact that if costs go up because
we are bringing in renewable energy and new sources of energy,
that is not because of your transmission line? If I understood
your testimony correctly, that is not because of the
transmission line or the 620 pages of Order 1000 but because of
other public policy decisions made by the State and Federal
Governments.
Mr. Wellinghoff. Any public policy decisions that influence
the markets will influence the costs in those markets.
Mr. Griffith. All right. So let me ask you, if we are
building a small wind farm on top of a mountain in my district,
who pays for that electricity to get to the grid? Is that
something that is paid for by the developer of the wind farm or
is that going to be picked up by the region? And I am also in--
I always get the initials backward--but PJM.
Mr. Wellinghoff. If it a gen tie line, a line going from
the wind farm into a particular transmission line, which gen
ties are not part of Order 1000, then the developer will pay
for the line.
Mr. Griffith. Now, apparently in March you stated that ``I
believe that additional Federal authority with respect to
transmission planning, site and cost allocation would
significantly increase the likelihood that those needed
facilities would be constructed in a timely manner.'' In Order
1000, you assert that FERC already has this authority, and you
indicated in answering to Mr. Dingell that the authority came
out of the Federal Power Act, and I am wondering, just so I can
save myself a lot of time, where will I find that authority in
the Federal Power Act and was it there before and you hadn't
stumbled across it, or what is different between now and March?
Mr. Wellinghoff. I am sorry. What specific authority are
you referring to?
Mr. Griffith. OK. Mr. Dingell asked you about the authority
to do the things that you need to do.
Mr. Wellinghoff. It is under the Federal Power Act, but I
didn't understand the first part of your question. I am sorry.
Mr. Griffith. OK. I am looking at a statement here that was
given to me that says that in March you testified that ``I
believe that additional Federal authority with respect to
transmission planning, siting and cost allocation would
significantly increase the likelihood that those needed
facilities would be constructed in a timely manner,'' and I am
just wondering, guide me through how I reconcile March to now.
Mr. Wellinghoff. OK. That is a fair question, and I am not
certain--I will tell you quite frankly, I am not certain what
my reference was there. I perhaps was referring to the issue of
siting, which is not under Order 1000. Order 1000 only relates
to planning and cost allocation. There has been a lot of
discussions about siting back and forth, the recent decision by
Secretary Chu and others, so I may have been referring to
siting specifically.
Mr. Griffith. And maybe we can have a conversation later or
maybe we can figure out how you can rectify that.
Mr. Wellinghoff. I would be happy to.
Mr. Griffith. I am not trying to get a ``gotcha.'' I am
just trying to sort it all out because I am one of those people
that, you know, I may not get to it today but I am going to
read through the 620 pages at some point, and it would save me
a lot of time instead of having to read through the whole power
act and figure out what part gives you authority, if you could
get somebody to get me a cite for that so I can read that as
well.
Mr. Wellinghoff. I would be happy to do that.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much. I appreciate it.
Mr. Wellinghoff. Thank you.
Mr. Griffith. Mr. Chairman, with that I will yield back my
time.
Mr. Whitfield. Ms. Azar, I want to just ask you one
question. You had made a comment about moving into the new
economy, and could you just explain to us what is your
perspective of the new economy?
Ms. Azar. Well, the new economy includes things like this,
that we are powering up and it is likely a dramatic increase in
the use of electricity through electric vehicles, through
continued development of gadgets like this, and also things
like cybersecurity where we want to make sure that our grid is
resilient and strong and that we are competing with--able to
compete with the global economy. So we need a resilient grid.
We need, you know, good resources and we need it to be at a
reasonable cost.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize. I had to
go to the floor and spend 5 minutes talking about Yucca
Mountain, which is another favorite topic of mine. I know, Mr.
Wellinghoff, you understand that.
Some general questions to the Department of Energy. Do you
have any views on FERC Order No. 1000?
Ms. Azar. Yes. In general, the Department of Energy
supports FERC Order 1000 as a good step forward in trying to
get transmission built. I think time is going to tell whether
or not it is sufficient. They tried to balance some very
difficult interest there.
Mr. Shimkus. In your testimony, you identified that it
takes about 10 years to build transmission and approximately 3
years to build new generation facilities. I have been a member
15 years. I have still got some general facilities that we are
trying to get built, so I don't know where those--maybe that is
after all the permitting.
Ms. Azar. It just depends on what the generation is. I
mean, natural gas and, you know, certain kinds of renewables
can be built very quickly. Nuclear and baseload coal plants
take much longer.
Mr. Shimkus. What implications do the differing development
periods have on resources planning? In other words, you have
got 10 and 3----
Ms. Azar. Significant differences. You know, transmission
planning--usually when people are doing planning, it is a lot
easier to plan in the near term than the long term, and so when
you are thinking about some dramatic changes in, you know, how
energy is going to move, how our populations are going to move,
how our economy is going to move, it is a lot more difficult to
predict where we are going to be in the future, and so when you
are thinking about transmission, and it takes so much longer to
build transmission, you are looking in the far term and so
predicting with accuracy is not something that frankly is a
goal predicting, you know, essentially designing a system that
is going to accommodate a lot of different hypothetical futures
is what we do in transmission. That is not what you do when you
are trying to decide what kind of generation to build and where
to build that.
Mr. Shimkus. And why I am going down this line of
questioning is that we do know with clean air, interstate
transport rule or whatever the name of it is, that there is
generation that is going to be retired. In fact, there was an
announcement that two coal-fired power plants would go offline,
about 600 megawatts in total that will not be available, as in
the last hearing, baseload generation. I think it affects
reliability concerns.
But it sounds like we may be able to build at least some
new generation in the near term but new transmission lines to
connect this generation as you were just answering could be put
off.
Ms. Azar. No, no, I didn't say put off. There is a
disconnect between the planning horizons which actually creates
difficulties. It doesn't mean transmission should be put off.
It is actually the exact opposite. Because transmission takes
so long to plan and build, we need to do it now so that we can
accommodate new generation.
Mr. Shimkus. That is a better way to put it, and I
appreciate. With that disconnect, that does affect reliability.
I mean, if you have generation and you don't have transmission,
I mean, the whole baseload debate----
Ms. Azar. I think you and I are using the term
``reliability'' differently. With regards to how reliable the
system is, that is exactly what we--what is why we do the
planning.
Mr. Shimkus. But the disconnect between the building of new
generation and the transmission lines can cause problems.
Ms. Azar. It can cause difficulties, correct.
Mr. Shimkus. Do you believe the 9th Circuit decision in the
California Wilderness Coalition versus DOE impaired DOE's
ability to carry out its duties under Section 216 of the
Federal Power Act?
Ms. Azar. I think we need to do it differently, and we are
doing it differently.
Mr. Shimkus. And what do you believe are the primary
barriers to building transmission in this country?
Ms. Azar. How long do we have?
Mr. Shimkus. I have 48 seconds.
Ms. Azar. All right. There is a lot of different barriers.
It depends on different regions, and I set forth just some of
them in my written. I apologize that I didn't get it to you
sooner but we didn't have enough notice for getting it in on
time. With regards to the barriers, things like market power,
things like, you know, the lack of willingness of load-serving
entities to want to sign power purchase agreements for merchant
generation for us to allow to do the proper planning is another
one. Yes, you keep looking at the clock, which makes me more
and more nervous. I would be happy to talk with you, sir,
offline or submit further comments on the record.
Mr. Shimkus. No, we appreciate it. Thank you for your time.
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
Mr. Green, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to our panel.
Chairman Wellinghoff, Texas has led the way in identifying
competitive renewable energy zones and ensuring the development
of adequate transmission infrastructure to bring the new
renewable resources from those renewable rich zones to the
concentrated loads in our urban area. Is it fair to say that
Order 1000 provides a structure for other regions of the
country to likewise identify and build transmission
infrastructure that is needed to bring new renewable resources
online?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Mr. Green, I would agree that Texas is a
great model. You have done a great job down there in Texas.
Even though FERC has no jurisdiction with respect to
transmission planning and cost all and Order 1000----
Mr. Green. We are all familiar with ERCOT.
Mr. Wellinghoff (continuing). Does not apply to Texas
specifically, but certainly the types of things that Texas has
done with building the $5 billion worth of transmission in
Texas are the types of things that other regions could look at.
They will have that opportunity in planning processes and
processes that are set forth and structured in Order 1000 for
those other regions, yes.
Mr. Green. Transmission development is done incredibly
well, as you said, in Texas using your regional approach. Are
you surprised by some of the criticism of the order?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Well, there is always going to be
criticism to anything that is suggested from a Federal
regulatory standpoint. Again, we are trying to give as much
flexibility to those regions as possible, and sometimes giving
flexibility, you get criticism coming back the other way, as I
indicated from the question of the chairman earlier about
clarity. If you give too much flexibility, people think you are
not being clear enough, and if you give too much clarity,
people think you are being too restrictive. So again, we are
trying to strike a balance, trying to give those regions that
balance they need to do what they need to do to ensure they get
the transmission built to economically reduce costs for
consumers.
Mr. Green. Well, I know we have done great with growth of
wind power in west Texas, but it doesn't do any good in west
Texas. The customers are in Dallas-Fort Worth, Houston,
Galveston, San Antonio, so that commitment there. Mr. Transeth,
who will be testifying on our next panel on behalf of the
Coalition for Fair Transmission Policy, writes that ``FERC
Order 1000 is deficient not so much on what it says but more
what it doesn't say. Under the Order, the commission delegates
to regions the ability to determine how transmission planning
will be conducted and how costs will be allocated with very
little, if any, guidance on the parameters of such important
decisions.'' Mr. Transeth also writes, ``In particular, the
order provides no guidance to regions on how benefits should be
defined, thus leaving open the very real possibility regions
can adopt extremely broad definitions and result in unfounded
conclusions that everyone benefits from new transmission and
should all pay, thus socializing the transmission costs.'' What
do you say to this criticism?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Well, FERC will provide the ultimate
guidance to the extent that a particular region can make
decisions, can't arrive at their own decisions with the
flexibility that we have given them. It will fall back to FERC
to ultimately set forth a cost allocation methodology and make
those decisions, and we have made that clear in the order. So
again, I think the criticism is unfounded because again, we do
try to give the regions the amount of flexibility and the
amount of room that they need to do what they need to do for
the regions, but again, if that clarity and preciseness is
needed in the sense that they can't make the decision
themselves within the structure that we have given in Order
1000, then ultimately when those compliance plans come in
showing that they haven't made a decision, FERC will make the
decision for them. I don't relish that. I don't think that is
the best way to do it, but again, that is the ultimate end of
the line where the buck stops with FERC.
Mr. Green. For the most part our Texas grid is regulated
under ERCOT, an RTO that is actually regulated at the State
level and not by FERC. A small part of Texas falls in the
Southwest Power Pool, though, and it is my understanding that
SPP first began its process for determining its regional
planning process shortly after FERC first proposed its regional
planning and cost allocation rule in 2010. Was the SPP
methodology approved by FERC?
Mr. Wellinghoff. We set some parameters out in Order 890
with respect to planning, so to that extent, and they did file
a compliance plan for Order 890, so to that extent, we did
review their planning process. We certainly haven't reviewed
the one that would be under Order 1000 as of yet, and I believe
you have got Nick Brown from SPP who is going to testify here
before you today.
Mr. Green. Have any other RTOs sent updated planning and
cost allocation methodology to FERC for approval since the rule
was first proposed in 2010, and if so, were those approved? Was
there pushback in the region on the methodology, et cetera?
First of all, I guess, were updated plans and cost allocation
submitted to FERC?
Mr. Wellinghoff. There have been some submitted. Some are
pending before us, which I can't talk about because they are
pending cases before us, but there have been some submitted.
Mr. Green. Some have been approved?
Mr. Wellinghoff. I believe some have been approved, but
there are a number that are pending right now before us as
well.
Mr. Green. And the last thing, although I am out of time,
Mr. Chairman, has there been pushback on the methodology?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Certainly there has been differing sides
on the methodology, and again, that is what FERC does is, we
resolve those issues as to the differing positions on
particular methodologies.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Colorado, Mr. Gardner, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you as well
to the witnesses.
Mr. Wellinghoff, a question for you. Are you familiar with
the cap-and-trade legislation that passed the House a couple
years ago?
Mr. Wellinghoff. No, I am not.
Mr. Gardner. Were you familiar with any of the amendments
that were added to it in terms of transmission siting issues,
the manager's amendment?
Mr. Wellinghoff. I don't believe so, no.
Mr. Gardner. There was an amendment that was added in the
negotiations at the end of the process, and I will read you a
summary of the amendment. It basically passed onto the bill. It
provided FERC with siting authority for the construction of
certain high-priority interstate transmission lines constructed
in the western interconnection and amended the National
Interstate Electric Transmission Corridor. The DOE/FERC
delegation proposal, is that the same kind of idea? If you
aren't familiar with that amendment, perhaps you could get back
to me.
Mr. Wellinghoff. I would be happy to get back to you on
that.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you very much. And then I will be asking
this question later as well to some other witnesses, but it is
my understanding that the order, the FERC Order 1000, requires
each public utility transmission provider to participate in the
regional transmission planning process. While some regions of
the country have regional transmittal organizations that could
run such a process, others do not. Could you explain to me how
the regional planning requirement would work for States like
Colorado that aren't part of----
Mr. Wellinghoff. Could you explain to me which ones don't
have those--my understanding is everyone--Colorado, in fact, is
in one of the western regional planning entities. I am not
sure. There is a couple out there, I am not sure which one it
is in, but in fact, they are already in one and they are
already conducting regional planning.
Mr. Gardner. Well, perhaps I can get back to you with
further details of the question. It is my understanding from a
number of the public utility providers that they are not right
now in an RTO.
Mr. Wellinghoff. They are not in an RTO but they are in a
regional planning entity. There are regional planning entities.
RTOs and regional planning entities aren't necessarily the same
thing. A lot of RTOs do the regional planning but in other
areas where they don't have RTOs, they just have regional
planning entities that in essence are an informal group of
utilities who come together with stakeholders including State
commissioners and transmission owners and consumers and others
that participate in these processes. There is one called West
Connect and there is ColumbiaGrid, and there is a number of
other ones in the West, and I know that Colorado----
Mr. Gardner. Perhaps you could follow up with your office a
little bit more with this question because there are some
concerns from my constituents.
Mr. Wellinghoff. Sure.
Mr. Gardner. I yield back my time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. At this time I recognize the
gentleman from Texas, Dr. Burgess, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to our
witnesses for being here.
Mr. Wellinghoff, kind of following up on what Mr. Gardner
was asking, the regional planning entity, Texas, as I
understand it, is sort of its own regional planning entity. Is
that correct?
Mr. Wellinghoff. ERCOT is the regional planning entity, and
in fact, they are again outside of our jurisdiction and not
under Order 1000.
Mr. Burgess. As it should be. And just to follow up on some
of the stuff that Mr. Green was asking, are there implications
for Texas about the rule that is being discussed this morning?
So ERCOT is outside but there are other areas that will be
affected?
Mr. Wellinghoff. There is a very small piece. I believe
that it is in SPP that is already part of the SPP planning
process and participates and will be affected to the extent
that they are part of what SPP already does and then what SPP
needs to conform to vis-`-vis Order 1000.
Mr. Burgess. Now, one of the things that we see happening
in Texas is of course all of the wind occurs in places where
people don't live and people live in places where the wind
doesn't blow, so getting the power from the wind farms in west
Texas to the population centers in the metroplex requires an
east-west transmission line, which is essentially going to
bisect my district. Now, the planning for that, is that all
handled at the State level through the public utility
commission?
Mr. Wellinghoff. In Texas?
Mr. Burgess. In Texas.
Mr. Wellinghoff. I believe so but I am not that familiar
with----
Mr. Burgess. So FERC is not involved in the----
Mr. Wellinghoff. No.
Mr. Burgess. There is not a Federal role in the siting of
those transmission lines?
Mr. Wellinghoff. No.
Mr. Burgess. It occurs at the State level?
Mr. Wellinghoff. That is correct.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Chairman, in the interest of comity, I am
going to yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. You are so kind. Thanks.
Mr. Walden, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank you for
holding this hearing. I have got a couple of questions here.
Picking up a bit on what my colleague from Colorado asked
about the western regions, now, it is my understanding, non-
jurisdictional utilities such as municipalities and the
Bonneville Power Administration have raised various concerns on
rehearing of FERC Order 1000. specifically, for BPA, the
Transmission System Act of 1974 charges the BPA Administrator
with determining what transmission investments are necessary
and appropriate. BPA has also expressed concerns to FERC that
this responsibility is non-delegable. Also, BPA's capital is
limited. The Administrator is required to include proposed
expenditures in his budget submission to the Congress. BPA has
expressed concerns to FERC that obligations of its capital must
be decided upon by the Administrator consistent with that
statutory budget process.
So Mr. Wellinghoff, can you assure me the commission will
thoroughly consider and be responsive to these concerns?
Mr. Wellinghoff. I can assure you of that.
Mr. Walden. You can?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Yes.
Mr. Walden. Good. Thank you, sir. As you know, the Pacific
Northwest had implemented extensive and transparent
transmission planning processes that have identified several
transmittal lines that need to be built to address transmission
congestion and reliability issues. These lines are in the
process of being approved and built. This is all being done
without an RTO. Will the commission be flexible under its order
and allow the existing regional planning processes in the West
to address the transmission needs of all their utilities and
customers?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Those regional entities that are
conducting that planning are certainly open to do that, yes.
Mr. Walden. So your order will allow that to continue?
Mr. Wellinghoff. I believe so.
Mr. Walden. As a westerner, you know that 50 percent of the
West is owned by the Federal Government--well, controlled by
the Federal Government--and the single greatest obstacle to
building transmission in the West is the difficulty of doing so
on Federal lands. What can FERC do to overcome this obstacle?
Because a lot of these lines these companies are looking at
putting in, they are just saying I am not even going to waste
my time going over here on the Federal ground. It is just too
difficult, cumbersome to litigate it. So then they try and take
it on the private ground, which of course causes a few issues
with farmers who are having to give up a couple hundred feet on
each side of this big lines of prime farm ground or they try
and run it right in front of the Oregon Trail Interpretative
Center windows. Can you give us some help here? Is the
Administration open to doing anything to help on the Federal
land to expedite the issues we face there on siting?
By the way, I am hearing the same thing on the fiber side
with the BTOP grants. I met with a recipient of one of the
grants to build out fiber, and it is the Forest Service and the
permitting process and it is this and it is that. It seems like
every intersection of the Federal Government becomes more
dangerous and slow and congested.
Ms. Azar. Congressman, can I answer that?
Mr. Walden. You may.
Ms. Azar. Wonderful. And thank you for the question because
we have set up a rapid response team for transmission which is
precisely addressing that issue, which is to make the Federal
permitting process for transmission lines much more expedited,
and the application of the statutes are still going to happen
but we can do it better, we can do it faster, and we are going
to.
Mr. Walden. All right. So if we have specific instances, we
could contact you and----
Ms. Azar. Absolutely. I can give you my cell phone.
Mr. Walden. Excellent. Thank you.
As a practical matter, utilities in the Pacific Northwest
need to coordinate interregional transmission planning with the
Bonneville Power Administration, a non-jurisdictional Federal
entity. Does FERC anticipate that BPA will fully participate in
the interregional planning process under Order 1000?
Mr. Wellinghoff. Certainly, they are encouraged to do so. I
can't speak for Steve Wright or what BPA will actually do but
they are certainly encouraged to do so, and we would hope they
would.
Mr. Walden. And will transmission projects that are taken
through a regional or interregional cost allocation process be
given special consideration by FERC for incentive rates?
Mr. Wellinghoff. We have a pending incentive rate docket
open right now. I can't say one way or the other.
Mr. Walden. OK. I have no bonus question for this round.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. Mr. Rush, I understand you have
one additional question for Ms. Azar.
Mr. Rush. Yes, and I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
your consideration.
Ms. Azar, are you familiar with the two plants in Illinois
that will be shutting down? I have been told that the two
plants are 70 years old, have run sporadically over the last
few years because they are the least efficient in Ameren's
fleet and do not produce electricity cheap enough to sell in a
weak power market. So do you agree that that is the real reason
that they are shutting down?
Ms. Azar. Ranking Member Rush, plants shut down all of the
time, and a number of plants right now are being mothballed or
there are folks waiting for the phone to ring and the phone
doesn't ring because they are not economic. Ironically, it is
oftentimes the owners of those very uneconomic plants that
don't want transmission to be built, and the reason for that
is, they can't compete in a competitive market. So as a
consequence, you may hear it in terms of oh, the cost-benefit
analysis can't be done appropriately or, you know, they are
going to be socializing the costs. The bottom line is, if you
really want real competition, some of these guys don't want it
because they are going to lose, and, you know, I can't speak to
the two plants in Illinois. I don't know them. You know, my
home State is Wisconsin. I can tell you when I was a
commissioner, we took a very hard look at some of the plants
that needed to be shut down because they were uneconomic.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. That concludes the first panel. We thank
you all again for being with us, and at this time I would like
to call up the witnesses on the second panel. We have with us
the Honorable Greg White, who is the Commissioner with the
Michigan Public Service Commission. We have the Honorable
Philip Jones, who is a Commissioner with the Washington
Utilities and Transportation Commission. We have Mr. John
DiStasio, General Manager and CEO of Sacramento Municipal
Utility District, who is here on behalf of the Large Public
Power Council. We have Mr. Steven Transeth, who is the
Principal with Transeth and Associates, who is testifying on
behalf of the Coalition for Fair Transmission Policy. We have
Mr. Nicholas Brown, who is President and CEO of Southwest Power
Pool, and we have Mr. Joseph Welch, who is Chairman, President
and CEO of ITC Holdings Corporation.
So I want to welcome all of you. We appreciate your joining
us this morning and we look forward to your testimony and the
information that you will provide.
Each one of you will be given 5 minutes to make an opening
statement, and so Mr. White, we will call upon you to begin.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF GREG WHITE, COMMISSIONER, MICHIGAN PUBLIC SERVICE
COMMISSION; PHILIP B. JONES, COMMISSIONER, WASHINGTON UTILITIES
AND TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION; JOHN DISTASIO, GENERAL MANAGER
AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, SACRAMENTO MUNICIPAL UTILITY
DISTRICT, ON BEHALF OF LARGE PUBLIC POWER COUNCIL; STEVEN A.
TRANSETH, PRINCIPAL, TRANSETH AND ASSOCIATES, PLLC, ON BEHALF
OF COALITION FOR FAIR TRANSMISSION POLICY; NICHOLAS A. BROWN,
PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, SOUTHWEST POWER POOL,
INC.; AND JOSEPH WELCH, CHAIRMAN, PRESIDENT, AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, ITC HOLDINGS CORPORATION

STATEMENT OF GREG WHITE

Mr. White. Thank you very much. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking
Member Rush and members of the subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me to testify regarding issues of critical importance
to the citizens of Michigan. I am grateful to have this
opportunity to present the views that the Michigan Public
Service Commission has expressed concerning the issues
surrounding cost allocation proposals for transmission projects
and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, FERC Order No.
1000 and the impacts to State planning processes.
Let me begin by emphasizing our recognition of the
importance of the development of strategic transmission
resources as critical to the further development of markets and
the reliable operations of the Nation's transmission system. My
State has committed thousands of hours in staff time and in
commissioner time working in various regional planning
processes. We are in the MISO, Midwest Independent System
Operator, RTO. We are also in the PJM RTO, Pennsylvania,
Jersey, Maryland, and we have committed again thousands of
hours of staff and commission time.
My testimony today can really be boiled down simply to the
concern that the allocation of costs to utility customers
properly reflects the benefits the customers may receive. In
other words, the costs allocated must be aligned with the
benefits. Under Sections 205 and 206 of the Federal Power Act,
the FERC is charged with ensuring that the rates, terms and
conditions for transmission of electricity and interstate
commerce are just, reasonable and not unduly discriminatory or
preferential. This has been interpreted by the FERC and the
courts to mean that the costs of transmission facilities must
be allocated in a manner that satisfies the cost causation
principle that all approved rates reflect to some degree the
costs actually caused by the customer who must pay them. The
U.S. Court of Appeals for the 2nd Circuit explained that
compliance with this principle is evaluated by comparing the
costs assessed against a party to the burdens imposed or
benefits drawn by that party. The Michigan Commission does not
believe that the cost allocation proposals considered in our
region satisfy the cost causation principle and we are very
concerned that the allocation of costs to Michigan could far
exceed any benefits that the State would receive from most of
these projects.
In particular, it is important to recognize Michigan's
unique peninsular geography and therefore its limited
electrical interconnection to the rest of the MISO and PJM
transmission system. As a result of geography and limited
interconnections, it is likely that Michigan will realize
minimal benefits from distant transmission expansion projects
constructed in other States. However, on the basis of electric
load, Michigan will be exposed to a disproportionate share of
approximately 20 percent or more of all of these costs. It is
clear that my State will not benefit from the construction of
all transmission lines in the Midwest or that Michigan receives
benefits that are commensurate with such allocation of costs.
The Michigan Commission's concern with FERC Order 1000 is
again that the method used for determining the allocation of
costs for these transmission projects selected to fulfill
interregional planning is just and reasonable and reflective of
the benefits that would be ascribed to Michigan's unique
circumstances. In addition, the Michigan Commission believes
individual transmission projects should be periodically
reviewed in order to enable the FERC to strike an appropriate
balance between consumer and investor interests.
The final item I would like to bring up, my testimony was
filed at 10 a.m. on Tuesday morning. At about 1 p.m. on Tuesday
afternoon, the announcement came out that the DOE had elected
not to designate the FERC with the responsibilities for the
national corridor designation, and so I would just like to
point out that the announcement in that joint statement between
the DOE and the FERC, we view that as a positive development.
While the details of this proposal will be critical, we
appreciate that Energy Secretary Chu has given strong weight to
the concerns raised by the States and numerous other parties.
State public service commissioners understand as much, if not
more, than anyone else about the importance of modernizing our
Nation's electrical system. We are working across State
boundaries to ensure that needed transmission is built in a
timely manner to benefit all customers and consumers and that
everybody has a voice.
So this is a welcome development and we look forward to
working with the Department of the Energy and the FERC.
[The prepared statement of Mr. White follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.050

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, before we go to the next witnesses,
I have a UC request. Mr. Chairman, Ms. Matsui is not on the
subcommittee but she is interested in asking questions of this
second panel, and one of her constituents will be testifying,
so my unanimous consent request is that Representative Matsui
be allowed to participate in the questioning of witnesses.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, without objection, and of course, we
have the rule of the committee that she will have to wait until
all the members of subcommittee ask their questions, and we
would be happy to do that.
Mr. Rush. She will comply with that.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Jones, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PHILIP B. JONES

Mr. Jones. Thank you. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member
Rush. Former Ranking Emeritus Chairman Dingell, good to see you
again. Members of the subcommittee, I appreciate the
opportunity to testify today on Federal transmission issues and
transmission issues affecting the Western Interconnection in
general which have been mentioned in the previous panel and the
Pacific Northwest region and my State in particular.
During my 6 years as a commissioner, I have been active in
energy issues in the Western Interconnection and as a member of
the Committee on Regional Electric Power Cooperation in the
West, an entity which I describe in my testimony which has a
long history of 3 decades of voluntarily cooperating to enhance
electric power cooperation in the West.
In my testimony, I include a map of the NERC
interconnections. You may want to look at that. Representative
Gardner, there have been some questions about regions and NERC
and electric reliability regions, planning regions and other
regions. It is a complicated area and each kind of reliability
and economic and this new Order 890 have created new planning
entities and they are all a little bit different. But I think
the bedrock of the planning is the reliability organizations
that are governed by NERC.
As I said, this CREPC, this Committee on Regional Electric
Power Cooperation, has been active in the West for years. It is
voluntary. We think we are doing a good job in the West because
outside of California and the Cal ISO we are generally what we
call a vertically integrated market where the generation and
transmission is owned by the same utility. The western region
has been planning for renewable energy generation and
integrating that into the grid. The WREZ, the Western Renewable
Energy Zones, which I describe in my testimony, have been
active for years. We have been working on integrating that
renewable energy into the grid, and we commend the DOE and the
FERC, both commissioners and staff, attend our meetings. And
now of course, we have the interconnection-wide-funded effort
by DOE to look at the interconnection-wide efforts, so there is
a maze of acronyms, there is a maze of planning entities, and I
would be happy to clarify on questions what they all do.
The role of Bonneville as was described earlier, and maybe
if Congressman Walden comes back we can get into that more,
that is critical in our region. Bonneville owns 75 percent of
the high-voltage system in our region but under Bonneville we
have two what we call sub-regional groups, ColumbiaGrid and the
Northern Tier Transmission Group, what we call NTTG, and these
have been engaged in planning for the region since actually
Order 890, so again, this is not new. Order 890 required even
Colorado and all the regions of the country to start planning.
The other development is WECC. This is what I showed you on
reliability. Our reliability organization came out with a 10-
year plan just 2 weeks ago for transmission. The bottom-line
summary conclusion of that was no new transmission in the WECC
region is needed by 2020 either to meet demand or to meet RPS
needs. So again, transmission, as you know, can be driven by
reliability issues, RPS needs or load. The WECC study indicated
that no new transmission is needed. However, they are now
conducting a 20-year plan to look at the needs way into the
2030 time frame and that investigation is underway now.
A couple more points on Order 1000 and siting. Order 1000,
I think, has struck a good balance, as Chairman Wellinghoff
said, between regional deference and the Federal needs. He
listened to us. We all submitted a lot of comments, and I think
the FERC listened. Yes, on some issues like cost allocation, I
would argue that FERC punted. FERC punted some of the issues
down the road. There is nothing wrong with that. We live in a
federalist system. So these cost allocation systems are going
to be critical. One is in our region. Our region is participant
funding, bilateral deals. We are not in an RTO region so
participant funding is mentioned in Order 1000 as a possible
way of funding transmission but you cannot use it for regional
cost allocation mechanism. It has to be different than
participant funding. But in my view, the order is a little bit
fuzzy on the difference between participant funding by the
transmission provider and whatever the new interregional cost
allocation system is going to be, let us say between PJM and
MISO. This is all to be worked out.
The siting issues, just let me say a word on that. The
States obviously felt very strongly about that. As many of you
know, we weighed in quite strongly in--how should I put this--
in opposition to the chairman's proposal on delegation of
authority under Section 216. We think there are a number of
reasons for doing that. I think it is kind of in the past now.
But we are grateful for that decision but I can assure you on
behalf of NARUC and member States in the West that we look
forward to working with both the chairman and Lauren Azar on
trying to get some of this stuff sited. The big issue in the
West is Federal agencies. As Congressman Walden said, whether
it is BLM or the Forest Service, transmission projects in the
West are being held up by Federal siting delays.
So Mr. Chairman, with those remarks, thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jones follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.064

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
Mr. DiStasio, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN DISTASIO

Mr. DiStasio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Rush
and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me to
address you today.
My name is John DiStasio. I am the General Manager and
Chief Executive Officer of the Sacramento Municipal Utility
District, or SMUD, as we are called. SMUD has been powering
California's capital region for 65 years. We have a population
of 1.4 million customers, and I am testifying on behalf of also
the Large Public Power Council. The Large Public Power Council
is an association of the Nation's 25 largest municipal and
State-owned utilities. LPPC members own approximately 35,000
miles of transmission lines in the United States. We are not-
for-profit systems and we are directly accountable to
consumers. We are pleased to serve consumers in seven States
represented on this subcommittee.
I speak from the perspective of a utility that is among the
most aggressive in the Nation in integrating renewable
resources into its portfolio and an implementing demand-side
management programs. Currently, 24 percent of SMUD's electric
supply portfolio is renewable, and we plan for that figure to
increase to 37 percent by 2020 and exceeding State mandates.
FERC Order 1000 was designed to encourage greater regional
transmission planning and the more efficient construction of
new transmission facilities. The planning features of the order
and the funding mechanism for the development of new
transmission facilities that FERC directs utilities to develop
in the planning process have been championed by developers of
renewable resources that are located far from customers and
require the development of long-line transmission facilities in
order to be commercially viable. I am concerned that burdening
ongoing planning discussion with debates over allocation of
costs will undermine existing planning processes that are
actually working fairly well. I am also concerned that the cost
allocation mechanism that Order 1000 contemplates will provide
a subsidy for remotely located renewable generation.
Speaking for a utility that has invested heavily in local
renewable and demand management resources, this subsidy calls
for a form of double payment for renewable resources that my
customers have already funded. Looking ahead, I am concerned
that this subsidy will severely curtail the development of
local renewable resources.
I want to note that SMUD and other LPPC members have been
active participants in existing regional planning processes.
The requirement in Order 1000 that system planners now develop
transmission cost allocation mechanisms based on a
determination of so-called benefits calls for system planners
to make highly subjective judgments. The commission fails to
articulate a definition of such benefits, and I am concerned
that controversy over the identification and associated
allocation of costs will throw a wrench into planning processes
that are now functioning effectively.
As to cost allocation, Order 1000 requires that each region
of the Nation develop a transmission plan that includes a cost
allocation methodology meeting the commission's specified
criteria. Although the order provides the planning region some
flexibility in deciding how to allocate costs of new
facilities, it clearly prevents planning regions from relying
on participant funding. This term describes current practice,
which calls for entities that take service over new
transmission lines to pay for them.
We are further troubled by language in Order 1000
suggesting that costs may be allocated to entities even where
no service relationship exists. This is a significant departure
from historical FERC practice, which has always required an
entity to agree to take service under a contract or a tariff
before charges could be assessed. FERC's proposal seems to me a
little bit like a restaurant which charges its customers for a
list of items on its menus whether the customers choose to
order them or not. In filed comments, we have expressed our
belief that the commission lacks legal authority to allow
developers to recover costs in this manner. We believe that
allocating transmission costs broadly based on claimed benefits
will subsidize transmission used to access remote resources.
This may result in long, expensive transmission facilities
being constructed to access remote resources even where there
are no customers with a need to take service over them. We are
concerned that this will result in the construction of
unnecessary or underutilized facilities, the cost of which
would be borne by consumers.
SMUD owns and operates 102 megawatts of wind facilities
with plans to more than double that capacity next year. We also
operate one of the Nation's largest utility-sponsored solar
programs that is going to be approaching megawatts in the next
couple of years. These local generation investments have
required only interconnection to local transmission. No new
transmission lines have been needed to date. We believe that
relying on these resources is a more efficient and least
expensive way to meet the renewable policy established by our
board and our State. These efficiencies will be lost if we are
required under Order 1000 to pay for transmission we do not
use.
Thank you again for the opportunity to speak with the
committee, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. DiStasio follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.076

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
Mr. Transeth, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN A. TRANSETH

Mr. Transeth. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Rush and fellow committee members. It is an honor to appear
before you today to talk about this very important issue that
faces our country today. My name is Steven Transeth. I am a
Principal Partner of the law firm of Transeth and Associates,
which provides legal services and consulting services on energy
issues. I am a former member of the Michigan Public Service
Commission, and I have had over 25 years dealing with energy
issues.
I am here today to testify on behalf of the Coalition of
Fair Transmission Policy, which is a group of geographically
and structurally diverse investor-owned utilities that have
joined together for the purpose of promoting legislative and
regulatory policies that will lead to a customer-focused
development of the Nation's electric transmission system in
support of the growing demand for clean generation resources. I
would like to also stress the coalition is supportive, as has
been stated many times today, in upgrading the grid and
improving the grid to make sure that it meets our growing needs
as we go forward. However, the coalition does have certain
concerns on some of the progress that has been made, especially
what has been done under Order 1000.
The coalition believes that the costs of transmission must
be allocated proportional to the measurable benefits the
customer receives and an accurate cost allocation process is
critical to ensure that the right price signals are sent and
that the consumers are receiving clean energy at the lowest
possible rates.
The coalition believes that there are many deficiencies
within the order but today I just want to talk really about
three. The first is, we believe that too much delegation has
been made to non-governmental regional entities to determine
transmission planning and cost allocation. We must understand
that these regional entities aren't necessarily continuous
groups of entities that have a commonality of interest but many
times have diverse types of interests and needs, and
consequently you have regions such as RTOs, which was mentioned
earlier, which may or may not necessarily be meeting the needs
of each of its individual members vis-a-vis what we are talking
about in terms of transmission today, and in fact, many of
these regions, such as RTOs, have a contractual duty to the
transmission operators and generators and do not have the legal
responsibility or accountability to the customers to make sure
that the rates imposed upon them are just and reasonable.
Two: FERC has failed to provide limitations and parameters
on what is going to be defined as a benefit and who are the
beneficiaries. By allowing benefits to be defined very broadly
and costs to be spread very widely, it is going to be possible
to ensure that those two are commensurate, and consequently,
you are going to have incidences--and I will speak to
Michigan's situation in a minute--where customers are going to
be forced to pay for benefits they do not receive.
Finally, we believe that the Order 1000 does not go far
enough in ensuring that States and localities do have a say in
how these decisions are made. Michigan is another example where
we are put into a situation where the RTO has made certain
policy decisions in terms of how they are going to progress in
terms of their transmission planning that we believe is
detrimental to our State. By failing to require this bottom-up
planning process, FERC has effectively eliminated consumers
from the decision-making process. These concerns are not
speculative but are currently being played out in the 13 States
that make up the Midwest RTO. FERC last December approved a
cost allocation system method that provides for new
transmission called multi-value projects, or MVPS, and then
allow for the socialization of those costs across all members
of the RTO. The multi-value within these programs is the
additional benefit factor of meeting public policy requirements
but whose public policies are going to be advocated?
Michigan recently, in fact 4 years ago, passed legislation
to embark on a very aggressive program to make renewable energy
as a driving mechanism of revitalizing our economy. Mr. Welch
in the near future is going to be breaking ground on 5,000
megawatts coming out of our thumb to bring wind onto the
market. Consumers Energy has built new wind farms in the
Ludington area, and we are looking at putting offshore wind in
our Great Lakes.
You contrast that to what is occurring in some of the
plains States of Minnesota, Iowa and South Dakota where they
have adopted what seems to be the public policy that is going
to be pursued by the RTO called MISO. That is building large
wind farms and exporting that wind across long-distance
transmission to the East. Those are both valuable and have
merit in their own pursuit, but when you have a policy in place
that promotes one to the expense of the other, you are going to
have trouble. If the MISO tariff is allowed to stand as it is,
it will eliminate Michigan's ability to pursue public policy as
it has determined is best for its customers, and most
importantly, we will end up paying for the cost of the
transmission and receive little or no benefits in return.
Michigan is not alone in this. We just happen to be first out
of the barrel on this. This is something that could happen
across the board as these RTOs develop their policy.
We are not alone in our concerns, and the evidence is more
than evident by the fact that over 60 petitions have been filed
requesting a rehearing on Order 1000. We believe it is entirely
appropriate and timely for Congress to conduct this hearing and
consider the broad implications of Order 1000.
Once again, I thank you very much for allowing me this
opportunity to testify, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Transeth follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.087

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Brown, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF NICHOLAS A. BROWN

Mr. Brown. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member
Rush and members of the committee. My name is Nick Brown. I am
President and Chief Executive Officer of Southwest Power Pool,
whose mission is helping our members work together to keep the
lights on today and in the future. I want to emphasize helping
our members work together. We don't do it for them, we don't do
it to them; we help them work together to resolve these issues.
We are a FERC-recognized regional transmission organization
and in fulfilling our mission we administer an open-access
transmission service tariff and we do serve as the planning
entity for our members who serve customers in all or parts of
the States of New Mexico, Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Nebraska,
Missouri, Arkansas and Louisiana, 370,000 square miles service
territory, over 57,000 miles of high-voltage transmission lines
interconnecting over 850 generating units.
We appreciate the opportunity to visit with you today about
Order 1000. It has been our experience in fulfilling our
strategic plan over the last several years of building a more
robust transmission network that the single largest impediment
to building a robust transmission network is how to allocate
costs for needed transmission expansion in a fair and equitable
way, and we have met that challenge in multiple ways. Last
year, we received approval from the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission on a completely new integrated transmission planning
process that looks at our needs on an iterative basis focused
on a 20-year period, then a 10-year period, then a near-term
period, and we have coupled that transmission planning process
with cost allocation methodologies that do in fact pair the
costs with the beneficiaries through a new highway-byway cost
allocation methodology where the extra high-voltage facilities,
the costs for which are shared very broadly across the entire
footprint because our studies have shown and our States have
agreed that everyone benefits from that extra high-voltage
transmission. The lower-voltage facilities are paid for more on
a local basis.
It is important to note when we were approved as a regional
transmission organization in 2004 that SPP delegated to our
regional State committee the responsibility for determining the
methodology to allocate costs for new transmission. The
regional State committee consists of a commissioner from each
of the States in which our members service. We brought them
together. We determined how to calculate benefits for new
transmission. Once that methodology for calculating benefit was
determined, we ran studies, and the cost allocation methodology
that we have in place that was approved by the FERC last year
is a result of all of that very collaborative approach.
Our experience again is that the single toughest issue is
dealing with cost allocation, and our view of Order 1000 is
that the commission got it right with the requirement for
regional planning. It is just not sufficient to build the type
of transmission infrastructure that our country needs on
looking at an individual company basis. So the requirement for
regional planning was right on the mark.
We also strongly support Order 1000's requirement that
links cost allocation with transmission planning. It is a
necessary step to move forward.
We also strongly support Order 1000's requirement to
construct transmission considering Federal and State public
policy needs, and we appreciate the flexibility that Order 1000
gave regional planning authorities to consider the diverse
needs of those public policy requirements within each region.
We also strongly support Order 1000's requirement for
interregional coordination and cost allocation, and while many
believe the commission went too far, our region believes the
commission could have gone further. To allow little guidance on
how to allocate costs for transmission facilities that have
interregional impacts will just cause more delay and more
confusion. We had to tackle that within our own region, and to
expect that it can be voluntarily tackled on an interregional
basis I believe will take a much more significant time than the
18 months in which we were given. The stakeholders within each
region are diverse and the regions are diverse. It will simply
take longer than 18 months to work through a collaborative
process to reach consensus on those issues.
And I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brown follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.096

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
Mr. Welch, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH WELCH

Mr. Welch. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Rush and members of
the subcommittee, thank you very much for the opportunity to
appear here today. My name is Joseph Welch and I am the CEO and
President of ITC Holdings Inc.
Mr. Whitfield. Do you have your microphone on?
Mr. Welch. I do.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Welch. Do I need to get it closer here?
Mr. Whitfield. There were people in the audience quite
upset that they didn't hear what you were saying.
Mr. Welch. Well, I am glad to hear that.
ITC, which is headquartered in Novi, Michigan, is the
largest independent transmission company in the United States.
ITC owns, operates and maintains transmission assets in
Michigan, portions of Iowa, Minnesota, Illinois, Missouri,
Oklahoma and Kansas, spanning both the MISO and SPP RTOs.
Unlike most utilities, ITC is independent, meaning we are not a
market participant. We do not generate, buy or sell power. We
move electricity across our wires under a Federal tariff at a
regulated rate.
It is no secret that our transmission grid is outdated and
never has been designed to be a regional-serving grid. Today,
70 percent of the transmission lines are 25 years old or older,
70 percent of our large power transformers are 25 years or
older, and 60 percent of our circuit breakers are more than 30
years old and the interconnection between utilities are
generally week. Per capita consumption of energy has doubled in
the same time period, and our population has grown by 50
percent. To add to the stress, the aging infrastructure energy
demand is expected to increase by 25 percent by the year 2030.
A quick history of the ramifications of underinvestment in
transmission. In 2003, at a cost of nearly $10 billion, the
power went out for nearly 50 million people in the Midwest, the
East Coast and Canada and highlighted the frailty of the
interconnected grid. More recently, we have seen the effects of
an outdated and stressed transmission system where southern
California, Arizona and Texas have experienced blackouts. Not
one of these instances was caused by lack of generation. The
Department of Energy estimates that the major power outages and
power quality disturbance costs the economy between $25 billion
and $150 billion annually. In addition to blackouts, lack of
investment leads to inefficient markets, energy curtailments,
higher congestion and pockets of generation market power, all
of which lead to higher energy prices. In response to the 2003
blackout, this committee worked to pass the Energy Policy Act
of 2005 and included provisions to help facilitate the
investment in new transmission.
FERC has been working with the regions to address the
challenges that planning and cost allocation present to
transmission expansion. Order 1000 is not perfect but it is an
important incremental step forward. Regional planning has been
going on for decades to some degree. It is not a new concept.
The problem with regional planning is that the participation of
regional transmission organizations is voluntary. Not
surprisingly, that leaves these organizations hostage to
competitive interests of market participants. If an RTO is
considering a decision that will impact a market participant
above market generation, they threaten to leave that RTO. The
RTO then developed a suboptimal regional plan to retain the
members.
Order 1000 incrementally improves the regional planning
process by requiring stakeholders to determine in advance what
criteria the RTO will be using in the planning and requires
RTOs to establish a process for interregional projects which do
not exist today. Order 1000 also addressed the issue of paying
for transmission projects that provide for regional benefits.
The commission allows the regions to make proposals following
six governing principles designed to protect consumers.
FERC has an obligation to ensure that rates are just and
reasonable, that they do not have anti-competitive effects.
Rhetoric that FERC is mandating certain methodologies or
forcing customers who do not benefit to bear costs is blatantly
inaccurate and clearly intended to mislead this committee. In
fact, Order 1000 specifically states, and I quote, ``Costs may
not be involuntarily allocated to entities that do not receive
benefits'' and must be roughly commensurate with the estimated
benefits received from the project. More plainly put, if you do
not benefit, you do not pay.
I understand that those who are opposed to the regional
transmission are seeking legislative ratemaking through S. 400
or other legislation but I encourage that this committee
consider their motives. They want Congress to undermine the
agreements the regions, which are comprised of voluntary
members, have spent years developing and Federal Government to
impose transmission costs on small groups of users to make
transmission costs prohibitive, retain captive markets and
eliminate competitors. These results do not benefit customers.
I would note that a number of utilities who comprise the
Transeth coalition have some of the highest average retail
rates in the region and they are here today opposing FERC's
efforts to encourage transmission development and more robust
competitive wholesale markets. I would suggest to this
committee that this is more than a coincidence.
Let me also make note to dismiss the notion that
transmission drives up electric bills. According to the U.S.
Energy Information Administration, transmission costs account
for only 7 percent of an average residential customer's bill
while generation accounts for nearly 68 percent in Michigan,
and in Michigan, the transmission portion of the bill is lower
than the national average. It is only between 4 and 5 percent.
Let me say again, in Michigan, where over 8 years ITC has
invested $1.2 billion in the transmission system, we remain
below the national average in terms of percentage of delivered
energy cost to retail customers. Basically, this is because
Michigan is one of the highest electric rates in the region.
This may lead you to ask, if ITC has made such a
significant investment in transmission in Michigan, how can we
have the highest wholesale rates in MISO if in fact
transmission lowers the cost of energy to customers. I want to
close with this because the answer highlights the value of
independence and explains why rational, independent, regional
transmission planning and cost allocation mechanisms that allow
these projects to be identified to be built are so vital.
First, the $1.2 billion was needed to just bring the system
to reasonable standards. Next, the State sits on a seam between
PJM and MISO, and there is no cross-border planning to identify
the projects that would provide for the access of the most
competitive generation in either RTO. And finally, the actual
transmission projects that would be built to bring more
competitive generation into the State lie outside the State of
Michigan. The utility that we need to build the transmission to
benefit Michigan will not if they do not see value for their
customers that they have to charge. This is the perfect example
of the problem that FERC Order 1000 addresses.
My time is expired and I look forward to questions. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Welch follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.114

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
I am going to follow Mr. Dingell's admonition of trying to
answer yes or no for the first question. How many of you
believe that the cost allocation policy in Order No. 1000 is
necessary to build new transmission lines in the United States?
Mr. White?
Mr. Welch. I do.
Mr. White. I am going to say no.
Mr. Whitfield. No?
Mr. Jones. No.
Mr. DiStasio. No.
Mr. Transeth. No.
Mr. Brown. Absolutely yes.
Mr. Whitfield. So we have four nos and two yeses. OK. Now,
one of you, it may have been you, Mr. Transeth, or maybe it was
Mr. DiStasio, stated that you do not believe that the
commission has the legal authority to permit transmission
developers to recover costs from entities with which they do
not have a contract or a service relationship. Was that you,
Mr. DiStasio?
Mr. DiStasio. It was me, and while I am not an attorney,
our attorneys have advised in looking at this that it is a
pretty big departure from past precedent of how FERC has looked
at this as well as the aforementioned case around cost
causation. This really does create at least the opportunity for
costs to be allocated to people that don't have a service need
or relationship or a contract or a tariff.
Mr. Whitfield. So you are obviously concerned about that?
Mr. DiStasio. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Now, Mr. Welch, you are a transmission
developer. Do you think that they do not have the legal
authority to permit that? I am assuming you do.
Mr. Welch. They do have the legal authority to permit that.
Mr. Whitfield. And your two lawyers have talked to each
other about it, I guess, right?
Mr. Welch. I try not to talk to lawyers.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, I guess it was Mr. Transeth, you said
that the commission's failure to limit--I asked the question to
Mr. Wellinghoff about the lack of clarity on determining what
is the benefit, in calculating benefits, and developing these
cost allocations, and you say in your testimony that the
commission's failure to limit in any way what individual
regions may consider as benefits is a fatal flaw of the rule,
and also that regions under the rule would presumably be
allowed to assert that certain types or classes of projects
have certain environmental or social benefits and that that
might be used and therefore really socializing the cost. Do any
of the other members have the same concerns that Mr. Transeth
has on that issue?
Mr. Brown. I do not, and primarily because of the
governance structure within our organization. We are driven by
our members. The members and the regional State committee are
the stakeholders who are making the decisions on how to
calculate the benefits. Some benefits are extremely easy to
quantify. Other benefits are much more soft but either way, the
stakeholders are working together to identify those benefits
and that can occur in every region in the country.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. DiStasio?
Mr. DiStasio. I agree with Mr. Transeth on that issue from
the standpoint that once we commit to a regional planning
process, we may not know what the calculation of benefits will
be until we are already committed to cost allocation that could
come out from the stakeholders that we would be on the losing
end of that argument and ultimately get imposed costs that we
otherwise would not have signed up for. So because we don't
know the benefits up front, they may be very difficult to
calculate, and if they get to FERC with all good intentions, it
could end up being for benefits that we wouldn't agree exist.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, it seems to me that this Order 1000
certainly lends itself to considering so-called benefits that
have never been considered before in order to pursue a social
objective or environmental objective or whatever. Mr. Welch?
Mr. Welch. Let me state too that I agree with Mr. Brown
that Order 1000 really gave the flexibility to the regions, and
I want to emphasize this one more time, which are voluntary
organizations where people have got to come together and they
sit at a table and the process in MISO I will talk about which
Michigan is a member of, the process took in excess of 2 years
for them to come to an agreement of any sort of how to allocate
costs. Once you start talking about allocating costs, no one
ever wants to pay the bill, but when you can get general
agreement, that is as good as it is going to get, and I believe
that Order 1000 absolutely sends the message to the regions to
come together and do this on your own and gave them the
flexibility of what to consider or what not to consider.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, yes. It just seems to me that this
certainly expands the Federal Power Act of just and reasonable
and can go much further than was anticipated at one time, so
that is one of the issues we are trying to deal with here.
Mr. Welch. Can I just add to this? But the fact still
remains, whether they consider that or not, there still has to
be a benefit-to-cost ratio that exists before you can charge
for it. So the fact that you consider the renewable resource or
you can further expand that to think about integrating it into
the grid. That is one issue. But the second issue is how the
cost allocation is allocated, and that cost allocation cannot
be allocated unless there are benefits commensurate with the
cost. We can sit here and argue about that, but the fact is, it
has got to be clear that the benefits line up with the costs.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, you know, that is what the hearing is
all about because FERC has issued this order, and maybe
Congress may decide that it needs to do some legislation
because maybe we don't view it the same way that FERC does. But
that is why we have the hearings.
Mr. Rush, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My question is directed to both Mr. White and Mr. Jones. In
the comments made to my office by the Illinois Commerce
Commission, the commission noted that FERC did not define the
role of State regulators and did not provide a means for States
to fully participate in transmission planning as stipulated in
Order 890. The question to both of you is, are you satisfied
that State regulators will be able to participate in a
meaningful way in the planning process as outlined in Order
1000 or do you share the belief that FERC made a mistake in not
prescribing a more substantive role for the States?
Mr. White. Thank you, Mr. Rush. I do believe that the
States and State commissions will have a substantive role in
the planning process. However, in my view, more of the
decision-making authority has been given to the RTOs to the
regional process that, you know, should have been better
defined, should have more clearly deferred to the States'
authority. At the end of the day, we are the ones who have to
ensure that the bills that our customers receive are just and
reasonable and demonstrate the benefits, and I think that
without that better clarification in the order, that is not
evident, but I do believe that we will be actively and
substantially involved in the planning process.
Mr. Jones. Mr. Rush, I think the tension here is a delicate
balance between being very prescriptive and giving flexibility.
I think Chairman Wellinghoff really struck it right. I think
there is a lot of flexibility to regional organizations in the
Midwest, the West and elsewhere, and it is not that
prescriptive. As I described in my testimony, I can just speak
for the West, we have been doing this, as I said, for 3 decades
voluntarily, and so we are used to it. The transmission
providers do consult with us. We have these sub-regional groups
that have filed open-access transmission tariffs with FERC.
FERC has approved them. State commissions are involved in the
planning processes for NTTG and ColumbiaGrid, the sub-regional
groups.
The only area where I would ask the subcommittee to be
mindful of is DOE through taxpayer dollars has funded this very
ambitious interconnection-wide planning effort, and the
schedules are set to be done by the end of 2013. Taxpayer
dollars are being spent. We commissioners are flying all over
the country, I can tell you, the Western Interconnect, Texas in
ERCOT, we are spending a lot of time in planning processes to
take into account renewables, energy efficiency, nuclear, coal,
you know, the whole gamut of possible generation technologies,
and then integrating those into the modern grid. So the
question I would urge the subcommittee to be mindful of is, how
do those processes fit into Order 1000 and the compliance
filings. Right now, the timelines are 12 months and 18 months,
as you know, so 12 months, the transmission providers have to
file with FERC on the regional plans, 18 months, they have to
file on the interregional cost allocation schemes. That is
before they finish all these--before all these plans are rolled
up, interconnection-wide and ISPC and in the West in ERCOT. So
I would just hope that we are being consistent here. We State
commissioners are spending a lot of time, effort and resources
going to all these meetings and I just hope the Federal
Government agencies, DOE and FERC, as you saw on the first
panel really coordinate on this.
Mr. Rush. In my discussions with Chairman Wellinghoff, he
indicated that he wants to stress competition in the market in
order to ultimately help reduce costs to customers, and this is
a question for the panel. Does anyone want to comment on this
and either agree or dispute the idea that the approach outlined
by FERC will indeed increase competition and keep down consumer
costs?
Mr. Welch. I truly believe that it is going to spur
competition, as I said in my prepared remarks. Number one, we
don't have a grid that was designed to be truly interregional.
Number two, we can't get the low-cost power, especially from
Michigan into Michigan because the transmission developments
lie outside the State, the things that we need to do to get
that import capability. You know, there has been a lot of
discussions here about, you know, whether we are going to
integrate renewables and how that all figures out, but just
imagine that--and we will change the discussion now to a
different market. Let us talk about something like grain, and
you read in the paper that there is this bumper crop in
Argentina of wheat and all of a sudden you look at the
commodities future in the United States and the price of wheat
drops, and why is that? Because there is a low-cost supply
coming into the marketplace and it is displacing other
entities. And so when these other States start to develop these
renewables, they are mandated in those States to come in, but
it has the effect of displacing their low-cost generation that
was otherwise used to serve their customers and makes it
available to the marketplace to be bought. Michigan being a
high-cost producer is the first State to benefit from such a
marketplace if we can get the transmission built.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, and I really appreciate the panel.
For electricity geeks like you all are and some of us have
become, this is something we have talked about for a long time
going back to the bills and, you know, electricity generation
and the public utility commissions were in essence controlled
within State lines and we did intend in the 2005 energy bill to
expedite siting and transmission, to start having a more
vibrant market. Now we have evolved, and this green movement,
which I would argue would bring high-cost electricity in, and
now we have the debate on how are we going to pay for that and
who is going to bear the cost when we as a public policy-wise
push green and solar, which is high-cost electricity, and I
have said this numerous times. It is credible. I am not making
this stuff up. It just costs more.
So now, who is going to pay for that? And then how do we
define benefits and who is going to define the benefits? I
would--if you stayed with the simplistic financial decision,
low-cost power without government bureaucrats and politicians
intervening and deciding what is good for the world, then you
could do a basic market analysis and price calculation and
drive for lower cost. But when we get involved and say we have
got to go solar, we have got to go wind, we start taking some
cheap coal power offline, we are intervening.
So I think--so the point is, if the definition of benefits
is vague, how do we really move forward? Does anyone want to
take a shot at that?
Mr. Welch. Well, I would go first, but I see Nick wanted to
grab the microphone, and since he is on the side that has to--I
don't think that the benefits are vague. They are cost
benefits, plain, pure and simple in the end. You can't do a
cost-benefit analysis with everything being quantified as a
dollar bill, and in the end, it is simply money. The question
becomes----
Mr. Shimkus. But the policy at the State level intervenes
with renewable power, that is more expensive, I mean, a mandate
of a 10, 15 or 20 percent renewable power position.
Mr. Welch. Who am I, and candidly, who are you, to tell
each State what they want to have for their own----
Mr. Shimkus. Who am I to determine on the transmission grid
if we have to intervene, you can't define benefits and then you
pass it on to States who don't want that.
Mr. Welch. No, but at the State level, these people are
passing laws in their State that they are going to have
renewable portfolio standards. My job isn't to dictate whether
that is a rational law or an irrational law. My job is to
facilitate the marketplace in a way that makes it cost-
effective, and when they put those facilities online, those
people in that State have made the decision they want that.
Mr. Shimkus. And those people in those States should be
able to bear the higher utility costs and understand from
whence it comes.
Mr. Welch. And they are paying for that renewable energy.
They are paying for that renewable energy. That is not being
passed on to some amorphous people.
Mr. Shimkus. But if you are in a regional transmission
organization and you are expanding the transmission grid, and I
think part of this debate is, I mean, really, this is about
cost allocation or participant funding.
Mr. Welch. No, it is about the cost allocation of the
transmission----
Mr. Shimkus. All right. You disagree. I have some nods that
might agree with my position. Mr. Jones, I need some help here.
Mr. Jones. Mr. Shimkus, I will----
Mr. Shimkus. Bring in the cavalry.
Mr. Jones. I am a State regulator and I am here to help
you.
Mr. Shimkus. Just like the government.
Mr. Jones. Let the transmission--just let me make three
points. Let the transmission planners do their work. These guys
are good, the engineers. We have all these sub-regional plans.
SPP is doing work, we are doing work in the West. These are
good guys. They know how to quantify the cost-benefit analysis,
what we call CBA, but incorporate all these new things that are
a little more difficult to quantify but they can do it. So that
is number one.
Number two, a State like mine is an--we do 20-year plans
called integrated resource plans, and those require least
costs, so I am here to make sure that both transmission and
generation is provided to my ratepayers at least cost. We
update those plans every 2 years. I can tell that for my
utility, Puget Sound Energy, the first 300-megawatt wind plant
that they put in our State was least cost.
Mr. Shimkus. And also have huge hydroelectric, which is
very helpful.
Let me go to Mr. White real quick, I mean, just making sure
that for full disclosure, Mr. White.
Mr. White. Yes, Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much. I think
you hit the nail right on the head. I think the definition of
benefits is critical here. The devil is in the details. There
are assumptions used by certain parties as to what constitutes
a benefit, and that may not be shared or may not be accurate
across the system.
To Mr. Rush's question, there is no question in my mind
that strategically developing transmission will facilitate
markets and can deliver tremendous benefits to customers at the
State, local, regional level. At the same time, if we are
simply focusing on transmission as the answer to all, we are
precluding a lot of other more strategic local options that
could in fact be significantly less costly because they can
connect directly to the distribution system, thereby bypassing
the need for very, very expensive long-haul transmission
systems, and so my point is, the devil is in the details and I
think you are exactly right. The benefits is critical here.
Mr. Shimkus. I want to thank the chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. His time is expired, but I am going to let
you two respond.
Mr. DiStasio. I just wanted to respond with an example.
First of all, if you look at my State and the States of many of
the LPPC members, California has a renewable energy standard
that envisions it will be developed in State, and our Governor
just added another 12,000-megawatt requirement for distributed
generation. So when we look at our resource planning, which we
do bottom up, by the way, to get to least cost, we don't see a
need to have long line transmissions paid for by our consumers
because it really is in conflict with State policy. That said,
we have certain occasions right now. We are connected to the
Pacific Northwest and northern California, more so than
southern California, and so we have a line that was built to
access hydro from the Northwest and for us to transmit power
when it is cold in the winter there and they transmit down to
us when it is hot in the summer in California, but we did it on
participant funding and we actually have people that operate on
that line with different market models. So there are examples
of this occurring, especially in the West, where we effectively
don't need additional cost allocation mechanisms to make these
kind of investments work.
Mr. Jones. Mr. Shimkus, we do share that low-cost cheap
hydro with our friends in California.
Mr. Transeth. Just to answer the question about this whole
concept of benefits and the lack of definition, I think it goes
even further than that. It is not just the benefits, it is who
the beneficiaries are that need to be also included in this
process. A good example, like I said in my testimony, this is a
lot of speculative. We have a case study going on right now
with the MISO--that is the Midwest RTO--and what is going on in
our--how does Indiana, who does not have an RPS, it doesn't
need the value of renewables that are going to come out of
these MVP projects yet they are going to be forced because they
are part of the region to pay for the cost commensurate to
whatever it is that their load is for that new energy. If you
don't connect those two, benefits and beneficiaries, you can
never have a commensurate measure. You have to decide is this a
defined benefit that we can measure, and plus, are those who
are going to actually see the benefits receiving it
commensurate to what costs you are imposing upon them.
Mr. Shimkus. Great panel, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Engel, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Engel. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to direct a few questions to Mr. Transeth because I
understand you are testifying on behalf of the Coalition for
Fair Transmission Policy.
Mr. Transeth. Yes.
Mr. Engel. And includes Con Edison of New York----
Mr. Transeth. Yes.
Mr. Engel (continuing). As a member. I represent a lot of
New York City and Westchester County, and I want to make sure
that we understand your concerns. Firstly, do you agree with
Chairman Wellinghoff and NERC that we will need significant
expansion of our power lines by 2019?
Mr. Transeth. I am going to go back to one of the comments
I made during my original testimony, and that is, this it not
about an obvious need, as Mr. Welch talked about, in terms of
improving and upgrading the system and making sure that we are
going to be able to meet our energy needs as we are going
forward. The question involved in this whole debate is, you
know, where are we going to build this transmission, how much
are we going to build and who is going to pay for it, and that
last one is really the key that we are going to keep stumbling
upon as we have got to make decisions, and that is going to my
comments just a few minutes ago is deciding what are the
benefits, who are the beneficiaries, and somehow or another
coming up with some meaningful and supportable proposition of
how those are roughly commensurate, as the 7th Circuit put
forth in their case.
Mr. Engel. Let me give you a chance to expand and talk
about cost allocation, because that is what everyone is
concerned about here. I understand the current law, once a
transmission is approved, I understand the grid operators have
fairly broad discretion in determining who ought to pay for the
line. It could be all regional customers. Am I correct? Or it
could be a subset of consumers directly benefiting from the
line? Am I correct about that?
Mr. Transeth. Maybe one of the----
Mr. Brown. It depends on the region and the provisions in
each regional tariff.
Mr. Engel. OK.
Mr. Transeth. I guess I assume that if MISO, which is what
we are asking, we would like them to designate Michigan as a
separate sub-region. I see no reason why they couldn't amend
their tariff and do that, and that is what we are seeking and
looking for. So yes, I guess the answer to that is, if they
determine that in fact Michigan is not receiving sufficient
benefits to warrant 20 percent of the cost of these MVP
projects, that they could designate us as a separate sub-
region.
Mr. Engel. Let me give you a chance to add on to some of
what you said.
Mr. Transeth. That is always dangerous.
Mr. Engel. Only on our side it is.
In your opinion, does Order 1000's cost allocation make
transmission cost determinations more or less fair than the
current system?
Mr. Transeth. The potential is--as I said many times about
Order 1000, it is not so much what it says, it is what it
doesn't say. I think that the basis is there. It is all going
to kind of come out in how this is finally determined. At some
point or another, some decisions are going to have to be made,
at rehearing or as they go through the compliance filings. That
is going to somehow or another wash out and we are going to
know more about where they are coming, and I guess it is coming
from the chairman's question that I disagree with Chairman
Wellinghoff's statement. I think that there is a problem with
clarity with this order, and that is what we have to get to. We
need to start inserting some clarity into Order 1000 if we are
going to get to the point that you are asking.
Mr. Engel. Am I right in saying that Order 1000, according
to my interpretation of it, the costs need to be allocated at
least roughly commensurate with the estimated benefits and
those who don't receive benefits should not be allocated costs
and no costs should be allocated to another region unless that
other region agrees to it?
Mr. Transeth. That is the principles in which they
establish in Order 1000. I don't know if as you read the 620
pages that that necessarily comes out in the wash in the
process, but that is a principle that they stated, and by the
way, much of that language comes directly out of the 7th
Circuit case, so I assume that that was one of the factors in
which why they issued some of the language they did in Order
1000.
Mr. Engel. In your testimony, you testified that Order 1000
does not define the term ``benefits.'' Mr. White recently
mentioned the benefits. What definition of benefits do you
think is appropriate?
Mr. Transeth. Well, a $64,000 question I guess. Well, that
is going to be--I suppose if I knew the exact answer to that, I
should be sitting on FERC, but I think at the very minimum, we
have to make sure that whatever benefits that we are looking
at, that they are going to be somewhat measurable. We have got
to be able to say this is a benefit and somehow or another this
is going to have some measurable impact on certain parties, and
that gets to the second part that I talked about where you need
also to be able to find who the beneficiaries are.
Mr. Engel. Let me ask you a final question under the wire
with the chairman's benevolence. Will Order 1000 in your
opinion result in New York City residents have to pay more for
their electricity, and if so, why?
Mr. Transeth. I wouldn't want to speculate on that.
Mr. Engel. No hunch?
Mr. Transeth. In and of itself, Order 1000 would not do
that. It is how that gets implemented is whether that happens
or not. If it goes the way that we are afraid, it is probably
going to raise your cost. If on the other hand some of our
concerns are addressed and there is some clarity brought into
the process, no, then I think we get into some of the
situations that Mr. Welch was talking about in terms of
actually making some kind of meaningful impact with
transmission and competitive markets.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Pompeo, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Anybody on the panel--by way, Mr. Shimkus said he is an
electricity geek. That must make me an electricity geek in
training.
Does anybody on the panel think that Order 1000 favors or
disfavors any type of power generation either intentionally or
in its effect?
Mr. Jones. I would say no with the exception that it has a
heavy emphasis on public policy requirements State by State,
and you know what has been going on in the States. It is no
secret. Thirty States have RPSs.
Mr. Pompeo. Including Kansas.
Mr. Jones. Pardon?
Mr. Pompeo. Including Kansas.
Mr. Jones. Including your State.
Mr. Pompeo. And so you are saying then that it benefits or
it is designed to try and take account for and acknowledge
those public policies that those States have created?
Mr. Jones. Correct.
Mr. Transeth. Representative?
Mr. Pompeo. Yes.
Mr. Transeth. I guess I would word it as Order 1000 allows
for the opportunity which it did not before to States to
establish a public policy that says we want renewables and so
it will be developed that way.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you.
You know, I think things work pretty well in the Southwest
Power Pool. I think we have actually done a pretty good job, as
I have now had a chance to learn more about it. How many of
these--we talked about these interregional planning. How many
interregional lines would have been built in 2010? Do these
happen once a decade? Do we have one every couple hours? How
many of these are we really talking about?
Mr. Brown. Well, without knowing how to allocate the costs
for those lines, I would agree with Mr. Welch, none. In our
region, since the Energy Policy Act of 1992, very, very little
transmission has been built because no one really knew how to
allocate the costs and who was benefiting from the expansion of
the transmission network, and so when we tackled the issue of
cost allocation and our footprint, now all of a sudden we have
notices to construct to our members that exceed $5 billion
worth of transmission over the next 10 years. It clearly was an
impediment in our region. I can't speak for the West, because I
seem to think they are building all the transmission they need.
We were not. We are now. And in terms of understanding the
benefit from an engineer's perspective, it is a very simple
calculation of adjusted production cost savings, and all of our
States are used to dealing with that particular type of
calculation. Everyone has used it in regulatory proceedings for
decades and it is a very simple calculation. It has worked in
our region.
Mr. Transeth. Representative, I think that the answer to
that is, we have long neglected our transmission system for too
long and we are now on the verge of I think seeing a new, I
don't know what you want to call it, a renaissance, but we are
going to see a lot of transmission built in the coming years. I
think that the way we generate, transmit and use energy is
going to look completely different 10, 20 years from now, and
all of that is going to come into play with some of the
decisions like we are making today.
Mr. Pompeo. Great. I have heard some concerns, Mr. Welch, I
will direct this to you, that Order 1000 creates the risk over
the overbuild of transmission lines and it will create excess
capacity either as a national matter or in particular
localities or regions. Do you have any thoughts on that?
Mr. Welch. I do, and as a matter of fact, in my pre-filed
testimony, I give to the committee members a couple of maps.
One map shows the high-voltage grid in the United States and
the other map shows the interstate highway system in the United
States and another map shows the interstate gas pipelines in
the United States and look at them and ask yourself, especially
in States like Kansas, if you think that you are going to have
a levelized electric access to competitive markets with totally
the absence of a high-voltage electric grid, the map is stark
by its own realities that there is none there, so much so that
in Kansas when we first came there to do business, we were
asked by the State legislature to come and help them out
because they were frustrated because in Nick's area, they were
still wrestling to the ground this issue of cost allocation,
and there were lines there that had such huge benefits to
Kansas, they said well, hell, we will just pay for them
ourselves, we have to get somebody to build them. Huge price
disparities across the State of Kansas. In fact, if memory
serves me right, 6 cents a kilowatt-hour difference between the
east side of the State and the west side of the State, so if
you are on the west side of the State, you are not too happy.
Mr. Pompeo. Yes, I am familiar with that.
Mr. Welch. And as a result of that, we need to get that
regional transmission built, and you have people there that
aren't large enough to enjoy the benefits of large power
plants. As you know, they are trying to build a large power
plant there. Without that transmission system that lets it get
to other small regional users in Oklahoma and other States, it
won't exist and again you will be captive to that.
So look at the map and ask yourself if this is--if those
maps that you see there is the road, the map gives us the
future of what is going to be a competitive energy market. It
is stark. I don't think in my lifetime based on everything I
have seen today, I don't think in my lifetime we can overbuild
a transmission grid. It is just virtually impossible by all the
things--just to get to the cost allocation, we have been at
this about 10 years. Now we are going to address siting. We are
worried about giving FERC--first we don't want FERC to say
anything or we want them to say everything about the benefits
so we can pinpoint that but we don't want them involved in
siting, and so this is a system that just isn't set up for us
to get where we need to be.
Mr. Pompeo. Great. Thank you. We would love to build that
power plant in western Kansas. My time is expired.
Mr. Transeth. Mr. Chair, could I just give a counter answer
to that, I guess to a certain extent, if I could have just a
few minutes?
Mr. Whitfield. Then Mr. DiStasio will want to make a
comment.
Mr. Transeth. I just want to say, I guess I think that
there is the potential of overbuild with this because you are
removing a lot of the traditional economic factors that would
go into decision-making. You don't have a best practice
sometimes in play if you are socializing cost over a broad
system so I think that there is the potential. We would have to
be very careful to make sure that that doesn't happen, but that
would be one of the fears I would have that you have gold-
plated transmission systems as opposed to what might be that
which is adequate.
Mr. DiStasio. And I would just echo that in that if the
need is not clearly identified and the benefits test isn't
clearly articulated, you could end up with a circumstance where
there is really not a need for transmission if you go through a
typical resource planning process. Clearly, transmission is
part of that but some of the cities we represent--Sacramento,
Orlando, Phoenix--we don't need additional resources nor do we
need additional transmission. The Western Energy Coordinating
Council study that was talked about says there is no new
transmission needed in the West until at least 2020, and then
frankly, they are doing a 20-year study that will look out
beyond that, but we have no load growth in our system. We still
are struggling with a difficult economy so if some of these
lines were to get built under other public purposes, we could
end up with stranded investment that would actually compound
the issues that are happening in our communities right now by
adding cost to consumers for facilities they don't need.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
Mr. Bilbray, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilbray. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
It is interesting to hear some of the discussions from the
different parts of the world, and clarification, Mr. Jones, we
do not in San Diego, southern California may get the hydro but
San Diego doesn't, and I just want to make sure that Mr. Welch
understands that southern California and San Diego were blacked
out. We never want to be mixed up with Los Angeles, oK? In
fact, our slogan is ``Better north TJ than south L.A.''
But seriously, Mr. Jones, I am going to get down into the
grass here if not right into the dirt on some of this stuff
because I think it is important. I think we all--and this is
one thing Democrats and Republicans should be able to agree on.
Conservation avoidance of cost is the most efficient way of
providing services as a base, and one of the things that Mr.
Jones brought up that I think we need to talk about now while
we are talking about who is going to pay what and where is
this, you know, immense cost caused by obstruction of the
Federal Government in siting alignments.
Now, the Sacramento area may be able to go to renewables,
because let us face it, you go out in your suburbs, you have
got old farmland, you have got areas to convert. You are not
surrounded by gnatcatcher habitat. You do not have to go over
mountains to be able to get out of the area so you can legally
site some of these facilities. What about the fact that we
don't seem to see real general planning or intricate planning
on the siting of these alignments to start with?
I will give you an example. You can't go through a national
forest. You can't go through an Indian reservation. To get out
to our solar farms in the Imperial Valley, our lines have to be
three times longer than the freeway that drives out there. Now,
we are a country that says it is fine to run a freeway through
an Indian reservation and a national forest but not a power
line going out to a clean energy source. Now, Mr. Jones,
wouldn't you agree that maybe Democrats and Republicans ought
to be talking frankly and openly about what we need to do to
change the system to make it easier and most cost-effective to
start siting those lines before we even start talk about
building them?
Mr. Jones. Yes, absolutely, and I think you need to direct
these questions to Lauren Azar. I think she is a troubleshooter
and she is supposed to be heading up these rapid response teams
dealing with these Federal agency issues that really impede the
development of transmission in the West.
But your other point on energy efficiency and demand-side
management is well taken too, and I can assure you that the
commissioners and the governor representatives were all looking
at different scenarios in the West so that we may not have to
build that $5 billion transmission line that connects San Diego
with the Columbia River or with wind in Wyoming or wind in
Alberta.
Mr. Bilbray. We would just like to get out to our desert.
Mr. Jones. So my point----
Mr. Bilbray. By the way, let me point out that we have been
trying for 25 years with about eight different alignments to
run the gauntlet through the Federal Government to get to be
able to make that connection, but go ahead, Mr. Jones.
Mr. Jones. My only point is that we do have NGOs and
stakeholders that participate in our processes who feel very
strongly about these public values in our national lands, so if
we are going to build those transmission lines through these
public sensitive areas, as a State regulator, my biggest
concern is that they are least cost.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. Let me stop it right now and just say
this. If you run a city and a county, a city basically has a
fiduciary responsibility to site easements for water, gas and
electric, but when you get outside of the unincorporated areas,
we have not required under the Johnson Act for local council of
governments, counties, the regional governments to do the same
type of siting for transmission lines that every city does,
every municipality does in this country, and we have approached
it that well, that is the private sector or somebody else's
problem. Is there any reasonable argument against the Federal
Government finally saying under the Johnson Act we require you
to do this, this, this but we are also now going to require
that you sit down and figure out where the appropriate
easements are and start pre-siting these and be a participant
in it preplanning like we do with zoning right away for these
alignments like we do other things. Go ahead, jump in.
Mr. DiStasio. Can I answer that? First of all, I want to
comment because we have been somewhat critical of Order 1000
but specific to siting, we have been very supportive of the
efforts. In fact, several lines have been identified just under
the same types of conditions that you are suggesting where
corridors have been identified. We supported FERC getting
backstop authority if the States couldn't act within a year for
FERC to go ahead and assist with siting those lines.
Mr. Bilbray. Stop, stop. FERC doesn't know the land use,
doesn't know the easement, doesn't know endangered species,
doesn't know the terrain, and the trouble is, FERC comes in an
outsider when you already have local governments, cities and
counties serving as a body that could be making a decision on
this, they make it on everything else. They make it on military
bases, they make it on all kind of easements. Why is this
different than what we would do with our roads? We do it with
freeways. Why don't we do it with our power lines?
Mr. DiStasio. Understood. I was just commenting on the fact
that we are very supportive if something does need to get done
about siting. Our issues have been relatively narrow to cost
allocation when it comes to Order 1000, and I would also like
to say, your comments about energy efficiency are very well
taken. We have 15 percent energy efficiency we are doing over
10 years, and we are doing that before we look at any other
investments.
Mr. Bilbray. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that, and I just
wanted to point out that if we built our freeway system the way
we are trying to put our interlinks not just electricity but
also gas and water and a lot of other things, we would still be
driving on two-lane roads around this country. We don't ask the
private sector or the locals to decide and lay all these out.
These are all preplanned and done comprehensively regionally
and State-wide, and we need to be aggressive about that, and
that is something Democrats and Republicans should be able to
work on because it is our fault we have taken leadership there,
it is not theirs. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, you know, transmission cost allocation
brings out the passion in all of us.
Ms. Matsui, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
allowing me to ask questions on this panel.
I am fast becoming a geek too. This has really been very,
very interesting, and I had a bunch of questions I want to ask
you but most of them have been talked about. I really want to
get to the nub of what we are talking about here. I am from
California. SMUD is my local utility and has been having great
customer satisfaction, according to J.D. Powers, for at least 9
years. So we understand in a sense SMUD and what SMUD has been
trying to do with energy efficiency and renewables and so
forth, and sitting here today listening to what you have gone
through the Northwest in sharing and helping each other, that
to me is a solution to many of the situations that we encounter
in the western part of the United States. I guess what I saying
is that when we have local solutions and we have policy that
actually advocates for energy efficiencies and investments in
them and you have cooperation, it is working, and I think what
I am looking at from that side is the sense that you still need
this national type of outlook on transmission, which I think is
important also. But some of it I am looking at is also that it
might be something that we generally look upon as something we
do historically in the past as we laid out the freeways and the
railroads and things of that nature, which may not work out
today.
So I guess what I am going to ask you is that I guess the
four of you or so on this side who have a wish list about what
you would like to see as far as some flexibility moving forward
from FERC and from the other side what you can accept from this
side because I think there is a solution here, and I think it
is how you go about is what we are talking about today. So kind
of quickly, what would you like to see as far as FERC and this
order we are talking about moving forward and implementing it?
Mr. White. Thank you very much. I do believe, and we are
supporter of FERC Order 1000 in the sense that it does move the
ball forward. It helps better focus the planning objectives and
the construct for decision-making. What we would like to see is
that greater flexibility be given so that we can be part of
that decision-making process in terms of how these projects
will be paid for and so that there is clearly measurable
benefits. We have no problem paying for projects for which we
benefit, even if they are located outside of the State that I
work in. But the way some of this construct has been developed,
it perhaps overgeneralizes or assumes level of socialization of
the costs and benefits in a way that creates almost a one-size-
fits-all mentality, therefore precluding the ability of local
solutions including efficiency, including more strategically
placed generation.
Ms. Matsui. Do you agree also, Mr. Jones and Mr. DiStasio?
Mr. Jones. Yes, I agree with that. I think the Order 1000
struck the balance properly in the execution of it. It is
important to continue these regional planning processes that we
have in the West between California, the desert Southwest and
the Northwest. I think those will continue. The proof in the
pudding, though, is going to be in the regional planning,
compliance filings in 12 months and then as all of us has
mentioned, cost allocation is a key issue, interregional cost
allocations. Between California and the Northwest, we have
traditionally funded those on participant funding where the
benefits are clearly identified and the beneficiaries pay
through a long-term contract.
Mr. DiStasio. And I agree with that. I think to put a finer
point on it, I think Order 1000 was a well-intentioned order
but we do need to have beneficiary pays as one of the
permissible options for people to share the costs, a willing
seller and a willing buyer determining that there is a need for
that line.
Mr. Transeth. There is not really much I could add other
than to once again say this is not really a question. I think
we all can agree that we need to be looking at a robust
transmission system that is going to meet our future needs but
this is really coming down to once again, you know, where are
we going to build this, how much and who is going to pay for
it, and that is where the difficulty is occurring between----
Ms. Matsui. Can you help us out there?
Mr. Brown. The process that Southwest Power Pool has in
place takes all of those things into account. The beneficiaries
do pay. They are involved in the planning process to ensure
that we don't overbuild or underbuild, and the States have
total control of the cost allocation methodology.
Ms. Matsui. So you think that is a model? Do you agree?
Mr. Jones. Yes. That works well for SPP, and actually SPP
has been up in the Northwest talking about an energy and
balance market for integrating wind, so we like what they are
doing.
Ms. Matsui. All right. I am over, but am I allowed one more
comment here? Thank you.
Mr. Welch. Well, I will just go back to what I said in my
prepared comments, and I am going to quote one more time from
FERC's order: ``Costs may not be involuntarily allocated to
entities that do not receive benefits.'' End of statement. I
mean, that is pretty direct. And I said that I supported this,
and at the end of the day, I would be remiss to say that, you
know, I would never support something to be allocated to the
customers that I am entrusted to serve that they didn't get
benefits from.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, and I find this very
interesting, Mr. Chairman, because in California we do have
these huge water fights too where we talk about the beneficiary
and who pays. Thank you very much. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. And thank you all very much. We appreciate
your time and your expertise, and I would like to say that Mr.
Dingell had to leave but that he did want me to let all of you
know that he intends to submit some additional questions to you
to answer and get back with us, so we would appreciate that.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I just would like to ask that you
keep the record open for the requisite amount of time.
Mr. Whitfield. You may keep it open for 10 days. We will
keep it open for 10 days.
And we look forward to working with all of you as we move
forward, so thank you very much, and that concludes today's
hearing.
[Whereupon, at 12:27 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74708.152


