- PROTECTING THE ELECTRIC GRID: H.R.

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROTECTING THE ELECTRIC GRID: H.R. --------, THE GRID RELIABILITY AND
INFRASTRUCTURE DEFENSE ACT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 31, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-52

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

72-383 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2012

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chair                         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JIM MATHESON, Utah
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              Islands
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

7_____

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JAY INSLEE, Washington
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  JIM MATHESON, Utah
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             GENE GREEN, Texas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   LOIS CAPPS, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio)
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................    29
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    30
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................   152

Witnesses

Hon. Trent Franks, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Arizona........................................................    31
Prepared statement...........................................    34
Hon. James R. Langevin, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Rhode Island..........................................    44
Prepared statement...........................................    46
Patricia A. Hoffman, Assistant Secretary, Office of Electricity
Delivery and Energy Reliability, Department of Energy..........    52
Prepared statement...........................................    54
Additional comments (for Mr. McKinley).......................    90
Additional comments (for Mr. Olson)..........................   100
Paul N. Stockton, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland
Defense and Americas' Security Affairs, Department of Defense..    60
Prepared statement...........................................    62
Joseph H. McClelland, Director, Office of Electric Reliability,
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission...........................    72
Prepared statement...........................................    74
Additional comments..........................................    96
Gerry Cauley, President and CEO, North American Electric
Reliability Corporation........................................   103
Prepared statement...........................................   106
Franklin D. Kramer, former Assistant Secretary of Defense for
International Security Affairs, Department of Defense..........   121
Prepared statement...........................................   123
Barry R. Lawson, Associate Director, Power Delivery and
Reliability, National Rural Electric Cooperative Association...   132
Prepared statement...........................................   134

Submitted Material

Discussion Draft of H.R. --------, To amend the Federal Power Act
to protect the bulk-power system and electric infrastructure
critical to the defense of the United States against
cybersecurity and other threats and vulnerabilities............     7

PROTECTING THE ELECTRIC GRID: H.R. --------, THE GRID RELIABILITY AND
INFRASTRUCTURE DEFENSE ACT

----------

TUESDAY, MAY 31, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:07 p.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed
Whitfield (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Terry, Burgess,
Scalise, McMorris Rodgers, Olson, McKinley, Pompeo, Rush,
Markey and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Maryam Brown, Chief Counsel, Energy and
Power; Allison Busbee, Legislative Clerk; Patrick Currier,
Counsel, Energy and Power; Greg Dotson, Democratic Energy and
Environment Staff Director; and Caitlin Haberman, Democratic
Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. I call this hearing to order. The hearing is
entitled ``Protecting the Electric Grid: the Grid Reliability
and Infrastructure Defense Act.''
Today's hearing focuses on protecting the Nation's electric
grid from physical and cybersecurity threats and
vulnerabilities. A secure grid is of utmost importance to our
national security, of course, and our national economic
interests.
Cybersecurity threats and vulnerabilities to the electric
grid have increased in recent years and were the subject of
several hearings in the 110th and 111th Congresses. There is
evidence that bad actors have conducted cyber probes of U.S.
grid systems, and that cyber attacks have been conducted
against critical electric infrastructure in other countries.
This past February, a cyber attack dubbed Night Dragon,
which is believed to have emanated from China, targeted the
critical infrastructure of energy and petrochemical companies
in the United States. The Night Dragon attack was not overly
sophisticated, but was nevertheless successful in breaching the
computer systems of key assets. This example is one of several,
and is the tip of the iceberg, and illustrates that we must be
more vigilant in securing the Nation's critical energy
infrastructure, including the electric grid.
Beyond potential cyber attacks, the bulk power system
remains exposed to physical vulnerabilities and threats,
including direct terrorist attacks, weapons that can create an
electromagnetic pulse, and geomagnetic storms. Federal and
State agencies and industry stakeholders have sought to address
many of these concerns. In particular, through an extensive
stakeholder process, the North American Electric Reliability
Corporation, pursuant to its authority under section 215 of the
Federal Power Act, has worked over the last several years to
develop and implement reliability standards and to address grid
security vulnerabilities in a timely manner.
To address these shortcomings, the Committee recently
released a discussion draft entitled the ``Grid Reliability and
Infrastructure Defense Act'' or the GRID Act. The bill is
identical to bipartisan legislation developed by this committee
last Congress by Chairman Upton and Mr. Markey. The GRID Act
provides the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission with
emergency authority to respond to imminent physical and cyber
threats to the bulk power system and electric infrastructure
that serves facilities vital to our national defense. This
emergency authority can be triggered only upon a directive from
the President. The discussion draft also provides FERC with
authority to identify and remedy weaknesses that leave the grid
vulnerable to cyber attacks and electromagnetic pulse events.
Notably, the legislation also directs FERC to develop
regulations to facilitate the sharing of information, as
appropriate, between governmental agencies, NERC, and owners
and operators of the bulk power system. Doing so will improve
communication among affected stakeholders, which will result,
we hope, in a more secure grid.
Although the discussion draft is identical to last year's
bill, we expect that input from today's witnesses and insight
provided by those witnesses will help us improve the bill to
reflect current conditions and any changed circumstances. I
know, for example, that Congressman Franks has introduced
legislation that is, I believe, more narrowly focused than this
broader approach, and we look forward to his testimony to
explain his views on this area because he has spent a great
deal of time on it, as has Congressman Langevin.
So I want to thank the witnesses in advance for being with
us today. I will introduce them a little bit later.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[H.R. -------- follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. At this time I would like to yield for the
purpose of an opening statement to Mr. Rush, the ranking
member.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank you to
all the distinguished guests for being here today.
Mr. Chairman, today we are holding a hearing on the Grid
Reliability and Infrastructure Defense Act, or the GRID Act for
short. This bipartisan piece of legislation is identical to the
bill that was favorably reported out of the E&C Committee
unanimously last year and then went on to pass the House by a
voice vote before getting stalled in the Senate.
Mr. Chairman, this bill represents the type of legislation
that advances the security interests of all Americans and shows
what can be accomplished when we choose to work together in a
bipartisan manner. So I appreciate you conducting this hearing
today, Mr. Chairman, and I hope and expect that we will move
this bill with the same type of cooperation and collaboration
that we experienced last session as this legislation moves
through the committee.
Mr. Chairman, the U.S. electric grid consists of
interconnected transmission lines and local distribution
systems that deliver electricity to our homes, schools, our
offices, generation facilities and related communications
systems. The intricate design of the grid makes all of our
components highly interdependent so that problems in one
location can lead to a domino effect of reliability concerns in
other areas.
In today's highly digitized world, the operational controls
over the transmission grid at generators are increasingly
managed by computer systems such as the supervisory control and
data acquisition, or SCADA systems, which are linked to the
Internet or other communication systems as well as to each
other. This reliance on automation and two-way communication
amplifies the grid's vulnerability to remote cyber attacks.
Additionally, the increased use of advanced metering systems
and other smart grid capabilities leaves our electric grid even
more open to attack.
Mr. Chairman, this bill will amend the Federal Power Act to
add a new section, section 2015(a), which will give the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission, FERC, new authority to protect
the electric grid from cyber attack as well as from other
threats including those posed from geomagnetic storms created
by solar activity.
Additionally, this bill will provide FERC with the
authority to issue emergency orders to protect against a grid
security threat whether by malicious act, a geomagnetic storm,
or by targeted physical attacks if the President notifies the
commission that such a threat exists.
Mr. Chairman, we are all aware of the constant potential
threats that our Nation faces whether by countries such as
China and Russia, who have already conducted cyber probes of
the U.S. grid systems, or by terrorist organizations looking
for ways to weaken our capabilities. Cyber attacks can cause
untold harm to our Nation's grid, and they can be done from
faraway locations at very, very low cost and with little
ability to trace the source of these threats. So it is
imperative that we provide those agencies that are responsible
for protecting us, protecting our Nation's grid, protecting all
Americans with all the tools, all the authority and all the
resources that they need to keep us safe.
So Mr. Chairman, I applaud you for holding this very
important hearing today. I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses and our experts on this critical issue, and with
that, I yield back all the time that I have, which is 1 second.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you for being so generous once again,
Mr. Rush.
At this time I recognize the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Waxman, for the purposes of an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today, the subcommittee examines the Grid Reliability and
Infrastructure Defense Act. This legislation is as bipartisan
as they come. This legislation was born out of a bipartisan
realization that our electric grid simply isn't adequately
protected from a range of potential threats. And the current
process for addressing vulnerabilities in the electric grid is
not sufficient.
In an emergency situation where the grid faces an imminent
threat, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission currently
lacks authority to require the necessary protective measures.
There are also an ever-growing number of grid security
vulnerabilities. These are weaknesses in the grid that could be
exploited by criminals, terrorists or other countries to damage
our electric grid. These same weaknesses even make the grid
vulnerable to naturally occurring geomagnetic storms.
During the last Congress, Chairman Upton, Representatives
Ed Markey and Joe Barton and I developed the GRID Act on a
bipartisan basis. The majority and minority staffs had
extensive discussions with interested stakeholders and
agencies. We worked with many members to answer their
questions, address their concerns, and consider their
constructive suggestions. This cooperative process produced
strong bipartisan legislation.
On April 15, 2010, the committee favorably reported the
bill by a unanimous vote of 47 to zero. And on June 9, 2010,
the GRID Act passed the House by voice vote on the suspension
calendar. Unfortunately, the GRID Act did not become law in the
last Congress.
I commend the chairman for taking up the GRID Act for
consideration in this Congress. This bipartisan legislation
will provide the FERC with the authorities it needs to address
imminent threats to the electric grid with temporary emergency
orders. It also directs the Commission to address longer-term
grid vulnerabilities with standards written or approved by the
Commission.
In addition, the bill includes provisions that focus
specifically on the portions of the grid that serve facilities
critical to the defense of the United States. And the bill is
budget neutral.
These are important national security and grid reliability
issues. In the last Congress, we heard from the Defense
Department and from former Defense Secretaries, National
Security Advisors, and CIA Directors. They all told us that the
changes made by this bill are critical to our national
security.
I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses. Although
we are likely to hear some in industry argue against providing
FERC authority to address these serious threats, we worked
across the aisle in the last Congress to develop workable
legislation. I hope today marks the beginning of a similar
process in this Congress.
The GRID Act is simply too important to allow special
interests to weaken its effectiveness. The Committee needs to
act to protect the Nation's electric grid from cyber attacks,
direct physical attacks, electromagnetic pulses and solar
storms.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
OK. Today we have three panels of witnesses, and on the
first panel, we have two Members of Congress, the Honorable
Trent Franks of Arizona and Mr. Jim Langevin of Rhode Island.
We appreciate both of you being here very much, and Mr. Franks,
I will recognize you for a 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF HON. TRENT FRANKS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA; AND HON. JAMES R. LANGEVIN, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF RHODE ISLAND

STATEMENT OF TRENT FRANKS

Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good
afternoon to you, sir, and to Ranking Members Rush and Waxman
and the rest of the fellow members here on the committee.
I believe the subject of today's hearing is one of profound
implication and importance to western civilization, and
consequently, I hope the members will feel inclined to read my
written testimony. I just thank you again for allowing me to
testify here today.
Mr. Chairman, in our technological advancement, we have now
captured the electron and transported its utility into nearly
every business, home and industrial endeavor throughout the
civilized world. In so doing, we have advanced our standard of
living and productivity beyond dreams but we have also grown
profoundly dependent upon electricity and its many
accoutrements. In keeping with one of humanity's most reliable
hallmarks, we now found among our greatest strengths an
unsettling vulnerability to EMP, or electromagnetic pulse.
The effects of geomagnetic storms and electromagnetic
pulses on electric infrastructure are well documented with
nearly every space, weather and EMP expert recognizing the
dramatic disruptions and cataclysmic collapses these pulses can
bring to electric grids.
In 2008, the EMP Commission testified before the Armed
Services Committee, of which I am a member, that the U.S.
society and economy are so critically dependent upon the
availability of electricity that a significant collapse of the
grid precipitated by a major natural or manmade EMP event could
result in catastrophic civilian casualties. This conclusion is
echoed by separate reports recently compiled by the DO, DHS,
DOE and the National Academy of Sciences along with various
other government agencies and independent researchers. All of
them, Mr. Chairman, came to very similar conclusions. The
sobering reality is that this vulnerability if left unaddressed
could have grave societal-altering consequences.
Like many of you, I believe Federal regulations should be
very limited. However, our first national priority is national
security, and to protect our national security, we must protect
our major transformers from cascading destruction. To that end,
I have introduced the SHIELD Act, which differs primarily from
your discussion draft in three critical areas. Unlike the GRID
Act, which I commend this committee deeply for passing last
year, the SHIELD Act authorizes to promulgate standards
necessary to protect our electric infrastructure against both
natural and manmade electromagnetic pulse events if the
standards developed by the ERO are inadequate to protect
national security. The SHIELD Act additionally requires
automated hardware-based solutions rather than procedural and
operational safety measures alone, and the SHIELD Act does not
contain cybersecurity provisions, leaving the conflicting
approaches to that extremely important issue among the Members
of the Senate in particular to be debated in a separate bill.
Automated hardware, Mr. Chairman, is particularly important
when one considers the shortcomings of procedural and
operational safety measures alone in response to an EMP event.
According to solar weather experts, there is only 20 to 30
minutes warning from the time we predict a solar storm that may
affect us until the time it actually does. This is simply not
enough time to implement procedures that will adequately
protect the grid. Furthermore, these predictions are only
accurate one out of three times. This places a crushing dilemma
on industry, who must decide whether or not to heed the warning
with the knowledge that a wrong decision either way could
result in the loss of thousands or even millions of lives and
massive legal ramifications beyond expression.
Mr. Chairman and members, we are now 65 years into the
nuclear age, and the ominous intersection of jihadist terrorism
and nuclear proliferation has been inexorably and relentlessly
hurdling toward America and the free world for decades. But
when we add the dimension of asymmetric electromagnetic pulses
to the equation, we face a menace that may represent the
gravest short-term threat to the peace and security of the
human family in the world today. Certainly, there are those who
believe that the likelihood of terrorists or rogue states
obtaining nuclear weapons and using them in an EMP attack is
remote and it may be a reasonable conclusion for the moment,
but in the recent events of the Arab spring, which our
intelligence apparatus did not foresee, it shows us that
regimes can change very quickly. If terrorists or rogue states
do acquire nuclear weapons, hardening our electric grid would
immediately become a desperate national priority. However, that
process will take several years, and a regime change only takes
a few weeks, a missile launch only takes a few minutes. The
fact that we are now 100 percent vulnerable means that we
should start securing our electric infrastructure now. Indeed,
by reducing our vulnerability, we may reduce the likelihood
that terrorists or rogue states would attempt such an attack in
the first place.
Thankfully, Mr. Chairman and members, there is a moment in
the life of nearly every problem when it is big enough to be
seen by responsible, reasonable people and still small enough
to be solved. You and I live in that moment when there still
may be time for the free world to address and mitigate the
vulnerability that naturally occurring or weaponized EMP
represents to the mechanisms of our civilization. Your actions
today to protect America may gain you no fame or fanfare in the
annals of history. However, it may happen that in your
lifetime, a natural or manmade event so big has an effect so
small that none but a few will recognize the disaster that was
averted. And for the sake of our children and future
generations, I pray it happens exactly that way.
Thank you, and God bless you all.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Franks follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Franks.
Mr. Langevin, you are recognized for a 5-minute opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF JAMES R. LANGEVIN

Mr. Langevin. I would like to thank you, Chairman
Whitfield, and Ranking Member Rush and Ranking Member Waxman
for allowing me to testify on what I believe to be one of the
most critical national security issues facing our country
today: securing our electric grid from cyber vulnerabilities,
an issue to which I have devoted several years of my time and
effort, and I wanted to be here with my colleague, Mr. Franks.
As both a member of the House Armed Services Committee as
well as the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, I
sit at a very interesting nexus which gives me broad
transparency into the national security challenges that face
our Nation today, and I previously testified on this issue in
2009 after a bill that I drafted with then-Homeland Security
Chairman Bennie Thompson, which was adapted into then-Chairman
Markey's GRID Act, and I of course want to thank the committee
for including me in this discussion again here today.
We know that there are a number of actors who seek to do
harm to our networks from foreign nation-states, domestic
criminals and hackers, to disgruntled employees, and as the
threat and capability both grow, so does the risk to our
critical infrastructure. Now, this threat is not new. In the
110th Congress as chairman of the Homeland Security
Subcommittee with jurisdiction over cybersecurity, I conducted
a detailed examination of cyber threats to our critical
infrastructure, and I want to reiterate what I made clear in my
previous testimony before this subcommittee. I believe we
remain vulnerable to a cyber attack against the electric grid
that could cause severe damage to our critical infrastructure,
our economy, our security and even American lives.
Now, the vast majority of our critical assets are in
private hands, and because fixing vulnerabilities can be
costly, security can find itself in conflict with other
priorities like profit, competition and accountability to
shareholders. Sadly, the American people are the ones placed at
risk when the owners of our critical infrastructure fail to
prepare for the worst-case scenarios.
I was pleased by the early attention paid to the issue of
cybersecurity by the Obama administration, and despite some
delays in the process, I would like to commend the
administration for taking some very serious steps in the right
direction. Under the leadership of Cyber Coordination Howard
Schmidt and his staff, the White House has released legislative
guidance that envisions more government involvement in setting
standards and best practices for cyber protection across all
sectors of our critical infrastructure. This mirrors
philosophically the framework of legislation I introduced
earlier this year.
Now, DHS is also taking important steps to become more
involved in securing our critical infrastructure. The
establishment of the Industrial Controls Systems Computer
Emergency Response Team, or ICS-CERT, under Sean McGurk,
formalized a group of experts and fly-away teams that could
respond to cyber incidents across all sectors of our utilities.
However, a company must still request help from the
government before it can be deployed, and the simple act of
having to ask often forces decision makers and industry to
steer clear of seeking help for these complex problems. I am
pleased to see industry players increasingly stepping up to the
plate to combat these threats but I fear they cannot most fast
and far enough under the current system. As Michael Assante,
the president of the National Board of Information Security
Examiners and former chief security officer at the North
American Electric Reliability Corporation, or NERC, testified
last year, and I quote, ``We are not only susceptible but we
are not very well prepared.''
Now, I supported the GRID Act as it moved through the House
last year because it seems to address some of the unique
political and regulatory challenges in our power industry
today. Currently, we live under a system that does not
prioritize security but actively penalizes open reporting and
cooperation. The legislation that is before us today aims to
correct this by allowing Federal regulators greater authority
to protect Americans during times of imminent crisis. It also
provides for the issuance of orders to identify and mitigate
vulnerabilities to protect the bulk power system from cyber
attacks. While this measure is a significant step forward, I
would also encourage the committee to consider provisions in my
legislation and in Senate and administration proposals that
expand this model to other sectors of critical infrastructure
and enhance the ongoing efforts of DHS to quickly respond to a
major crisis.
I would also note my concern that by specifying only the
bulk power system, this legislation excludes critical
distribution systems that would leave major cities like New
York and Washington unprotected by the broader provisions of
this bill.
I will conclude by cautioning again that inaction on this
issue will make our Nation increasingly vulnerable to cyber
attacks from both outside and within. We know the threat
exists, and we have an opportunity to address it before any
further damage is caused. It is the responsibility of Congress
and the administration to take the appropriate steps that will
protect this Nation.
Once again, I would like to thank you, Chairman Whitfield
and Ranking Member Rush as well as Ranking Member Waxman, for
their attention to this very important issue and for the
opportunity to testify here today. I certainly look forward to
working with the Energy and Commerce Committee and to
supporting your efforts to raise awareness about securing our
critical infrastructure and protecting our citizens from cyber
attack.
Thank you, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Langevin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Langevin. We appreciate the
testimony of both of you.
As you know, this is an important issue with great
consequences for the country, and last year, of course, the
GRID Act did pass the House of Representatives but was unable
to get through the Senate, and we are quite familiar with that.
We pass a lot of things here that don't get through the Senate,
but our objective is to get something through the House and the
Senate and signed by the President. And I know, Mr. Franks,
that a large number of members of the Armed Services Committee,
and you serve on that as well, Mr. Langevin, are cosponsoring
your bill, and I am assuming, Mr. Langevin that your bill and
Senator Rockefeller's bill basically reflects the
administration's proposal. Is that correct?
Mr. Langevin. Well, I wouldn't go so far as to say that,
but they both move in a similar direction.
Mr. Whitfield. What I would like from both of you to just
give advice to this committee on what you think we need to do
to maximize our opportunity to get this passed in the Senate.
Mr. Franks?
Mr. Franks. Well, Mr. Chairman, as it happened last year, I
went over and personally lobbied the Senate as hard as I could
on the GRID Act, even though as I have laid out today, I
believe that there are some critically important things that
needed to be added to or changed. I met with Senator Murkowski
and others there in the chamber, and the big challenge was that
they had differing strategies on what should be done about
cybersecurity.
Now, let me make it so desperately clear here. I believe
that cybersecurity is a critically important issue, and I think
I would find myself largely in Mr. Langevin's camp on that
issue, but the problem is, the personalities there have
different strategies on how to address it, and I am trying to
protocol here, Mr. Chairman. They couldn't get together on
that, and that is why we felt like the issue should be
separated, not because that one is more important than the
other per se but because I just think it is going to be
especially difficult. That is complicated this year, as you
know. The White House just a few weeks ago, probably what you
were talking about with Mr. Langevin, released a legislative
proposal for nationwide cross-sector cybersecurity efforts, and
the Senate is working to produce a goal to meet those needs,
and my concern is that if we tie them together, we may weaken
both of them, because there is very little disagreement on the
EMP aspects of it. The Senators were very supportive of being
able to protect the grid itself, just had some very seriously
differing approaches to the cybersecurity element of it.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Mr. Langevin, do you have a comment?
Mr. Langevin. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would just say that
last year we were a bit frustrated by the Senate still
contemplating which path forward they were going to take. I was
fortunate to get an amendment included in the House Armed
Services defense authorization bill last year that would have
established a White House Office on Cybersecurity with a
director's position that would have been Senate confirmed, and
it would have included updates to the FISMA law. That did not
get through the conference committee last year because the
Senate was still struggling to determine which direction they
were going to take, whether it was going to be Rockefeller-
Snowe or Collins-Lieberman. I believe that the Senate is moving
in the direction of resolving those issues, and I am hopeful
that now that the White House has come out with its guidance on
their views on cybersecurity going forward that that will clear
some of the hurdles in the Senate and they will be able to come
together and reach an agreement which hopefully will allow the
GRID Act, will allow these issues to clear the hurdles that
remain ahead.
So I would say it is perseverance. We are going to have to
continue to keep the pressure on the Senate but hopefully, and
I would say that I am I close contact with Senator Sheldon
Whitehouse, who is also from Rhode Island and who is also one
of the leaders in the Senate on cybersecurity. He believes that
we will see quite positive progress on the issue of
cybersecurity in the Senate, so I am hopeful that we will see a
lot of these issues addressed and we will be able to get them
through conference.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you all very much, and we do
look forward to continuing to work with you because both of you
have been leaders in this area and we hope that we can continue
to call on you for your input.
At this time I will recognize the gentleman from Illinois.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to be brief.
Mr. Langevin, you have expressed some level of restraint
regarding this bill in that you think that it could be
strengthened in certain areas, and I am curious, I know that we
want to send the best bill that we can to the Senate. Again, we
can persevere, as you have indicated, but how do you think that
we can strengthen this bill?
Mr. Langevin. Well, a couple of things, Congressman Rush. I
would like to see the approach that we are taking here,
addressing the challenges to the bulk power system broadened to
include other areas of critical infrastructure, because some of
them would be in the jurisdiction of the full Energy and
Commerce Committee. Others may be in the area of the Financial
Services Committee. But I think that the approach that you are
taking here is a positive one with respect to the electric
grid.
In addition to that, I would like to see this bill address
distribution systems, not just transmission but distribution
systems. As I said, it is my understanding that because
distribution is not dealt with in the bill that areas like
Washington, D.C., and New York would be left out of the intent
and hopefully the coverage that this legislation would provide,
protection provided to our electric grid. So I would encourage
the committee to look further at that issue.
Mr. Rush. Congressman Franks, do you have any suggestions
along the same lines?
Mr. Franks. Well, I think that Congressman Langevin has it
absolutely right, that I know we have pictures of New York and
Washington but we still want to keep them around for a while,
and I think that it is wise to extend that to the transmission
lines.
Again, my primary purpose here is to try to focus as
narrowly as I can on maintaining the base electric grid,
because if that goes down, our cybersecurity issues are no
longer an issue because we don't have computer systems, we
don't have the electricity to run them, and it might behoove
the committee to consider a possibility of sending the GRID Act
over as it is and in a separate version just addressing the EMP
issue in case there is the issue where the Senate can't come
together on exactly how they want to do the cybersecurity, but
I emphasize one last time that the cybersecurity issue is
absolutely critical. I visited the Palo Verde nuclear power
plant in Arizona just outside by district. It is the largest
one in the Nation. And we had a hacker that was strokes away
from being able to go in and begin to monkey with the reactor
itself.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, my general assembly and my State
legislature, they just yesterday passed a bill out and sent it
to the governor addressing some of these same matters, and I am
interested in the other cities that you named but I am also
interested in the third city, the city by the lake, Chicago,
and what the threats are to Chicago also.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Rush.
Generally speaking, when we have Members of the House or
the Senate testifying, the chairman and ranking member are the
only ones that ask questions. However, I would ask our friends
on this side of the aisle if they have any questions. Mr.
Terry?
Mr. Terry. I don't, but I have worked with Trent on his
bill and I just wanted to thank both of you for your good work.
This is an extremely important issue, and as the ranking member
and the chairman both said, we need to get this to the point
where the Senate can pass it and we get it to the President's
desk, so thank you for your efforts. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Mr. Terry, and once again,
thank you all so much for your concern and your leadership on
this issue, and we will continue to work with you as we move
forward, and unless you all want to stay and hear the other
panel, we will let you go on in your other activities. So thank
you.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I would like to call up our
second panel, which includes the Honorable Patricia Hoffman,
who is the Assistant Secretary, Office of Electricity Delivery
and Energy Reliability at the Department of Energy. We have the
Honorable Paul Stockton, Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Homeland Security and America's Security Affairs at the U.S.
Department of Defense, and we have Mr. Joseph McClelland, who
is the director of the Office of Electric Reliability at FERC.
So welcome to the hearing, and thank you all for taking
time to be with us and to give us your expertise and thoughts
on this issue. So at this time, Ms. Hoffman, I will recognize
you for a 5-minute opening statement, and I would just point
out there is a little device on the top of the table that has a
red, green and yellow light, and when it turns red, we would
like for you to maybe think about coming to an end, but we
won't hold strictly to that.
Ms. Hoffman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF PATRICIA A. HOFFMAN, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, OFFICE
OF ELECTRICITY DELIVERY AND ENERGY RELIABILITY, DEPARTMENT OF
ENERGY; PAUL N. STOCKTON, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR
HOMELAND DEFENSE AND AMERICAS' SECURITY AFFAIRS, DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE; AND JOSEPH H. MCCLELLAND, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF ELECTRIC
RELIABILITY, FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION

STATEMENT OF PATRICIA A. HOFFMAN

Ms. Hoffman. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee. I would like to extend my thanks to the chairman
and the esteemed members of the committee for inviting me here
today to discuss cybersecurity issues facing the electric
industry, as well as potential legislation intended to
strengthen protection of the bulk power system and the electric
infrastructure.
Ensuring a resilient electric grid is particularly
important, since it is arguably the most complex and critical
infrastructure that others depend upon to delivery essential
services. The Department of Energy's Office of Electricity
Delivery and Energy Reliability supports the administration's
strategic, comprehensive approach to cybersecurity, and
specifically with respect to the electric grid, we recognize
that our focus should be on seven key areas. One is
facilitating public-private partnerships to accelerate grid
cybersecurity efforts; two, funding research and development of
advanced technology to create secure and resilient electricity
infrastructure; three, developing cybersecurity standards that
provide a baseline to protect against known vulnerabilities;
four, timely sharing of information; five, the development of
risk management frameworks; six, facilitation of incident
management and response capabilities; and seven, the
development of a highly skilled and adaptive workforce.
Cybersecurity for the electric grid must not only address
threats and vulnerabilities of traditional information systems
but also address the unique issues to electric control systems
such as SCADA systems and other control devices.
The Cyberspace Policy Review underscores the need to
strengthen public-private partnerships in order to design a
more secure technology and improve resilience of the critical
government and industry systems and networks. As directed by
HSPD-7, a public-private partnerships must be established to
effectively address national security concerns for critical
infrastructure. However, private industry alone cannot be
responsible for preventing, deterring, and mitigating effects
of deliberate efforts to destroy or exploit critical
infrastructure systems. Our Office has long recognized that
neither the government nor the private sector nor individual
citizens can meet cybersecurity challenges alone. We must work
together.
OE supports and funds activities to enhance cybersecurity
in the energy sector. Nearly all of the cybersecurity
activities involve public and private partnerships. Through
partnerships and competitive solicitations with the DOE,
Department of Energy National Laboratories, industry and
academia, OE has sponsored research and development of several
advanced cybersecurity technologies that are commercially
available, and a couple of these examples include a secure
serial communications for control system that has been
commercialized by Sweitzer Engineering Laboratory; a software
toolkit that provides auditing of SCADA security settings--this
was commercialized by Digital Bond, which is a small business;
vulnerability assessments of 38 different SCADA systems; and a
common vulnerabilities report to help utilities and vendors
mitigate vulnerabilities found in many SCADA systems.
Supporting the development of cybersecurity standards--our
office is collaborating with NIST and other agencies and
organizations to develop a framework and roadmap for
interoperability standards that include cybersecurity as a
critical element. The NIST smart grid interoperability panel
cybersecurity working group released the Cybersecurity
Guidelines for the Smart Grid. OE also partnered with leading
utilities to develop cybersecurity profiles to provide vendor-
neutral actionable guidance to utilities, vendors and
government entities on building cybersecurity into the smart
grid components at the development stage including safeguards
and implementing safeguards when integrated into the grid.
OE supports continued investment in developing and building
a cybersecurity workforce within the energy sector. Some
examples include working with State and local governments and
agencies to put together technical briefs, education forums,
workshops and exercises, just to name a few.
The Department fully supports the administration's proposed
comprehensive cybersecurity legislation focused on
cybersecurity for the American people, our Nation's critical
infrastructure and the Federal Government's own networks and
computers. Specifically, the administration proposes the
following legislative changes to enhance protection of critical
infrastructure: voluntary government assistance to industry,
voluntary sharing with industry and States and critical
infrastructure security risk mitigation.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the committee for its
leadership and supporting the protection of the bulk power
system and critical infrastructure against cyber threats. The
OE looks forward to working with Congress to further the
dialog, and I would be pleased to answer any questions that you
may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hoffman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Ms. Hoffman.
Mr. Stockton, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PAUL N. STOCKTON

Mr. Stockton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member
and other distinguished members of the committee. I have a
detailed statement which I will submit for the record, but I
want to focus on a few key points that I make that I hope will
be helpful to you as you exercise the leadership that we need
coming from the House of Representatives and the Congress as a
whole.
First of all, the Department of Defense is not in the lead
for energy security in the United States. For the Federal
Government, that is my colleagues at the Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security, Department of Defense in
support of them but let me emphasize, the Department of Defense
cannot execute its core missions in service of this Nation
unless we have a secure flow of commercial electric power, and
that is for a simple reason: the Department of Defense depends
for its energy 99 percent on the commercial sector. We don't
own the commercial sector. We never will. We have no regulatory
authority over it, but we are utterly dependent on the flow of
that commercial power.
Let me talk a little bit about why that is the case. In the
modern way of warfare, since 9/11, our forces deployed abroad
fighting in Afghanistan and Iraq and operating elsewhere depend
to an increasing extent on military facilities back here in the
United States to conduct and support those operations. To
generate, deploy and operate forces abroad, we depend on
military facilities in the States represented here today, and
if there is an interruption in the flow of commercial power to
those facilities, for a short period they have backup power
generation but for a longer disruption of the grid we would be
facing a situation of potentially devastating effects on our
conduct of defense operations abroad, and we could face serious
challenges at home. I will talk about those consequences in a
moment, but first I want to talk a little bit about the nature
of the threat.
First of all, the cyber threat is something we take very,
very seriously. That is why I am so strongly in support of the
administration's cybersecurity legislative proposal. But I want
to emphasize that cyber is only one of the threat vectors that
the Nation faces. Simple kinetic attacks intelligently
conducted by the adversary could have significant disruptive
effects on the flow of commercial power to Department of
Defense facilities in the United States. We heard Congressman
Franks speak eloquently about the risk of solar flares, again,
something we take very, very seriously. But Mr. Chairman,
looking at you and the ranking member, the States that you are
from as well as other States represented here, I would like to
turn for a moment to the New Madrid fault and the threat that
earthquakes pose as sort of a representative way of looking at
the nature of natural hazards. In the national-level exercise
we just conducted 2 weeks ago that posited for its scenario a
7.7 earthquake on the New Madrid fault, our friends at NERC
estimated that there would be a multi-State long-term power
outage, long term, weeks, potentially months, rolling blackouts
in Chicago and in the East Coast, and what I would like you to
think about is the downstream effects of such an event, both on
critical Department of Defense operations in Fort Campbell, for
example, everyplace else, all the facilities are represented
here today, but also in the immediate area. Two things to think
about. First of all, the way that the loss of electric power
would magnitude the scale of the catastrophe to which we would
all be responding. Municipal water systems in Memphis and
elsewhere, they depend on the flow of commercial power. When
that power stops, drinking water gradually gets turned off, and
in a situation like the New Madrid fault, gas lines are going
to be broken, fires are going to be breaking out, where is the
water pressure to fight those fires. Where is the gas to fuel
the trucks that will be going to fight the fires or collect
water elsewhere, because of course as you all know, gas pumps
and diesel pumps, they run on electric power. We would very
quickly be in a situation where we need to get emergency diesel
power flowing to nuclear power plants, State emergency
operations centers, everything else required to deal with the
disaster, and this would be in a situation where roads and
bridges are down and there is so much demand for backup diesel
power compared to the amount of diesel fuel that is
prepositioned at these facilities.
These are examples of the kinds of ways in which a disaster
would be magnified but I am looking at it from an additional
perspective. The Department of Defense would be supporting the
governors of your States through FEMA, of course, and there
would be big demand on the Department of Defense to provide
additional support at the same time that our response
operations would be severely disrupted. With the loss of
electric power, how are we going to receive the massive forces
that would be coming in at the request of governors? How are we
going to stage them, move them forward? These are challenges
that we need to take on very, very seriously.
Now, the Department of Defense is doing so, and what I
wanted to do briefly is talk about some of the remediation
efforts we are taking. First of all, we are working closely
with the Department of Energy to partner together in the
Federal Government so we can reach out to industry and find out
how we can work together with industry to provide industry with
what we would call a better design basis to ensure the
resilience of the electric power grid against all of these
hazards. I believe today's power grid has very strong
resilience but it is not designed for the kinds of threats that
we are talking about today, above all, cyber or carefully
designed kinetic attacks. We need to work together with
industry to find a way to enable them to build more resilience
into the grid and then inside the Department of Defense family,
we need to do a better job of securing the flow of electric
power to our critical defense facilities in all of the States
represented here today to make sure that single points of
failure on the flow of electric power coming in, we take care
of those problems and we remedy those in partnership with the
utilities in the same neighborhoods as our military facilities.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stockton follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Stockton.
Mr. McClelland, you are recognized for a 5-minute opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH H. MCCLELLAND

Mr. McClelland. Thank you. Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, thank you for the privilege to appear before you
today to discuss the security of the power grid. My name is Joe
McClelland and I am the Director of the Office of Electric
Reliability at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. I am
here today as a commission staff witness, and my remarks do not
necessarily represent the views of the commission or any
individual commissioner.
In the Energy Policy Act of 2005, Congress entrusted the
commission with a major new responsibility: to oversee
mandatory, enforceable reliability and cybersecurity standards
for the Nation's bulk power system. This authority is in
section 215 of the Federal Power Act. It is important to note
that FERC's authority under section 215 is limited to the
``bulk power system,'' which excludes Alaska and Hawaii,
transmission facilities in certain large cities such as New
York, as well as local distribution systems. Under section 215,
FERC cannot author or modify reliability or cybersecurity
standards but must depend upon an electric reliability
organization, or ERO, to perform this task. The commission
selected the North American Electric Reliability Corporation,
or NERC, as the ERO. The ERO develops and proposes
cybersecurity standards or modifications for the commission's
review, which can then either approve or remand. If the
commission approves the proposed cybersecurity standard, it
becomes mandatory in the United States, applying to the users,
owners and operators of the bulk power system. If the
commission remands a proposed standard, it is sent back to the
ERO for further consideration.
Pursuant to its responsibility to oversee the reliability
and cybersecurity of the power grid, in January of 2008 FERC
approved eight cybersecurity standards known as the critical
infrastructure protection, or CIP standards, but also directed
NERC to make significant modifications to them. Compliance with
these eight CIP standards first became mandatory on July 1,
2010. Although NERC has filed and the commission has approved
some modification to the CIP standards, the majority of the
commission's directed modifications to the CIP standards have
not yet been addressed by NERC. It is not clear how long it
will take for the CIP standards to be modified to eliminate
some of the significant gaps in protection within them.
On a related note, as smart grid technology is added to the
bulk power system, greater cybersecurity protections will be
required, given that this technology provides more access
points thereby increasing the grid's vulnerabilities. The
cybersecurity standards will apply to some but not most smart
grid applications.
Moreover, there are non-cyber threats that also pose
national security concerns. Naturally occurring events or
physical attacks against the power grid can cause equal or
greater destruction than cyber attacks, and the Federal
Government should have no less ability to protect against them.
One example is electromagnetic pulse, or EMP. An EMP event
could seriously degrade or shut down a large part of the power
grid. In addition to manmade attacks, EMP events are also
naturally generated, caused by solar flares disrupting the
earth's magnetic field. Such events are inevitable, can be
powerful, and can also cause significant and prolonged
disruptions to the grid. In fact, FERC, DHS and DOE recently
completed a joint EMP study through the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory. The study evaluated both manmade and naturally
occurring EMP events to determine their effects on the power
system and to identify protective mitigation measures that
could be installed. Included among its findings was that
without effective mitigation, if the solar storm of 1921, which
has been termed a one-in-100-year event, were to occur today,
well over 300 extra high-voltage transformers could be damaged
or destroyed, thereby interrupting power to 130 million people
for a period of years. Although section 215 of the Federal
Power Act can provide an adequate statutory foundation for the
development of routine reliability standards for the bulk power
system, a threat of cyber attacks or other intentional
malicious acts against the electric grid is different. These
are threats that can endanger national security that may be
posed by criminal organizations, terrorist groups, foreign
nations or others intent on attacking the United States through
its electric grid. Widespread disruption of electric service
can quickly undermine our government, our military, our economy
as well as endanger the health and safety of millions of our
citizens. Given the national security dimension to this threat,
there may be a need to act quickly, to act in a manner where
action is mandatory rather than voluntary and to protect
certain information from public disclosure. Faced with a cyber
or other national security threat to reliability, there may be
a need to act decisively in hours or days rather than weeks,
months or years. The commission's legal authority is inadequate
for such action.
New legislation should address several key concerns. First,
FERC should be permitted to take action before a cyber or
physical national security incident has occurred. Second, FERC
should be allowed to maintain appropriate confidentiality of
security-sensitive information. Third, the limitations of the
term ``bulk power system'' should be understood as our current
jurisdiction under 215 does not apply to Alaska and Hawaii as
well as some transmission facilities and all local distribution
facilities. Fourth, entities should be able to recover costs if
they occur to mitigate vulnerabilities and threats. And
finally, any legislation on national security threats to
reliability should cover not only cybersecurity threats but
also natural events and intentional physical malicious acts
including threats from an EMP. The GRID Act draft addresses
many of these issues.
Thank you for your attention today, and I look forward to
any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McClelland follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you all for your testimony.
Many of you heard Congressman Franks and Mr. Langevin also
talk about the need to expand. I noticed the White House in
their cybersecurity proposal is exactly that, is focused only
on cybersecurity, and that was a suggestion that Mr. Franks
made that let us do cybersecurity in one bill and let us
address the other issues in a separate bill. Do you all have
any thoughts as far as strategy, that that is something the
committee should attempt to do, or not? Ms. Hoffman.
Ms. Hoffman. As was mentioned earlier, cybersecurity is a
difficult and complex issue, and EMP and other issues are
different in nature, although the impact to the country can be
devastating, either one, so in order to tackle things one at a
time, the administration is looking just comprehensively at the
cyber legislation individually.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Mr. Stockton, do you have a comment?
Mr. Stockton. Yes, sir. I think that the cyber legislation
proposed by the administration is a critical step towards
protection of infrastructure as a whole would greatly benefit
the energy sector as well. Clearly, there are threats that we
have been discussing that wouldn't be encompassed by this
legislation but it is a critical building block on which we
need to make progress.
Mr. Whitfield. Right. Mr. McClelland?
Mr. McClelland. I don't see where the administration's bill
would conflict with the GRID Act. The administration's bill
provides a broad umbrella to partner with industry to bring the
practices to a higher level. The commission's authority under
215 doesn't have to conflict with that concept, and in fact,
any further enhancement of the commission's authority or any
regulatory authority may actually complement that concept.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, you know, Mr. Langevin pointed out the
need to expand from bulk systems to expand your section 215
authority. Do all of you agree that that should be done? I am
assuming you do, Mr. McClelland.
Mr. McClelland. As I pointed out in my testimony, the
commission, you know, our position or my position is that the
distribution systems aren't covered and so we wish to point out
that if the term ``bulk power system'' is followed, there would
be significant pieces of the power grid that would not be
protected if the GRID Act passes, either from a cybersecurity
or physical perspective.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Stockton, do you or Ms. Hoffman have any
comments on that part?
Ms. Hoffman. I think it is important to take a holistic
look at cybersecurity. As you look at the administration's
proposal, it wants to take a comprehensive approach so that
would include entities that would be defined as critical
whether they are in the bulk power system or at the
distribution. The important thing to note is, we need everybody
to understand how to advance cybersecurity procedures and
postures, and I would say that includes State governments as
well as any Federal action.
Mr. Whitfield. How would you all describe the coordination
between DOE, DOD and FERC today on these types of issues?
Ms. Hoffman. The coordination between DOD and DOE primarily
looks at defense facilities and the interface with the energy
sector. We do provide some support work on studies and looking
at the interdependency between the energy sector and the
defense. We are looking at micro grids. We are looking at
advanced technologies in support of the defense facilities. Our
coordination with FERC provides tools and technologies to look
at improved reliability for the electric sector. We do
coordinate it with information sharing to the extent possible,
looking at technologies that will actually improve the posture
of the system. So the coordination with FERC is, they are a
regulatory entity. The Department of Energy funds public-
private partnerships so in a sense, we are incentivizing
changes within industry, and FERC looks at regulating aspects
of industry.
Mr. Whitfield. Does anybody else have any comment?
Mr. McClelland. I would say there are formalized
mechanisms, as Ms. Hoffman pointed out. There are formalized
mechanisms such as the government coordinating council, where
the Department of Energy sits as the energy sector lead. FERC
participates in those formalized initiatives with the other
agencies. In addition, we have excellent working relationships
on an informal or an impromptu basis with the Department of
Energy, the Department of Defense, Department of Homeland
Security, CIA, NSA and NRC. So we reach out as necessary to
either borrow expertise or provide expertise pursuant to power
grid and individual needs on the grid.
Mr. Whitfield. When we talk about cybersecurity attacks, in
the United States I am not aware of any major attack, and
internationally, what comes to my mind is the Stuxnet in Iran
which basically shut down some of their nuclear power systems.
Are you aware of any other major cybersecurity attacks that
have had significant impact?
Ms. Hoffman. I am not aware of any major significant
attacks. Stuxnet was a very complex attack within the nuclear
sector. The issue or the focus that we have is, there are
incidents that may occur, and we need to be prepared to be able
to respond to those incidents quickly and promptly, and so as
we move forward, it is looking at, how do we have an incident
management plan or an incident response plan to be able to
address the event quickly, so looking at information exchange,
diagnostics, and the ability to deter and prevent any further
damage.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Mr. Rush, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I want to thank the witnesses. In the last
Congress, when we worked on this issue in a bipartisan manner,
the administration provided the members of this committee with
a classified briefing that helped us understand the
vulnerabilities to our electric grid and actions needed to
protect that same grid, and I just have to ask each of you, in
light of the fact that we have some new members, a lot of new
members on this subcommittee, will each of you agree to at a
time determined by the chairman to return and brief the members
of this committee again on the vulnerabilities of our
cybersecurity area? Will each of you do that?
Ms. Hoffman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Stockton. Yes.
Mr. McClelland. Yes.
Mr. Rush. Well, let me just ask Ms. Hoffman, you seem to
feel as though, the impression that I get is that you seem to
feel as though oK, this is a step in the right direction but it
is narrow, and what the administration is looking at is a much
broader view. They are taking a more universal, a broader view
of this particular issue. If you were to overlay the
administration's efforts on this bill, this proposal and the
GRID Act, what would we see and what would you see as being
some of the most significant differences?
Ms. Hoffman. The administration's proposed discussion draft
focuses on several things. It looks at criminal aspects with
respect to criminal charges and enforcement. It looks at
voluntary information sharing. It looks at voluntary
assistance. So it is building a public-private partnership to
actually build capabilities in support to the industry sector,
which is critically needed at this point in time. It also looks
at the ability to develop plans, risk-based plans. Now, most of
the critical infrastructure definition and the development of
risk-based plans will of course be done through a rulemaking
process through DHS, but the administration has taken a
holistic approach of trying to get all the sectors up to a
cybersecurity baseline performance.
Now, in deference to the GRID Act, which is focusing on
transformers, EMP, it is focusing on emergency and standard
development, which is a slightly different approach from what
the administration's position is but both those could be worked
for complementary efforts.
Mr. Rush. Do any of the other witnesses have any comments
on this?
Well, let me ask you this. It seems as though--I know my
State, as I indicated earlier, yesterday the members of the
general assembly passed smart grid regulations, and it seems as
though some of the States are starting to move on their own,
but the administration has a discussion draft or a pending
bill, and I am not sure whether or not these States who are
starting to take actions are basing any of their efforts on
what the administration is ultimately looking at. So how much
cooperation, how much sharing of information, how much
enlightenment is the administration providing to these States
so they won't have to come back and redo whatever legislation
they might pass prior to the administration getting its bill
passed, and what is the status of the administration's proposal
right now? There are two points there. Ms. Hoffman? You might
want to----
Ms. Hoffman. The status is, it is a discussion draft and
the administration is looking forward to working with Members
of Congress to continue that discussion, to advance the
components of that discussion draft. With respect to smart
grid, there are security profiles and standards that are
currently under development to provide security within the
devices as they are being built, so we are working
cybersecurity standards with the development of device as we
deploy and implement smart grid technologies.
One of the things that we are trying to do is provide
improved system performance, which can aid and provide benefit
for restoration time out as management so more preventive
versus looking at the consequences if an event occurs.
Mr. Rush. Gentlemen, my time is up.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Rush.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from West Virginia,
Mr. McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Hoffman, I wasn't here when this bill passed last year,
but I am curious if you could walk me through it or maybe
someone else on the panel perhaps. The way I am reading this,
the GRID Act, is we start with subsection A of definitions and
then we move into B, which is emergency response measures, and
that refers very specifically to security threat, and under
that subsection B, it has a subsection 6 which has cost
recovery. So there is a vehicle, a mechanism to recover cost
for threat. Then if we can skip C just for the moment that has
to do with vulnerability, and then you go to D, which is called
critical defense facilities. Under critical defense facilities,
there is a subsection on page 15 about cost recovery. I am just
curious, back on the one I skipped over, C, that is the section
that refers to grid security vulnerabilities. Under
vulnerabilities, there is no cost recovery by this particular
piece of legislation. Was that intentional, that
vulnerabilities would not be able to recover the costs, the
utility companies and anyone else would not be able to recover
their costs? I am sorry I singled you out but I don't care who
answers the question.
Mr. McClelland. I can take a shot at that. I believe you
are correct. I believe that threats are singled out for cost
recovery. I believe under the 100 most critical facilities for
the DOD, the user is required to pay for any upgrades or any
enhanced measures. I didn't see cost recovery for
vulnerabilities either.
Mr. McKinley. Does that make any sense to you, that there
is someone that could have the expense, if you read down
through all the issues that you have for if nothing else the
large transformer availability. There would be no way to
recover the cost to having that on board.
Mr. McClelland. Right. Well, we have consistently said at
the commission that we think that there must be three aspects
if you would like to have someone move on one of these issues.
One is, you have got to identify priorities, second, you have
to identify mitigation, and third, you have to provide cost
recovery.
Mr. McKinley. So are you in agreement then we probably
should have some cost recovery under vulnerabilities?
Mr. McClelland. Personally, I would say yes.
Mr. McKinley. Do the rest of you have any problem with cost
recovery under vulnerabilities?
Ms. Hoffman. We don't have any problem on cost recovery.
Just recognize cost recovery, no matter what the actions are,
is going to be recovered somewhere from the ratepayers, from
the entities that are being protected. So eventually----
Mr. McKinley. So if the others are very clear--I am not an
attorney, I am an engineer. It just tells me when you leave
something out, it looks like we have left it out deliberately.
There was another line that I caught under, I think it
might have been page 8, yes, page 8 on line 22. It talks about
there under cost recovery, only those that were substantial
costs. Could we get that clarified somehow? Can you all help us
with some language that might be more appropriate to define
what substantial costs would be?
Mr. McClelland. Sorry. Were you looking for a comment
there?
Mr. McKinley. Given the time, no. I hope that we can get
something back on that.
The last is a little bit of concern, Ms. Hoffman, to your
answer. So much of our defense is actually overseas, and we are
going to be very reliant on the other countries' responses to
threats and vulnerability. You said we would respond quickly.
And you said you didn't know of any attack. Do we have any
evidence of probing, inquiries, photography, suspicious work?
Is there something going on? Because it is one thing to have an
attack. The other is someone in preparation for it. Can you
share any----
Ms. Hoffman. I just don't have any information on that.
With respect to overseas, my focus is on the domestic U.S.
infrastructure so I----
Mr. McKinley. What should we do then overseas if we know
that is certainly a possibility with the terrorism that is
going on? Do we just simply rely on the other countries to
provide the same type of responses to threats and vulnerability
and then we react after it has happened, or what role do you
see us playing in trying to promulgate something now?
Ms. Hoffman. With respect to international grid structures,
you know, Europe has their own sort of response mechanisms for
any sort of emergency that happens on their system. I have to
admit that I don't have a great insight or detail on how we
should respond for an overseas issue.
Mr. McKinley. I know I am running over on time. Is there
some way we could maybe work something like that into here,
something you could provide to us later to how we might be able
to integrate both the European and the American grid together,
at least in terms of cybersecurity? Thank you very much.
Mr. Whitfield. Did you want to respond, Ms. Hoffman?
Ms. Hoffman. Yes, I am willing to have further dialog.
Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Massachusetts, Mr. Markey, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much. Thank you
for having this very important hearing, and thanks to Mr.
Franks and everyone else who is here for their interest in this
issue.
Chairman Upton has continued his efforts on the bipartisan
GRID Act, which I introduced with him in the last Congress.
That legislation passed the Houser on suspension one year ago
today, and Mr. Upton and I worked together in a bipartisan
fashion to pass the bill a year ago, and I think this is a
perfect example of bipartisanship because, remarkably, 99
percent of the electric energy used to power our military
facilities including critical strategic command assets comes
from the commercially operated grid, and over the last several
years, the grid's vulnerability to cyber threats has come into
sharp focus. The Department of Homeland Security revealed the
so-called aurora vulnerability through which hackers could use
communications networks to physically destroy electric
generators, transformers and other critical assets.
Just over a week ago, Lockheed Martin suffered what it
called a significant and tenacious cyber attack on its system,
and in today's Wall Street Journal, a description of the
Defense Department's cybersecurity plan has a military official
quoted as saying that if a terrorist or other adversary shuts
down our power grid, maybe we will put a missile down one of
your smokestacks. Unlike the frequent outages experienced by
Pepco's customers every time the Washington, D.C., area
experiences a serious storm, a coordinated attack on the grid
could literally shut down the U.S. economy, putting lives at
risk and costing tends of billions of dollars. Damage from such
an attack could take months or even years to recover from.
Moreover, from such an event may not just be a matter of
rebuilding. Three nuclear reactors in Japan have suffered near-
complete core meltdowns after the earthquake caused a loss of
electricity needed to cool them down. Unit 1's meltdown likely
began just a few short hours after the earthquake, tsunami and
blackout. The hot radioactive fuel is believed to have burned
holes that are as much as 10 centimeters wide through the
pressure vessels. It is expected to take months to stabilize
the reactors and decades to clean up the damage that the
meltdown caused. And Mr. Stockton mentioned that the power
outage risk associated with earthquakes near the New Madrid
fault line is notable because there are extra nuclear reactors
located near it, and those several reactors could be
vulnerable.
So Mr. McClelland, let me ask you this. Here in the United
States in the past 8 years, there have been at least 69 reports
of emergency diesel generators failing at 48 nuclear reactors.
Nineteen of these failures lasted for more than 2 weeks, and
six lasted longer than a month, and there aren't any
requirements that spent nuclear fuel pools have backup power at
all when there is no fuel in the reactor core. Clearly, a
blackout could cause a meltdown in this country too.
Mr. McClelland, do you believe that the portions of the
grid that supply electricity to our nuclear reactors, that is,
electricity to the reactor, not from the reactor, are more
secure than the rest of the grid?
Mr. McClelland. The commission has been working with the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission on this issue, and there are
three sources of power. There is the offsite power, that you
just asked about, the on-site diesel generators----
Mr. Markey. So they are more secure? Are you saying they
are more secure?
Mr. McClelland. There are agreements in place between the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission----
Mr. Markey. No, but today, are they are more secure than
the rest of the system, or not?
Mr. McClelland. In many cases, no.
Mr. Markey. No. The answer is no. Thank you.
Mr. McClelland, since the legislative hearing this
committee held in October of 2009, have sufficient measures
been put in place to secure the American electrical grid from
cyber and physical attack?
Mr. McClelland. There has been some progress on the NERC
standards, some submission as far as----
Mr. Markey. Have sufficient measures been put in place?
``Sufficient'' is the key word at this point.
Mr. McClelland. We have issued inquiries to the NERC.
Mr. Markey. So are you saying there are sufficient----
Mr. McClelland. There have been some filings made and we
are checking the status of those filings to see whether or not
they do indeed represent progress.
Mr. Markey. Well, let me ask you this. Given that the
number of cyber access points to the grid is increasingly
rapidly with the growth of smart grid applications, do you
believe the threat facing the grid is greater or less than it
was a year ago when the House overwhelmingly passed grid
security legislation, given the fact that a smart grid actually
winds up with no vulnerabilities, ironically.
Mr. McClelland. Yes, the threats are greater.
Mr. Markey. So you think there could be greater
vulnerability?
Mr. McClelland. Undoubtedly, yes.
Mr. Markey. Do you believe that the way the grid security
standards are currently set is even capable of leading to the
rapid adoption of standards that are sufficient to respond to
the threat that our grid faces?
Mr. McClelland. The commission has said on numerous
occasions that when it comes to national security, the
standards development process is too slow, it is too open and
it is too unpredictable.
Mr. Markey. Mr. Stockton, do you agree with that?
Mr. Stockton. He is better positioned to assess the
adequacy of the regulatory environment.
Mr. Markey. Ms. Hoffman?
Ms. Hoffman. There is room for improvement.
Mr. Markey. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Terry, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Terry. Thank you.
Mr. McClelland, in the SHIELD Act versus the GRID Act, on
FERC authority, do you feel that you need additional level of
authority to respond to a national security threat? Can you be
more specific in that? Then on the flip side of that additional
authority is how we balance that with State regulatory
entities.
Mr. McClelland. The SHIELD act provides the commission with
a proviso that if it finds the NERC standard insufficient, it
can author a measure to put into place to address a security
vulnerability. The commission currently under the 215 process
cannot author or modify reliability standards. We can't author
or modify NERC alerts. We can provide input but we cannot
author or modify. I feel it is important that the commission be
given that direct authority to be able to order interim
measures or measures to be put into place, to write those
measures and to direct that they put into place to address
vulnerabilities to the bulk power system or threats.
Mr. Terry. And in regard to that, do you foresee any
difficulties then working with State regulatory agencies on the
same issues?
Mr. McClelland. I think it is going to be very important
that the commission coordinate not only with the State
regulatory agencies but with the electric reliability
organization and with the affected entities that the commission
communicates with, so yes, I think it is very important.
Mr. Terry. Ms. Hoffman, do you have any thoughts in regard
to the additional jurisdictional request?
Ms. Hoffman. I think it is absolutely important for the
Federal FERC to coordinate with the State entities in looking
at cybersecurity vulnerabilities, mitigation measures,
solutions, because as we move forward, the more educated and
consistent we are across the board as we take a comprehensive
approach, the more it will benefit not only the electric sector
but other sectors that may have the involvement with States or
other entities.
Mr. Terry. All right. Thank you.
The other question I have in regard to the hardening of the
grid, what type of hardware solutions exist out there? Would
you have under the SHIELD or GRID Act the appropriate ability,
authority to, for want of a better word, mandate the technology
and is there any conclusions on what the costs would be
nationally to adopt the hardware solutions? Mr. McClelland?
Mr. McClelland. There are several different aspects of
electromagnetic pulse. If we confine the discussion to the
high-altitude electromagnetic pulse from a nuclear detonation,
that is a good example because it includes all three
components. E1 is a high-energy radiofrequency burst. E3 is a
ground-induced current. The ground-induced currents attack bulk
power system transformers. They find their way onto the bulk
power system transformers and destroy those transformers very
quickly. One tried-and-true method is series compensation, that
is to say putting capacitors in the line. That stops the flow
of ground-induced current, assuming there are no parallel paths
to that line.
Back to E1, it is more difficult. It is more challenging. I
did receive some information recently from an Israeli scientist
that shows promising technology for erecting a Faraday cage. A
Faraday cage would block the E1 component, and it is simply
spray-on, metallic spray-on coating that looks very promising
in this area. So there is development that has been undertaken.
There are others in the world that have deployed effective
mitigations against electromagnetic pulse. We have not done so
in this country.
Mr. Terry. At what cost?
Mr. McClelland. I can get back to you with those numbers. I
do have those numbers but not at my fingertips. And I will just
say this right up front. I think E1 is more challenging but I
do have numbers also for E1 that I can get back to you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Mr. Stockton or Ms. Hoffman? Ms. Hoffman first.
Ms. Hoffman. I would just add to that, Joe adequately
talked about some of the hardening-type activities that could
be done. The other thing to keep in mind is the current state
of health of the transformers. You can do some hardening, but
if the current health of the transformer is not where it should
be, there will be vulnerability, so also assessing the current
health of the transformer will also impact to what level of
deterrence or capability they have to withstand an EMP or
geomagnetic solar flare. Some of the things that we need to ask
is, how much do we want to harden against? Are we talking about
a 200-amp thing or what is currently tested up to as an 80 amp?
The other thing, do we have enough manufacturing capability of
transformers in the United States? As we look at it, hardening
is only one solution and there are several sets of solutions
that we must keep in mind.
Mr. Stockton. Let me follow up. Building resilience into
the system so we can provide for a rapid return of
functionality, that is another alternative to hardening. We
need to be able to ensure that we can from a Department of
Defense perspective get back to conducting our core missions no
matter what. Sometimes hardening will be the best, most cost-
effective approach. Other times, quick restoration of enough
power to do the bare minimum to operate those core functions,
that makes better sense from a cost-effective perspective.
Mr. Whitfield. Ms. McMorris-Rodgers is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mrs. McMorris-Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks
to all the witnesses for being here today. I appreciate your
testimony. And we have certainly heard about the
vulnerabilities and it suggests that there does need to be
better coordination between the private sector and the
government.
Commissioner McClelland and the rest of the panel, what are
the standard operating procedures for an agency that has
regulatory or other authority over a critical sector of our
economy when a credible threat is received? For example, how
does FERC communicate? Does it direct NERC to issue standards?
How are those standards communicated to users of the system and
what is the protocol for NERC?
Mr. McClelland. If I might start with a correction, it is
Mr. McClelland. I am not a commissioner.
Mrs. McMorris-Rodgers. Oh, yes, that is right.
Mr. McClelland. Thank you. I will answer your question by
saying it depends on the issue. If it is an urgent matter that
affects just a few entities, it may be very appropriate--and
the commission has done this--to bring in members of the
affected utility who have security clearances, brief them in
detail on the perceived vulnerability or threat and work out a
tabletop solution as to how they might increase their
preparedness for some interim period of time. It wouldn't be
appropriate, necessarily appropriate to try to develop a
standard around a very sophisticated targeted threat that
exploits a vulnerability with a handful of entities.
If it is a larger issue, the commission engages in a
rulemaking procedure and so the commission would order NERC
either upon a filing or upon its own motion to address a
specific issue, a security issue. NERC would then receive the
order, engage industry through industry volunteers and a
standards development process. That process routinely takes
years. At the end of that time period, NERC would submit a
standard and the commission would be in the position to either
approve the standard, at which time it would become mandatory,
enforceable, or to remand the standard for further work at
which time NERC would take it back, consider the commission's
comments and continue to pick up that issue and work on a
standard.
Ms. Hoffman. If I may add to that?
Mrs. McMorris-Rodgers. Please.
Ms. Hoffman. With respect to a cyber event, generally we
follow the national cybersecurity response framework, but cyber
events will generally be coordinated through US CERT. They will
go through some analysis and forensics. They will bring the
Energy Sector Coordinating Council as well as the government
Coordinating Council. They will do risk and consequence
analysis to determine how is that going to impact the sector,
share it with the industry, the information that is available,
and then be able to actually move forward with the industry's
help on mitigation measures. So it is really key to having that
information sharing and that quick response capability that is
very important.
Mr. McClelland. May I add just one thing to that?
Mrs. McMorris-Rodgers. Please.
Mr. McClelland. The only action that is mandatory is a
standard. Until such time as the ERO or NERC develops a
standard, submits it to the commission and it is approved,
nothing is mandatory. So there are some other interim actions.
NERC could issue an alert, for instance. It could be an
advisory or a recommendation or an essential action. None of
those would be mandatory but they do show levels of increasing
urgency. NERC can convey the information to the industry, ask
for a follow-up response and they communicate to the industry
the importance of those levels. But outside of a standard,
nothing is mandatory.
Mrs. McMorris-Rodgers. Do you believe that the current
system is effective, and how could it be enhanced?
Mr. McClelland. I think that the current system can be
effective for routine reliability matters, tree trimming for
instance, but when it comes to national security issues, these
are fast-moving, very sophisticated, sometimes highly targeted
situations and we have come to the conclusion that no, the
standards development process is not adequate to address these
types of issues. Although it can raise the bar to narrow the
universe of attackers, it is not adequate in the case where
national security is jeopardized to use the standards
development process.
Ms. Hoffman. If I may add, there is room for improvement.
From the perspective, we need to do a better job with respect
to information sharing. That goes back to what is in the
administration's comprehensive bill as well as this is looking
at protection of information. That information sharing is a key
critical component to getting to an effective response and
mitigation measures whether it is done by the industry by
themselves or it is actually looked at from a different action
point of view.
Mrs. McMorris-Rodgers. Thank you, everyone.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Olson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would like to
welcome the witnesses and thank you all for coming and giving
us your expertise and your time.
I have got a couple of questions for you, Mr. McClelland,
and you, Ms. Hoffman. Specifically, if the FERC and the DOE had
to order a generating unit to operate for reliability purposes
or in an emergency situation and doing so would result in that
unit exceeding an environmental permit limit, would FERC or DOE
indemnify the unit operator from any and all agency action or
private citizen lawsuit liability?
Ms. Hoffman. I will get back to you for further
clarification, but it is my understanding, we do not have
jurisdiction over another agency's fines, penalties,
regulations.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Olson. Mr. McClelland?
Mr. McClelland. The commission has acted in conjunction
with DOE on one other occasion, to my memory. It was the first
time that section 207 in the Federal Power Act had been
invoked. DOD invoked section 202. In that particular case,
there were generating units serving the Washington, D.C.,
region and transmission upgrades that needed to be performed.
In that case, however, both DOE and FERC did not need to
conflict or clash with the environmental regulations. So I know
of no case where that has already occurred but I can certainly
posit that back to our general counsel and we can answer that
question for you.
Mr. Olson. Thank you for that. I just want to know, you
know, what could happen? What is the realm of possibility to a
company that obeys orders from you but in doing some exceeds
some environmental limitations from some other agency? I mean,
this is a serious problem. If you tell them to do this because
there are reliability issues or emergency situations, by gosh,
they are going to do that and that is the right thing to do,
but certainly we don't want to have any exposure to them for
doing with one arm what the government is telling them to do
and the other arm says no, you guys exceeded some permitting
process, we are going to punish you for doing that. I mean,
again, I greatly appreciate your answers to those questions
because I have had some operators back home in Texas ask me
these exact questions because we have many, many natural
disasters--hurricanes, tornadoes, you know, freezes, all of the
above--that impacted sometimes our reliability of our grid, and
I know there are differences between some of our systems in
Texas but again, we do have some people out there who are very
concerned about this, and I would appreciate an answer to those
questions.
That is all I have. I yield back my time, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Olson.
Thank you all very much for taking the time to come and
testify. We appreciate your input and look--yes?
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, if I might, this is something that
is kind of gnawing at me. I tried to get to this issue in my
line of questioning. Is there an administration bill and has
that bill been filed in the Senate? I know it is not in the
House.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, they may be able to answer you. It was
my understanding, and I may be wrong, that Mr. Rockefeller had
introduced a bill similar to the administration's request, but
maybe they can answer it.
Mr. Rush. Is that the bill, Ms. Hoffman?
Ms. Hoffman. I don't have explicit knowledge. All I have
right now is the discussion draft, so I am just not aware.
Mr. Whitfield. Do you know, Mr. Stockton?
Mr. Stockton. The same discussion draft.
Mr. Whitfield. Do you know, McClelland?
Mr. McClelland. Sorry, it is the same.
Mr. Whitfield. So the White House doesn't talk to you any
more than it talks to us, right? We will find out.
Mr. Markey?
Mr. Markey. Can I just be recognized for 2 additional
minutes to ask--I just have another question or two.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection, I will give you 2
additional minutes.
Mr. Markey. I thank the chairman very much.
This is a very serious threat to our country. We know that
al Qaeda and others target us and we know that there are many,
many PhDs inside of al Qaeda, whether we like it or not. That
is what we found in Boston when Mohammad Atta and those other
nine were up there in my district plotting on hijacking those
tow planes in my district. They were well-educated people, very
smart. They tried to find the aperture, and they found out in
the aviation system. They are very technically sophisticated
people. That is the one thing we did learn about al Qaeda, and
that is why I have such a passion for this issue.
Back in 2006, the North American Electric Reliability
Corporation proposed some grid security standards that seemed
to be fairly limited. One of them even allows utilities to
decide for themselves which of their assets are critical and
thus subject to the standards in the first place. Only 29
percent of power-generating owners self-reported that they
owned a single critical asset. Isn't that right, Mr.
McClelland?
Mr. McClelland. Yes.
Mr. Markey. So 70 percent of the electric utility felt they
have no critical assets and----
Mr. McClelland. Critical----
Mr. Markey. Excuse me?
Mr. McClelland. Sorry. I was going to say the distinction
is critical cyber assets. Those are the assets that fall under
the standards.
Mr. Markey. And I just think that that is a mentality here
that we have to be realistic about. You know, we have moved to
a new era. We are potentially under assault in this sector in
the same way that you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, the attack on
the Iranian nuclear facility. That was just a very smart way of
some very smart people figuring how to disable a nuclear power
plant in Iran from a distance, and thank goodness whoever those
people are that they were able to do it, disable it and still
not cause a nuclear disruption, but there may be others that
are not so benign in what their objectives are and the harm
that they can do.
So I just think that this isn't something where you self-
identify yourself as potentially being a problem. I think we
have to decide that there is a problem and that al Qaeda is out
there. Do you agree with that, Mr. McClelland?
Mr. McClelland. Yes, and I would just add one distinction,
that NERC has submitted a standard to the commission where
critical assets, now, there are several designations for
critical assets. Assets that serve nuclear facilities, for
instance, are now deemed critical assets. The commission,
however, has requested additional information because critical
assets are not the assets that are covered by the standard. It
is critical cyber assets. So the commission has asked, one of
the lines of questions is, tell us how that translates to
critical cyber assets because those indeed are still self-
determinations.
Mr. Markey. Is NERC's guidance advisory or mandatory?
Mr. McClelland. The standard that NERC has proposed to the
commission would be mandatory, and that would be the
designation, bright-line designations of critical assets which
can help guide an entity to self-determine critical cyber
assets, which fall under the standard.
Mr. Markey. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you all. Thank you once again for
testifying. We look forward to working with you.
At this time I would like to call up the third panel of
witnesses. That would be Mr. Gerry Cauley, President and CEO of
North American Electric Reliability Corporation, Mr. Franklin
Kramer, former Assistant Secretary of Defense for International
Security Affairs at the U.S. Department of Defense, and Mr.
Barry Lawson, Associate Director, Power Delivery and
Reliability at the National Rural Electric Cooperative
Association.
Welcome to the hearing. We look forward to your testimony.
At this time, Mr. Cauley, I will recognize you for 5 minutes
for the purposes of your opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF GERRY CAULEY, PRESIDENT AND CEO, NORTH AMERICAN
ELECTRIC RELIABILITY CORPORATION; FRANKLIN D. KRAMER, FORMER
ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTERNATIONAL SECURITY
AFFAIRS; AND BARRY R. LAWSON, ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR, POWER
DELIVERY AND RELIABILITY, NATIONAL RURAL ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE
ASSOCIATION

STATEMENT OF GERRY CAULEY

Mr. Cauley. Thank you, and good afternoon, Chairman
Whitfield and Ranking Member Rush and members of the
subcommittee and fellow panelists.
As CEO of the organization charged with ensuring
reliability and security of the North American grid, I wake up
every day concerned about emerging risks caused by the
intentional actions of our adversaries who would want to harm
our Nation and our citizens.
The security of the North American bulk power system is an
utmost priority for NERC. The mainstay of NERC's critical
infrastructure program is a set of nine cybersecurity standards
that we actively monitor and enforce. We have recently made
significant strides in improving our cyber standards.
When I came on board at NERC in 2010, I recognized the
importance of establishing bright-line criteria, as we just
heard from the previous testimony, to identify critical assets
to be protected. A new standard was developed in 6 months and
filed with the commission in February of this year and is
pending their approval. Our standards process works for what it
was intended to do: to establish sustained baseline
requirements for the reliability and resilience of the bulk
power system.
However, there is no single approach, not even compliance
with mandatory standards, that will protect the grid against
all potential threats from physical and cyber attacks. The
threat environment is constantly changing and our defenses must
keep pace. Achieving a high degree of resilience requires
continuously adaptive measures beyond those outlined in our
standards, measures we are actively pursuing today.
The most important of these activities is the operation of
our electricity sector information sharing and analysis center.
In this role, NERC works closely with Federal partners to
promptly disseminate threat indications to electricity sector
participants. NERC staff has the necessary security clearances
to work with the Department of Homeland Security, DOE and
Federal intelligence agencies to generate unclassified
recommendations and actions for industry.
Using this process, NERC has issued 14 security-related
alerts since January 2010 covering such items as Aurora,
Stuxnet, Night Dragon and others. The NERC alert system is
working well. Coupled with our CIP standards and the option of
using a new expedited and confidential process for developing
standards, NERC has a strong foundation of tools we need to
protect the cybersecurity of the bulk power system.
As outlined in my written testimony, NERC is leading a
number of other initiatives to ensure the resilience of the
bulk power system including joint efforts with DOD, DHS and
Department of Energy. We are preparing an industry-wide grid
exercise in November 2011. Jointly with DOE labs, we are
initiating a program to monitor grid cybersecurity of the grid
networks and another program to improve the training and
qualification of industry cyber experts.
With regard to the proposed draft legislation, first and
foremost, NERC has consistently supported legislation to
address cyber emergencies and to improve information sharing
between government and the private sector. NERC has
consistently supported comprehensive legislation authorizing a
government entity to address cyber emergencies. Which agency is
a policy decision for Congress. NERC stands ready to assist and
respond to designated grid security threats.
Measures to improve information sharing between the
government and private sector of critical infrastructure are
needed. NERC commends the provisions of the discussion draft
directing the commission to facilitate sharing of protected
information. While the focus on providing adequate security
clearances is key, this alone is not enough. It is most
important to develop methods for declassifying sensitive
information to make it available to industry decision makers.
New authority to address grid security vulnerabilities,
however, is unnecessary. FERC already has the authority under
the Federal Power Act, section 215(d)(5), to direct NERC to
prepare a standard to address a specific vulnerability. If
Congress decides to allow vulnerabilities to be addressed
through a FERC rule or order, at a minimum, the ERO should be
given the opportunity to address the identified vulnerability
before FERC acts with FERC given a backstop authority if the
ERO fails to address the vulnerability within a prescribed
period. While we appreciate the language in the current draft
which calls for FERC to request and consider our
recommendations if time allows, we believe more is needed.
Other provisions of the discussion draft are not needed.
NERC has issued information to ensure the industry understands
and is mitigating the Aurora vulnerability. The provisions on
geomagnetic storms and spare transformers also are not needed
as FERC already has the authority to order us to address these
topics today. NERC is actively working on the GMD issue
including a recent workshop and an alert providing industry
with operational and planning actions to prepare for the
effects of a severe geomagnetic disturbance.
In addition, a NERC task force is focused on mitigating
risks associated with long lead time transformers and
developing a secure database for sharing information on spare
equipment.
Finally, the ERO should be given authority under FERC
oversight to address grid security vulnerabilities by
enforceable means other than standards. Congress has provided
us with many tools to address security. As noted previously, we
have three levels of alerts. We have strong industry
participation and response to these alerts including a
provision to authorize NERC subject to FERC oversight to
promulgate legally enforceable directives would enhance the
security of the power grid. I believe legislation addressing
the security of our Nation's electricity infrastructure could
be beneficial but the framework should focus on enabling
information sharing between government and industry and problem
solving between the private and government sectors.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today, and I look
forward to your questioning.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cauley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Cauley.
Mr. Kramer, you are recognized for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF FRANKLIN D. KRAMER

Mr. Kramer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking Member,
Mr. Terry. I appreciate the opportunity to testify.
I think the proposed legislation, the GRID Act that you
have the discussion draft, is excellent but I would like to
suggest five things that would actually make it better, at
least from my perspective.
The first is I think that we need mandatory Federal
standards. We need to turn the system around and have the
Federal agency, be it FERC or, as in the administration's
discussion draft, DHS have the authority to issue standards.
Secondly, I think that we need to focus much more on the
issue of resilience, how will we deal with the problem of how
the grid will operate in the face of attack.
Third, I think that all elements of the Federal Government
and including especially the DOD have to be given clear
authority to help protect and/or respond to an attack on the
grid because it is only the DOD that has the capabilities that
are necessary.
Fourth, I think we have to think about the issue of scale
and resources and particularly the issue of cost and make sure
that the industry can recover its costs.
And lastly, I think there needs to be a much more extensive
research and development program to deal with the advanced
threats. We need advanced capabilities.
The reason I say that, Mr. Chairman, all these points, is
what you have already said. The threat is increasing. We have
seen, for example, last year an attack on Google. We have seen
more recently an attack on a company called RSA, very advanced
cyber companies, and as you mentioned, we have seen the Stuxnet
attack. Those control systems that were attacked in Stuxnet are
precisely the kind of control systems that control the electric
grid. The vulnerability is very, very substantial, and has been
pointed out by others already in this hearing, right now with
the smart grid increasingly coming into play, the distribution
system as well as the generation system, the transmission
system are sources of vulnerability, so I think we really need
to focus on the entirety of the problem and recognize how much
the threat has been increasing over time.
The reason I say that we need mandatory standards is that
frankly the current system is just too slow. It doesn't work
quickly. It hasn't satisfied the problem. In fact, if you look
at NERC's own, I think it was called high-impact, low-
frequently study last year, it said very clearly that the grid
is at risk against an advertent adversary. If we think about
other areas--clean air, clean water, automobile safety
standards--the Federal Government issues the standards. It
certainly allows industry to comment, but I think that is the
way we ought to do it.
In addition, I think that the current act, the discussion
draft, has what is called authority for the FERC if there was a
so-called imminent threat. But I think that imminent is too
late often. What we really need is if we see a significant
threat where one needs to be able to take prompt action before
we get to that microsecond before the attack occurs. The
Federal Government ought to have that authority so it can issue
interim standards but earlier than the imminent-threat
standard.
On the resilience point, I think we all know--and again, if
you look at the Google attack or Stuxnet or the like, is that
cyber offense beats cyber defense. In fact, the Deputy
Secretary of Defense has said that publicly and plenty of
others have. In the DOD area, the DOD doesn't just rely on
passive defense, it also does what is called active defense,
and if DOD needs to do active defense to protect its network's
critical infrastructure, and again, we have heard and I have
said myself and others said today the DOD relies 99.9 percent
on commercial electricity. Well, that means that commercial
electricity ought to have the same kind of protection, that
active defense. I don't think that the industry should do it, I
think the DOD under the right kind of standards, legislative
standards, regulations, guidance from the President, ought to
work with the sector-specific agency and also with the industry
to be able to provide that.
We also need to have capabilities that we haven't heard
talked about today. We need what I call gold standard
integrity: integrity of data, integrity of software, integrity
of hardware. We need capabilities like segmentation and
isolation so that the key elements of the grid can be protected
by being separated from other elements of the grid.
We want to look also finally at the issue of scale and
resources. It is a very large enterprise. We are going to have
to have the private sector work to get it out there. It seems
to me that if the industry is going to incur cost, and this is
a highly regulated industry, that it ought to be able to
recover those costs. That could be done directly or indirectly
with the Federal Government. It could be in the rate base. But
it should be allowed in some way, shape or form.
And finally, as I said, I think we need to have a
comprehensive R&D program so that when we have advanced
threats, we can have advanced capabilities to meet them.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the opportunity
to testify and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kramer follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Lawson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BARRY R. LAWSON

Mr. Lawson. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member Rush and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on cybersecurity and the GRID Act. My name is
Barry Lawson, and I am the Associate Director of Power Delivery
and Reliability at the National Rural Electric Cooperative
Association, which represents over 900 member-owned not-for-
profit cooperatives providing electricity to 42 million
consumers in 47 States.
Over the last decade, I have been involved in a variety of
critical infrastructure protection and cybersecurity
initiatives with industry, NERC, DHS and DOE. Based on these
experiences, I know the electric power industry takes these
issues very seriously. Additionally, to my knowledge, there has
not been a documented case of a successful attempt to damage
the North American bulk power system through cyber means.
While my testimony today is offered on behalf of electric
cooperatives, I want to also recognize the longstanding
partnership among all sectors of the electric power industry
when it comes to reliability and cybersecurity. NRECA is part
of a coalition which includes major trade associations
representing the full scope of the electric power industry as
well as state regulators, large industrial consumers and
Canadian utilities. It is rare that we all agree on public
policy issues but we unanimously support the NERC process and
narrow new authority for the Federal Government in the event of
severe, imminent cyber threats.
Under section 215 of the Federal Power Act, NERC works
closely with electric power industry experts and others to
draft mandatory and enforceable reliability and cybersecurity
standards that apply across the North American grid. The
standards process can be lengthy when addressing highly
technical issues but it can also be shortened when needed using
NERC's expedited standards procedures as approved by FERC. NERC
also has a FERC-approved process for developing standards in a
confidential manner when national security requires it.
NERC rules and procedures also give NERC authority to
distribute alerts on topics that are important for industry to
address. FERC reviews these alerts before they are released.
There are three levels of alerts, and the top two levels have
mandatory reporting requirements that typically require
recipients to inform NERC what they did in response to the
alert. The alert process has quickly and effectively provided
industry critical information on many issues including Stuxnet,
Night Dragon and geomagnetic disturbances. NERC is required to
provide reports to FERC on the top two levels of alerts,
explaining the level of action industry has taken. To date,
these reports have shown that industry takes these alerts very
seriously.
The industry recognizes the threat environment is
complicated and that imminent, severe threats are possible. In
some cases, even NERC procedures and standards cannot assure
that industry gets timely, actionable information to mitigate a
threat against the bulk power system. When the Federal
Government at the highest levels determines that emergency
action is necessary, it should be able to issue orders to our
industry that directly address the severe and imminent cyber
threat and set out the mitigation actions needed to protect the
bulk power system. Those orders should sunset when the threat
has subsided or is mitigated, for example, by development of a
related NERC standard.
Our primary concern is that the draft GRID Act creates new
authority for FERC concerning vulnerabilities that largely
duplicates existing FERC authority and ongoing NERC activities
under section 215 and could substantially undermine the
existing reliability standards regime. It should be understood
that vulnerabilities alone do not adversely impact the
reliability of the grid. That being said, our industry has
every incentive ranging from financial considerations to the
fundamental obligation to serve our customers with reliable and
affordable power to protect the grid when vulnerabilities
emerge.
The draft GRID Act authorizes FERC if it determines there
is a grid security vulnerability that existing NERC standards
do not address to issue a rule or order requiring industry to
implement measures to protect against the vulnerability. The
new authority the draft seeks to give FERC is very concerning
to our industry. First, we question whether FERC has the
intelligence-handling expertise to exercise such broad new
authority. Second, this new authority regarding vulnerabilities
would fundamentally alter section 215 by providing FERC an
unnecessary role in addressing vulnerabilities that NERC and
industry are managing very well through standards and alerts.
To help industry to protect the grid from vulnerabilities
and threats, we need timely, actionable intelligence from
government. More industry trusted experts need higher levels of
security clearances so we can plan effective responses to
threats and vulnerabilities. The draft seeks to make
improvement in these areas, and we appreciate the
subcommittee's support.
In conclusion, we urge the subcommittee to focus on the
immediate, narrow issues at hand, the need for very quick
emergency orders if the bulk power system faces an imminent
cyber attack and the need for the electric power industry to
receive timely, actionable information.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lawson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thanks, Mr. Lawson.
Mr. Kramer, you would agree then that in the interest of
national defense that additional Federal authority is
necessary?
Mr. Kramer. Yes, sir, I think it is absolutely required.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. And Mr. Cauley, you mentioned in your
testimony, I believe, that you didn't think it was necessary
for NERC to develop standards to ensure the availability of
large transformers, and I am certainly not an expert in that
area but it is my understanding that the availability of large
transformers is one of the key issues out there and I was just
curious if you would elaborate on your position on that.
Mr. Cauley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do take the issue of
spare equipment and transformers very seriously from physical
attack, cyber or GMD, and it is a major issue. So I think we
don't have enough information yet to know what the standards
should be in terms of how much equipment and where it would be
located and how we would transport it, so if I said something
opposing future standards on spare equipment, I may have
misspoke and I will have to go look in my written testimony.
But it is a key issue, and we are dealing with it today with
some industry experts on a task force that are looking at
likely scenarios, what would the need be, how would we move the
equipment, so we are trying to find a technical solution to the
problem before we tackle the issue of whether there should be a
standard or not.
Mr. Whitfield. So are these transformers manufactured in
the United States today?
Mr. Cauley. The vast majority of them have been
manufactured overseas and continue to be. There is some recent
activity to bring some onshore but the vast majority are
manufactured overseas.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, Mr. Lawson, I am sure you heard the
testimony today that in addition to the bulk electric system,
that distribution should be included in this, and of course,
rural electric co-ops are quite involved in distribution, so
would you disagree with that, or what would be your position?
Mr. Lawson. Well, we believe that the legislation before us
should focus on the bulk power system. Distribution is handled
at the local level, whether that be State or local municipality
level or with the local board of a cooperative, and we don't
think it needs to be extended to the Federal level.
Mr. Whitfield. But how do we address the potential problem
in some of these large metropolitan areas that was mentioned?
Mr. Lawson. With regard to the distribution facilities in
the large metropolitan areas?
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Lawson. I think there is one definition in the NERC
glossary that is being worked on today, and that is the
definition of bulk electric system. That definition is looking
at how and what should be included under bulk electric system,
and one of the issues that the commission has directed the
industry through NERC to review is how those facilities in
large metropolitan areas are covered, and I think the direction
that that drafting team is going in that I am a member of is
covering more facilities in those metropolitan areas than are
currently covered under the existing NERC BES, bulk electric
system, definition.
So I think things are changing and a draft of that
definition was recently out for public comment, and it is now
moving on to the second draft phase, so I think there will be
changes in that area.
Mr. Whitfield. So Mr. Cauley, do you or Mr. Kramer have any
comments on that particular issue?
Mr. Cauley. Just a couple, Mr. Chairman. The industry has a
very long history of the issue of local service and
distribution being dealt with with the ratepayers in the local
jurisdiction and obviously the States and other local
jurisdictions, so I think any effort to encroach on that
through Federal legislation I think should just be taken
carefully in consultation with the States.
On the issue of the military bases, which was part of the
earlier testimony, I think there is an opportunity to have
enhanced discussions between the utility company and the
military bases to say do they have what they need, do they need
more backup generators, do they need more lines coming in to
the base, so I think there is opportunity for those discussions
to take place. I will end there. Thanks.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Kramer?
Mr. Kramer. I would disagree with both of these gentlemen.
First of all, I think we have the smart grid becoming ever
increasingly a greater part of the electric power system, and
the smart grid means that from the consumer side, from the
distribution side, you are going to have increasing vectors
that allows for cybersecurity attacks, and those could be
national security attacks, so I think that we need to have an
overall Federal standard that protects against that, and NIST
is working on that. I don't actually think they have done
enough but at least they have done something. But I think we
need to put that into play, so I would very strongly encourage
the committee to expand its jurisdiction.
With respect to the military bases and the like, I think
Mr. Stockton was pretty clear, they don't have enough, and it
is not just the bases themselves. If you think about the
military, for example, the entire critical infrastructure,
transportation infrastructure, the telecommunications
infrastructure, all of these depend upon electricity. So even
if the bases themselves had electricity, the DOD simply
couldn't operate without transportation, without
telecommunications and the like, and I think we really need to
have something done about that.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Lawson?
Mr. Lawson. Just to add to that, on the military bases, the
best way to effect change and improvements is at the local
level between the military installation, commander and the
leadership of the utility supplying that military installation.
Those relationships exist today. They are typically very good
relationships, and if there are additional levels of
reliability, security that are needed, it is very important for
the military installation leadership to let the utility know
and they can work jointly towards providing that.
With regard to the smart grid, the industry is not
implementing smart grid facilities carelessly. They are doing
it carefully and keeping security very much in mind in many
different ways. We are also working very closely and as much as
we can with the vendor community to try to explain to them what
levels of security we need and what levels of security already
exist in their equipment today, so it is something that we are
focused on and not doing carelessly.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you all. My time is expired.
Mr. Rush, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This has been quite
interesting.
Mr. Cauley, I would like to ask you about imminent threats
to the grid and also long-term vulnerabilities as well. Let us
say our intelligence agencies learn of an imminent threat to
the grid from terrorists. How would you characterize NERC's
authority to step in and address that threat on a real-time
basis?
Mr. Cauley. We have the ability to acquire that information
through working with various intelligence agencies, which we do
continuously to get the information digested into what it means
in terms of impact on the industry and issue various levels of
alerts, and we have done that. We issued one back just in April
which we turned around within a day. So depending on the
urgency, we can turn them out in hours or days. I think as I
pointed out in my testimony, we have different levels. Some are
just informational, some are recommendations, and there are
essential actions which we have also been able to put out. The
essential actions are mandatory under our rules but they are
not enforceable from a legal sense in terms of any sort of
penalties and sanctions, and that was why I was suggesting in
my testimony that that would be one opportunity to improve the
toolkit that we have to get timely, actionable information out
to industry.
Mr. Rush. And would this apply if there were imminent and
severe threat also?
Mr. Cauley. This would apply really to any known threat or
vulnerability where there was a high degree of urgency like we
needed to get information out either within hours or days or
weeks, and I think that is a much preferred approach. Everyone
keeps referring to our standards. Well, our standards were not
meant to solve a problem in 3 days or 3 weeks. They are meant
to be long-enduring, around for years and years. The alert
system is meant to solve these urgent actions that you are
describing here.
Mr. Rush. Does FERC have sufficient authority at this
point?
Mr. Cauley. I believe in the area of vulnerabilities in
terms of, for example, whether it is Aurora or spare
transformers, I believe under section 215 that Congress
intentionally provided FERC authority to direct the ERO to
produce a standard that would solve a problem. So under my
reading of the plain language of section 215, the FERC has the
ability to direct us to----
Mr. Rush. Mr. Kramer, do you agree with that?
Mr. Kramer. I totally disagree, and I will give you an
example. This committee has heard about Stuxnet, obviously, and
Stuxnet is not a classified problem. Semantic organizations
among many others has issued a very detailed set of reports on
this. It is a threat. It is a very, very, very severe threat
that we have to think about, and the vulnerability exists
throughout the electric grid system because it is the same kind
of control mechanisms that Stuxnet attacked that are the type
that are involved in the electric grid, and it is sitting out
there, so to speak, as a blueprint for anyone to use--now, I
couldn't use it, but any capable cyber adversary. So I think
that that would be an example of what I would call a severe
threat. It is not imminent but I think that something needs to
be done about that right now, and I think it needs to be done
promptly, and from my perspective, and I said, as we do in
other kinds of legislation, I would rather have the opportunity
for the industry to comment but for the Federal Government, be
it the FERC or the DHS, but some Federal agency to determine
what standards are necessary, what actions need to be taken
promptly and to cause those to be taken under a mandatory
system.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Lawson, would you give us your opinion on
this?
Mr. Lawson. First of all, as I said in my statement, the
industry strongly supports the alert process. I am not aware of
another tool out there today that can get information out to
approximately 2,000 utilities within hours or a day or two with
specific information about how a threat or a vulnerability or
anything that specifically relates to the electric utility
industry. So I think the alert process is a very critical one
and one that we need to keep utilizing.
Also, under the alert process, there are three levels. The
base level is advisory, the middle level is recommended action,
and the most serious level is essential action. And I can tell
you that the industry reacts very strongly to these alerts
because we know that they are communicating very important
information to the industry and that under the top two levels
of alerts, you will be required to provide NERC with an update
on what you have done with regard to that alert, and those
reporting requirements are mandatory, and then they are
summarized and provided to FERC. So the industry takes these
very seriously and the top-level alert, essential action, has
not yet been utilized. So only the advisory and the recommended
action have been utilized, and both of those levels have been
taken very seriously by the industry, and I am sure essential
action would be taken exactly the same.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I just want to ask one other
question.
So let me just ask you this. All three of you can respond
or anyone can respond. What I am hearing here is that in the
event of an imminent, severe, catastrophic cyber attack on the
electrical grid system here in this country where there could
be vast harm done to the American people, are you saying, am I
correct in understanding that you are saying that the Federal
Government--or let me ask the question this way: Who are the
American people going to hold responsible for their protection
to solve the problem and to protect them? Are they going to
hold the Federal agencies or the industry responsible, in your
opinion?
Mr. Cauley. Congressman Rush, I mean, first of all, to
distinguish some time horizons, first of all, if there is an
imminent emergency like planes flying on 9/11 that are going to
cause disaster, NERC and I think the industry supports some
government agency having strong, immediate authority under
those kind of circumstances--the Nation is in trouble, somebody
has to be in charge--I think we support that. And I think the
other issues I think where we get a little bit of difference of
opinion but it is not as bad as it sounds, actually, is on
dealing with the things we have a longer time to think about
and respond to, and all we are saying is that we think that the
FERC has for longer-term issues like spare equipment--we are
not going to solve spare transformers tomorrow, it is going to
take probably years to resolve that--is that we have the
authorities we have now, and I think we could strengthen the
gap in the middle between dire emergency right now and things
that might take months to solve. In the interim, we have our
alert system and all we need is a little more authority to make
those mandatory in some cases. When I testify here today, I am
not here testifying against authority for FERC. We work with
FERC today as a partner in developing our standards. They
review them and approve them, and I view going forward that we
would continue to work with FERC, that anything that we can do
to help the industry know what they have to do and whether it
is mandatory or not, that we would do that in partnership with
FERC.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Terry, you are recognized.
Mr. Terry. Thank you.
To follow up on that, have you, Mr. Cauley, read the GRID
Act or the proposal, the draft? So as it is written now, my
assumption is, you don't support it? Is that accurate, you
wouldn't support it as written?
Mr. Cauley. I applaud the committee for taking initiative--
--
Mr. Terry. I have short time. Yes or no?
Mr. Cauley. I support parts of it, not the entire----
Mr. Terry. The jurisdictional part, you have a problem
with?
Mr. Cauley. With the vulnerabilities being unnecessary,
that is correct.
Mr. Terry. Mr. Lawson, same question.
Mr. Lawson. We support narrow authority for the Federal
Government with regard to imminent cyber threats.
Mr. Terry. So that is a no? OK. I appreciate that. I think
we have more work to do than I anticipated before this hearing.
Mr. Kramer, I want to spend the rest of the time with you.
Do you keep track or is there reporting of hacking attempts to
your office or any office that you know of?
Mr. Kramer. Just so we are clear, I am a former Assistant
Secretary so I am testifying in my individual capacity here.
Mr. Terry. All right.
Mr. Kramer. So I read the--there are plenty of reports on
hacking that are in the open press and there are plenty of
reports on hacking that are maintained by a lot of entities,
and I think----
Mr. Terry. Electrical generation?
Mr. Kramer. Including electrical, and the Night Dragon
point was made to this committee as an example.
Mr. Terry. I participated in a demonstration at our local
generator that was able to track hacking attempts within the
last 24 hours, and I think there was six or seven. Most they
have been able to track back to a certain university in China,
but we won't go into that for this hearing. Now, they were
mostly--how do I say this--for fun. It was their practice of
seeing how they can enter into the system, and not for
nefarious purpose, although we don't know that when they are
trying to do it, when they are trying to hack the system, and
that is what concerns me and this committee is what we can do
to strengthen our system against those hacks.
And by the way, just two questions to you, Mr. Kramer, in
my 2 minutes left. Generally, what should electrical generation
companies be doing to best ensure that their systems can't be
hacked into? And then on the electrical generation itself,
there have been some side discussions on electrical generation,
whether the more critical defense bases or buildings should go
off grid, totally reliant and with the small module nuclear
reactors may allow them to do that. You have a minute and a
half to comment on both those questions.
Mr. Kramer. I will make three points, sir. First of all,
with respect to the issue of serious attack, one of the things
that a serious attack would have to do would be reconnaissance.
You won't just attack without substantial reconnaissance, so
the reconnaissance or the activities that you are talking about
are quite consequential and would be part of any serious attack
and so dealing with those early on is just as important as
dealing with the set of issues, you know, so to speak, when the
attack occurs.
Second, with respect to what the industry ought to do,
there are a number of standards set forth, both the NERC
itself, FERC, DOE and others have written out which I think one
is called, well, 20 critical activities that were put out by
one of the cybersecurity groups. Those are what you might call
very good hygiene, and one of the critical things that I think
needs to be done is that there has to be a greater amount of
protection provided to the control system portion of the grid
than to what is called the corporate portion of the grid, and I
also think that there need to be what I would call advanced
capabilities developed so that you can isolate the control
portion of the grid from the corporate capabilities and from
vendors and others who have to send things in. I think there
will need to be, as I mentioned, integrity capabilities that do
exist now at the bench level, so to speak, at the demonstration
level but are not out there throughout the grid, and I think
that the critical parts of the industry, Mr. Markey mentioned
that--I don't have his exact figures but roughly 29 percent, if
I remember right, of the grid was considered critical by the
industry. I think it is a much larger amount than that, so I
think you have to have more significant.
With respect to the bases again, I want to make the point
that even if the bases themselves have electricity and there
are actions going on, I can't tell you what the acronym stands
for anymore but it is called SPIDERS. It is a demonstration
program, and this is non-classified--you can look it up on
Google--to make the bases more self-sufficient, and the DOE has
a so-called SPIDERS program at three or four different bases.
But even if the bases themselves have electricity, the DOE
relies on telecommunications capabilities of the country, it
relies on the transportation capabilities of the country, it
relies on water, it relies on gas pumps and the like, and all
those rely on electricity. So there is no possibility
whatsoever that you could have an effective defense unless you
have electricity available beyond the bases. In addition, that
happens to also be true overseas, which is a different topic
that the chairman raised, but it goes beyond the question.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Rush, do you have anything else you want
to touch on?
Well, that concludes today's hearing. We appreciate your
being here, and I am sure we are going to continue to be in
touch with you as we move forward on this legislation, and we
will keep the record open for 10 days for additional materials,
and thank you all very much, and that concludes today's
hearing.
[Whereupon, at 4:25 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


