- EPA'S GREENHOUSE GAS AND CLEAN AIR ACT REGULATIONS: A FOCUS ON TEXAS' ECONOMY, ENERGY PRICES AND JOBS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EPA'S GREENHOUSE GAS AND CLEAN AIR ACT REGULATIONS: A FOCUS ON TEXAS'
ECONOMY, ENERGY PRICES AND JOBS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

----------

MARCH 24, 2011

----------

Serial No. 112-26

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

EPA'S GREENHOUSE GAS AND CLEAN AIR ACT REGULATIONS: A FOCUS ON TEXAS'
ECONOMY, ENERGY PRICES AND JOBS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 24, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-26

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
72-785 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JIM MATHESON, Utah
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              Islands
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JAY INSLEE, Washington
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  JIM MATHESON, Utah
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             GENE GREEN, Texas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   LOIS CAPPS, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio)
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     7
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................    22
Hon. Charles A. Gonzalez, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................    24
Hon. Pete Olson, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................    25
Hon. Kevin Brady, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, prepared statement......................................    27

Witnesses

Greg Abbott, Attorney General, State of Texas....................    30
Prepared statement...........................................    33
Todd Staples, Commissioner, Texas Department of Agriculture......    46
Prepared statement...........................................    48
Bryan W. Shaw, Chairman, Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality........................................................    55
Prepared statement...........................................    57
Answers to submitted questions...............................   255
James Griffin, Plant Manager, Dianal America.....................    71
Prepared statement...........................................    74
James Marston, Regional Director, Texas Office, Environmental
Defense Fund...................................................    78
Prepared statement...........................................    80
Kathleen Hartnett White, Director, Armstrong Center, Texas Public
Policy Foundation..............................................   209
Prepared statement...........................................   212
Gina McCarthy, Assistant Administrator, Office of Air and
Radiation, Environmental Protection Agency.....................   234
Prepared statement...........................................   238
Answers to submitted questions...............................   473

Submitted Material

Letter, dated September 25, 2007, from John Blevins, Director,
Compliance Assurance and Enforcement Division, Environmental
Protection Agency, Region 6, to Flexible Permit owners,
submitted by Mr. Green.........................................     9
Letter, dated April 11, 2006, from David Neleigh, Chief, Air
Permits Section, Environmental Protection Agency, to Steve
Hagle, Special Assistant, Air Permits Division, Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality, submitted by Mr. Green....    13

EPA'S GREENHOUSE GAS AND CLEAN AIR ACT REGULATIONS: A FOCUS ON TEXAS'
ECONOMY, ENERGY PRICES AND JOBS

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 24, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:30 a.m., at
the Garrett-Townes Auditorium, South Texas College of Law, 1303
San Jacinto Street, Houston, Texas, Hon. Ed Whitfield (chairman
of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Whitfield, Olson, Barton, Green,
and Gonzalez.
Also present: Representative Brady of Texas.
Staff present: Allison Busbee, Legislative Clerk; Cory
Hicks, Policy Coordinator; Mary Neumayr, Counsel; Anita
Bradley, Senior Policy Advisor to Chairman Emeritus; and
Jacqueline Cohen, Democratic Counsel.
Mr. Whitfield. Welcome. My name is Ed Whitfield. I am
chairman of the Energy and Power Subcommittee of the Energy and
Commerce Committee in Washington, DC. We're delighted to be
here today. We're having a hearing on the EPA's Greenhouse Gas
and Clean Air Act Regulations and its focus on the impact on
Texas' economy, energy prices, and jobs.
I'm sure I don't need to introduce the other Members here
because you all know all of these people very well, but we
certainly have with us this morning Mr. Joe Barton, the co-
chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee. Still--is now
emeritus of the committee and is one of the leaders of our
committee for many years and has been a strong advocate, as you
know, for energy issues and has provided great leadership in
the State of Texas.
Mr. Gene Green here is with us because I saw him just a few
minutes ago. He is the ranking--serving as ranking member of
the Energy and Power Subcommittee today. And, of course, you
all know him because he's from Texas.
In addition, we have Pete Olson, who is a member of the
subcommittee from Texas.
And we have Mr. Kevin Brady, who is not a member of the
Energy and Commerce Committee but provides great leadership
within the Congress. And we're delighted that he's here. I know
he represents part of this area.
And, of course, Charles Gonzalez, who is also from Texas,
and is a member of the Energy and Commerce Committee and the
subcommittee.
So, we are delighted to be here today. And before I give my
opening statement, the way we're going to operate this today is
that each member is going to have 5 minutes for an opening
statement and then we're going to introduce the panel and then
they will give their 5-minute opening statements. And then at
that point, well, each member will have the opportunity to ask
questions and answers--have a question-and-answer period. And
when that is over, not because we're trying to discriminate
against Mr. Brady, but the rule is that since he's not a member
of the committee, he simply would wait until last to ask his
questions. His questions may be the very best, but the rules
are he waits until we all finish. So, I know that he'll do a
tremendous job.
Voice. Mr. Chairman, don't they have different rules in
Texas?
Mr. Whitfield. Well, I haven't been informed yet. I'm sure
I will be. I've heard that Texas frequently steps to its own
drummer. So, I want to be compliant and flexible with Texas.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

But I'm delighted to be here today. The Environmental
Protection Agency, as you know, has begun to impose greenhouse
gas regulations under the Clean Air Act affecting both mobile
and stationary sources, including new rules establishing
initial new preconstruction permitting requirements under the
Prevention of Significant Deterioration program which became
effective January 2nd, 2011, and initial new operating permit
requirements that will become effective July 1st, 2011, under
the Title V program. These greenhouse gas rules, which have
been subject to a variety of legal challenges, represent the
beginning of EPA's regulation of greenhouse gas emissions under
the Clean Air Act, and additional greenhouse gas-related
rulemakings are scheduled or expected, including for power
plants and refineries and other sectors.
I will tell you that we've already reported out legislation
in the Energy and Commerce Committee to prohibit the regulation
of greenhouse gas emissions. We did that for a number of
reasons. Number one, Congress, on three separate occasions, has
said no specifically to that issue. In 1990 Congress said no.
In 2007 the U.S. Senate by a vote of 97 to nothing sent a
resolution asking the President not to even send up the kill of
protocol for ratification. And then last year the Senate
refused to act on the Cap and Trade bill.
So, Congress has made its will very clear on this issue. In
addition, the greenhouse gas regulations in 2010, EPA formally
disapproved the Texas Commission on Environmental Qualities'
Flexible Air Permits program. TCEQ submitted the original rules
for this program to EPA for approval as a revision of the State
Implementation Plan in 1994; and only recently, after about 16
years, has that issue been resolved. And, of course, we don't
consider it over yet.
I might also say that it's very perplexing to see EPA
trying to take this authority away from the State of Texas
because from 2000 to 2008 Texas lowered nitrous oxide levels by
46 percent, ozone levels were reduced by 22 percent, all major
urban areas in Texas currently meet the Federal 8-hour ozone
standard of 85 parts per billion except Dallas; and they have
made remarkable improvement.
Suffice it to say that Texas in this--on this regard has
really been a leader in the Nation in meeting EPA standards.
So, our objective today is to find out what's going on. And
Congress is going to reassert itself into the Clean Air Act
because for the last 10 or 15 years we've almost had a laissez
faire attitude about it. But we cannot stand to simply sit by
and we are going to reassert ourselves. And we want some
questions answered. And if we have to do legislation, we're
going to consider that, as well.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. So, with that, it's my pleasure to introduce
the ranking member at this time, Mr. Gene Green, for his
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to welcome you
not only to Texas but to Houston. It's great to have a
Congressional hearing here. We don't always get these type of
field hearings in our community. In fact, this is home. I wast
born about five blocks from here at St. Joseph's Hospital. So,
I take my Texas roots very seriously.
And I want to welcome my colleague to Houston. As the
energy capital of the world, I hope you enjoy your time here
and that you have an informative visit. Sometime when you have
more time I would love to take you over to what I call our
``jobs corridor'' on 225 in East Harris County where you can
see the huge amount of investment in the energy sector we have
over there, along with the Port of Houston.
In our district, which encompasses most of East Harris
County here in the Houston area, we do everything energy, both
upstream and downstream, including being the home of five
refineries, several manufacturing facilities, and 50 plus
chemical plants. For this reason I have closely watched the
Texas Flexible Permit debate in order to ensure that our
facilities have the permits they need to operate.
In August of 2008, the Business Coalition of Clean Air and
Fuel Group, the Texas Association of Business, and the Texas
Oil and Gas Association filed suit against the EPA to take
action on pending permit-related SIP actions such as flexible
permits. In July of 2009 these groups reached an agreement
regarding the timing of Federal Review of aspects of Texas' Air
Permitting program, and in July of 2010 EPA took final action
disapproving Texas' flexible permit program SIP provision. The
EPA determined that the revisions proposed by the TCEQ's New
Source Review program did not meet the Federal Clean Air Act
requirements. Reaching a workable agreement that would make
Texas compliant with the Clean Air Act without imposing
excessive and unnecessary costs on refiners and other
businesses is in the best interest of both the EPA and the TECQ
or TCEQ. I would hope that both the EPA and the TCEQ would
agree, and I look forward to an update from both on the status
of these discussions.
Now, I, like my colleagues on the other side of the aisle,
have concerns about the timing of this issue, in particular,
that the EPA did not object to the Texas Flexible Permit when
they originally issued it in the early 1990s. But it's
completely false to say that the EPA voiced no concerns over
this program until they disapproved last year.
In fact, both the Clinton and Bush Administration sent
several letters to TCEQ outlining their concerns with the Texas
SIP provisions. Additionally, the Bush Administration sent a
Fair Notice letter to flexible permit holders in 2007
emphasizing that they must comply with the Clean Air Act
provisions in addition to the Texas Flexible Permit provisions.
Mr. Chairman, without objection, I would like to ask
unanimous consent to insert a copy of the Fair Notice letter
that was sent to the flex permit holders into the record as
well as a copy of the Warren TCEQ letter sent by the Bush
administration to TCEQ.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Green. It was only when the courts forced the EPA to
make a decision on the flex permit program that they finally
disapproved the program. I don't say this in an effort to take
sides. I say this because I think it's important to set the
record straight because unfortunately most of the rhetoric on
this issue would have you believe that the issue just came to
light in the last couple of years, when instead it was
percolating for several years.
Finally, concerning upcoming greenhouse gas rules to
utilities and refineries, I must emphasize that I'm opposed to
the EPA moving forward with regulations on large utilities and
refineries in our country because I believe it's the Congress
who should be the decision maker on these carbon-control
issues.
However, we can't discount the Supreme Court decision and
say ``climate change is not an issue'' and move on without it,
which is the approach some of my colleagues want to take.
Instead we should pass a bill that would delay the EPA from
moving forward with these regulations so that the Congress has
the time to address this issue with input from Members that
represent diverse constituencies nationwide.
Again, I look forward to the testimony of our witnesses.
And, again, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for coming to Houston and
to Harris County. And you're welcome back any time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Green.
At this time I recognize the chairman emeritus, Mr. Barton.
Mr. Barton. Well, thank you, Chairman Whitfield. We
sincerely appreciate you coming to Houston, Texas. There are
lots of things you could be doing in Kentucky, and we
appreciate you spending a day to come down to the energy
capital of the world and focus on a hearing that's very, very
specific to Texas.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

I'm a strong proponent of strong environmental protection.
I was a co-sponsor and voted for the Clean Air Act in the early
1990s. I am a past subcommittee chairman of the Oversight
Subcommittee of this committee and of the Energy Subcommittee
with Mr. Whitfield, who is currently the chairman, and of the
full committee. I have probably participated and chaired more
hearings on the Clean Air Act and greenhouse gases than almost
any current member of Congress and perhaps any member of
Congress, ever.
I want a strong EPA. I want a strong Texas Counsel of
Environmental Quality. I want an Attorney General in Texas who
enforces the environmental laws not only of the State of Texas
but of the United States of America.
So, we are not engaged today in a witch hunt against the
Environmental Protection Agency, but we do believe that the
Environmental Protection Agency, like every other agency of the
Federal Government, should follow the law and not make it. And
with regards to the air--Clean Air Act and the flexible permits
that have been issued under that Act and with regards to the
issue of greenhouse gases, you know, it is my strong belief
that the EPA has acted without legal foundation in terms of the
air quality permits and without due consideration in their
promulgation and decision to try to regulate greenhouse gases
under the Clean Air Act.
There are two separate issues. Let's look at the first
issue, the air permits. Under the Clean Air Act, beginning in
the mid 1990s, States had to comply with the new law and submit
to Washington State implementation plans and specific permits
for various facilities that were jurisdictional under that Act
for six criteria pollutants.
In Texas, you know, our region and our industry were
compliant with five of the six, I believe, almost from the get-
go. We have had a problem in the Houston area, the Beaumont-
Port Arthur area, the El Paso area, and the Dallas-Fort Worth
area on ozone. So, Texas decided to use a facility-wide
flexible permitting approach where they would set a cap for a
facility and not try to set a standard within each facility for
each piece of equipment. This was done under Governor Ann
Richards' direction and under President Bill Clinton's
Presidency. So, this was not some Republican initiative.
Basically, as I understand it, the policy difference
between the EPA today and the State of Texas today is that the
Texas legislature and the Texas Counsel of Environmental
Quality, all the various officials in Texas have decided to
take a facility-wide approach where you decide to cooperate
with the affected regulated industry, share a joint goal, and
try to meet the Federal law that way.
The EPA under President Obama has decided that they want a
command and control and that we have got to force people to do
things equipment by equipment. And I'm going to ask the
Attorney General and the chairman of the Council of
Environmental Quality here how many permits have been affected.
But my information is it's about 180. So, we want strong air
quality enforcement in Texas, but we want a State that can grow
economically. And as the testimony will show, depending on your
baseline, 1990 or 2000, Texas employment is growing, Texas
population is growing, but Texas air quality is also improving.
OK, if you can add 4 million people in 10 years and decrease
emissions, that should be something that you're patted on the
back and given a medal for, not something that your permits are
revoked.
So, Mr. Chairman, we are here to get to the bottom of this,
to put some things on the record. We're going to hear from our
State officials and then our industry officials, and then we
have been blessed that the number two person at the EPA, the
head of the Air and Radiation Agency there, is going to come
and--what we're not going to hear from, Mr. Chairman, is the
Regional VI administrator. He and his aides couldn't make it
180 miles from Dallas to testify in public about this. So, we
will have some questions for the record for our friends from
Dallas, who probably had to get a haircut or something this
morning and couldn't make it down.
With that I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Barton.
Yes, we are quite disappointed that the regional director
of EPA is not with us this morning. Although, we certainly
asked at the time.
At this time I'd like to recognize the gentleman--another
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Gonzalez, who will give a brief
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you very much; and, Mr. Chairman,
welcome to Texas. You are surrounded by Texans today from both
sides of the aisle. And I can tell you now that regardless of
party affiliation that I think and I believe that we often
agree on the following: And that is that Texas has been, is,
and will remain an energy State. We understand what we've done
historically. We understand what need to effectuate as it
relates to traditional fuels and sources of energy but we also
will be a leader in the alternatives and the renewals.
Now, much time is lost in the politics of the present
subject matter that's before us today. If we were to believe in
areas surrounding the flexible permit program, the Obama
Administration disapproved the program in order to punish Texas
and take over its program. What seems to get lost is that
previous Administrations, as pointed out by Mr. Green, have
expressed concerns with the flex permitting program for the
past 16 years. Rather than favoring the EPA on this decision,
the responsible thing to do is to figure out the past program.
Past permit holders are now in limbo and that cannot be good
for business. To create the regulatory certainty that
businesses need, TCEQ and EPA need to reach an agreement. I've
been told that they're at an impasse. They don't have ongoing
discussions and negotiations, which is very unfortunate. I look
forward to hearing both the EPA and TCEQ on what the next steps
are and how we plan on working together to reach a resolution
amenable to both sides.
On the question of greenhouse gases, rather than stripping
EPA of its authority to regulate greenhouse gases, Congress
should pass legislation that creates a framework for how we
deal with greenhouse gas emissions. We know that the House
acted on this previously. The Senate did not. We'll see where
we vote in 111th Congress.
However, I've not been presented nor have I seen any
proposals that would address this issue in a legislative way if
we don't want a regulatory agency to do the work for us. All
we've witnessed are against a critical EPA and to redebate the
climate items without putting forward any new ideas on how we
are going to address the problem and how we are going to
compete with China, Germany, and other countries who have made
key investments in alternative energy and positioned themselves
to be leaders in this new energy sector.
A secure energy future will no doubt include fossil fuels
for the foreseeable future. It is needed and will serve as our
transition fuel as we move to cleaner energy alternatives. Our
State and Federal Government have a responsibility and a role
to play in mitigating the effects of climate change and putting
us on a sound path to making that energy transition. I believe
our constituents expect and deserve as much.
Again, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Gonzalez.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Olson, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PETE OLSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Olson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank you
for bringing this hearing to Space City, USA, and the energy
capital of the world. And I appreciate your courtesy for
letting me deliver this speech. Unfortunately, I have to leave
a little bit early here; and I apologize to the witnesses.
Thank you for coming today; and, unfortunately, I won't be here
for much of your testimony but we do have a record and we know
we're going to be working close with you in the future.
But make--make no mistake, we are here today because the
EPA has overstepped its bounds and it does not respect the
authority of the individual States. Unfortunately, Texas has
found itself in the crosshairs of this radical EPA that simply
refuses to acknowledge our successes in increasing production
while reducing pollution. All this while we're the fastest-
growing State in population in the Nation. Since the recession
of 2008, the great State of Texas has produced half the private
sector jobs in our country--half the private sector jobs.
Even with adding to the Nation's jobs, population and
economic growth, Texas has improved air quality through its
flexible permitting program, which the EPA has disapproved.
We've had a 22 percent reduction in ozone and a 53 percent in
NOx emissions. The national average was 15 percent for ozone,
27 percent for NOx. And this was from the time period 2000 to
2008. With those numbers, it's very clear: Flexible permitting
works. These are successes that the EPA refuses to recognize.
Another great example of the EPA overreach was in the
emergency administrative order issued late last year by EPA to
raise resources. Earlier this week the Texas Railroad
Commission announced that it had determined that range
resources was not--was not the source of the contaminant in any
domestic water wells. This finding rightly indicates that the
Texas Railroad Commission handled the contamination incident
properly. And the EPA had no authority to take the
extraordinary steps they did by going around our State
regulators.
The EPA improperly usurped State authority and has
repeatedly demonstrated a disturbing pattern of behavior of
abuse of their Federal authority in the State of Texas, and it
must stop. I will continue to press the EPA to remain within
their Federal parameters and exercise common sense and caution
when attempting to intervene in matters under the jurisdiction
of this State.
And, finally, as our Nation's economy struggles to regain
its footing, this Administration has continued its backdoor
approach to cap and trade through EPA regulation. I believe
this act is unconstitutional. We know these regulations will
destroy jobs and hurt an already weak economy. At a time of
near record gas prices, these regulations will only force
Americans to pay more at the pump.
This document, the Constitution, dictates that Congress,
not unelected bureaucrats, has the authority to decide whether
and how greenhouse gases are going to be regulated. As our
chairman said in his opening statement, just last week this
committee passed, with my strong support, the Energy Tax
Prevention Act, which would prevent the EPA from implementing a
cap and tax scheme through onerous regulation and restore much-
needed regulatory certainty to businesses trying to grow our
economy. This bill would also roll back the rule that EPA has
already implemented that has allowed them to seize control of
Texas greenhouse gas permitting authority.
Texas and American business owners alike need the assurance
that this Government will not continue to regulate them out of
business.
Again, I appreciate the chairman's courtesy and I apologize
to the witnesses for an early departure. I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Olson.
We're sorry that you have another engagement, but thank you
very much for coming on this issue. We appreciate your being
here.
In Washington we really do not allow members that are not
members of the committee to make an opening statement. However,
since Mr. Brady is with us today and he's informed me in Texas
they have different rules, I thought I would give him an
opportunity to speak.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Chairman, point of parliamentary inquiry?
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, sir.
Mr. Barton. If we allow Mr. Brady--and I'm certainly
encouraging you do that--if Congresswoman Jackson Lee comes, I
would hope that we would give her the opportunity to give a
statement, also.
Mr. Whitfield. We will--we will do that.
Mr. Barton. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Brady, do you want to go?
Mr. Brady. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thought you were just
picking on us Ways and Means members.
Mr. Whitfield. We just want your jurisdiction.
Mr. Brady. I do have a compelling opening statement that is
likely to bring you all to your feet. So, just save your
comments until [inaudible].
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brady follows:]

Mr. Barton. The guys from Agriculture are fighting for jobs
here in Texas and for the authorities to state to permit these
businesses and to the fight that these mandates, the Federal
Government has no authority to impose on us. I want to make two
points. One is that there is, so far this morning, this belief
that because there has been an exchange of letters between
Texas and the Federal Government, that gives Washington the
authority to seize our permitting process. The truth of the
matter is this is to the contrary. With an exchange of letters
between Washington and every State on issues for Medicaid,
Medicare, clean water, highway transportation, and endangered
species, and fisheries, and water, a normal routine exchange of
letters between and among Federal programs is no basis for
seizing our authority.
And, secondly, let me be real clear, this isn't a choice
between clear air and jobs. Texas is achieving both. The
question here is, does Washington have the power to seize these
States' permitting authority and impose among other mandates a
global warming agenda that Congress has rejected? If the answer
is yes, well, there is no limits to the power of the unelected,
unaccountable bureaucracy in Washington. If the answer is no,
factually, it restores Congress' constitutional jurisdiction
over the districts and restores the State's rights as a partner
with the Federal Government to achieve these goals.
I'm anxious to hear from our witness, Mr. Shaw. Thanks for
joining us, as well, today. Chairman, thanks for having me.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
And I want to welcome the first panel. We appreciate you
being here today.
We have as a witness the Honorable Greg Abbott, who is the
Attorney General of the State of Texas. In addition, we have
Mr. Todd Staples, who is the Commissioner of Agriculture of
Texas. And then we have Mr. Bryan Shaw, who is the chairman of
the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. So, we
appreciate your being here. We look forward to your testimony.
And Attorney General Abbott, I'll recognize you first for
your opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF GREG ABBOTT, ATTORNEY GENERAL, STATE OF TEXAS;
TODD STAPLES, COMMISSIONER, TEXAS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE;
AND BRYAN W. SHAW, CHAIRMAN, TEXAS COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL
QUALITY

STATEMENT OF GREG ABBOTT

Mr. Abbott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And let me join in in
welcoming you to Texas. I hope you could get some good food
while you were here. Thank you for the opportunity to appear
before this subcommittee.
For the record, my name is Greg Abbott, and I am the
Attorney General from Texas. And I'm here today to focus
primarily on the litigation that Texas is waging against the
EPA and explain why Texas believes the EPA is violating the
Clean Air Act, as well as other laws.
First, before I go into that--and we have submitted in
greater detail in our prepared remarks--Texas has worked
effectively with the EPA to enforce environmental laws. Texas
also strives to prevent pollution before it occurs. Over the
last decade, as has been recounted already, Texas cut NOx in
half and reduced ozone more than any other State in the
country. And Texas has achieved one of the largest reductions
in greenhouse gas emissions of all the States in the country.
Texas remains committed to working with the EPA to improve air
quality and to hold polluters accountable. But Texas cannot
support the EPA's efforts to regulate greenhouse gases and
federalize the Texas air permitting system. Texas believes the
EPA's actions are not only bad policy and harmful to creating
jobs but also believes that EPA has repeatedly violated the
law.
Along these lines, the EPA has ignored the plain language
of the Clean Air Act, violated notice and comment requirements,
and attempted to rewrite Federal laws that were written by the
United States Congress by way of the administrative rulemaking
process.
Texas lodges several legal challenges. I'll mention just
three because of lack of time that reveal legal problems with
the EPA's regulations. One is called the ``Tailoring Rule.''
The Clean Air Act defines in precise numerical terms the
emission thresholds that trigger permitting requirements for
stationary sources. The EPA conceived that the regulation of
greenhouse gases at these stationary thresholds are
inconsistent with the Congressional intent concerning the Clean
Air Act by subjecting thousands of schools, churches, farms,
and small businesses to Clean Air Act regulation. These harsh
results show that greenhouse gases simply are not the kind of
substance the Clean Air Act was designed to regulate. To get
around Congress' clear instructions, the EPA basically amended
the Clean Air Act by administrative fiat. The EPA calls the
revised language the ``Tailoring Rule.'' The Tailoring Rule
purports to create new thresholds for greenhouse gases in place
of the thresholds that were mandated by Congress, itself.
These new thresholds are several hundred times higher than
those in the Clean Air Act. Well, with this Tailoring Rule, the
EPA effectively rewrote the Clean Air Act by unilaterally
raising emission thresholds.
A second legal violation is in the SIP call rule issued by
the EPA. The Clean Air Act gives States up to 3 years to bring
their programs into compliance with major new Federal mandates,
such as the greenhouse gas regulations. Well, the time allowed
by the EPA violated the Clean Air Act by giving States only 15
months rather than the allotted 3 years to change their laws
and regulations to comply with the new greenhouse gas mandate.
The EPA bases its decision on statutory provisions for bringing
a SIP into compliance with existing standards, but the
greenhouse gas rules are new standards. So, the 3-year
requirement applies. EPA's failure to give States 3 full years
violates the Clean Air Act.
The last one I'll mention is the legal violation in the FIP
rule. Absent an overriding emergency, the Administrative
Procedure Act requires the EPA to solicit notice and comment
from the public before issuing regulations. The FIP rule was
issued without notice and comment in violation of the APA.
There was no emergency to rush the rule. The EPA had plenty of
time to respond to Texas' position on greenhouse gases. A
notice and comment period was, therefore, required by the FIP
rule. EPA's failure to provide it should doom the rule. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Abbott follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Abbott.
Mr. Staples, you're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TODD STAPLES

Mr. Staples. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members, for the
opportunity to be here with you today and thank you for your
leadership for our country and our State.
I'm here today to share with you concerns of Texas
agriculture with a number of efforts underway to regulate
greenhouse gases and to discuss the negative consequences not
only to American agriculture, but particularly to consumers and
its negative impact on jobs here in our country.
American agriculture produces the safest, the most
affordable, and the most reliable food supply in the world.
Texas is a big part of that. Texas leads the nation in the
production of cattle and cotton and sheep and goats and many
other categories. It has an economic impact annually of about
$100 billion on our State's economy and represents about 9 and
a half percent of our entire gross State economy.
To demonstrate the connectivity between agriculture in
urban Texas right here in Houston, the Port of Houston is the
biggest exporter of Texas agriculture products. We're all
involved in agriculture at least in some form today.
The EPA's regulation of greenhouse gases in Texas under the
Clean Air Act will have a detrimental effect on Texas'
agriculture. It will increase input costs which farmers and
ranchers will have no choice but to either absorb or stop
producing the food that we eat and the clothes that we wear.
Ultimately, in this process, it is the consumer, American
families, that will be picking up the tab for these higher
costs. Based on a USDA study, released just this year,
Americans spend about $41 billion for the transportation of
food from the farm to the consumer. The Department of Labor
reported that the increase in food costs are the highest in
four decades. All with very minimal inflation. And I might add
that these are natural, market-driven costs. And costs
associated with greenhouse gas regulations will only add to
these already higher costs that consumers are facing.
Uncertainty of regulation threatens the health of
production agriculture. Agriculture is an industry more
vulnerable than most. Agriculture producers have to fight
pests, disease, weather, and volatility of the market each and
every day. They should not have to fight their own Governmental
regulatory agencies.
Since the EPA began consideration of the endangerment
finding, analysts have sounded statistical alarm bells loudly
and clearly. Costs estimates run the gamut but all prove that
greenhouse gas regulation will have a negative impact on
agriculture and a negative impact on consumers.
If the input costs for American agriculture are higher than
those of our competitors in other countries, this will have the
net effect of moving production agriculture outside the borders
of the United States and along with it the jobs that are
created.
These regulations, members, are proven in their cost but
they are questionable in their benefit.
Generally, when establishing regulations, we're doing it to
achieve an end. There are consequences for every regulatory
action. That's why following sound science is a fundamental
principle by which all regulators across the United States have
always lived and practiced. Now we believe the EPA is
abandoning these principles and this process. In this case,
there's no measurable positive impact and no way to determine
if your regulation is achieving the result worth the economic
disruption that it's causing.
And this isn't just a disruption to farmers and ranchers.
It's disruption to the consumers who benefit from American
agricultural products is what is on the table. Today Americans
spend about 10 percent of their disposable income on food. That
compares to about 24 percent in Mexico and, roughly, 33 percent
to our competitors in China.
Food security is a part of national security. There are no
greater better stewards than our farmers and ranchers. No one
cares more for the land and air and water than them. We're
pleading to you for your help today to turn to the courts, we
have turned in voluminous communication to the EPA, and we're
asking for your help in this process.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Staples follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Staples.
And, Mr. Shaw, you're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRYAN W. SHAW

Mr. Shaw. Thank you, Chairman and members. It is an honor
to be here and to be able to address this group and talk about
the issue of flexible permitting in Texas. And I hope to take
the time that you've allotted me to give some background on why
we are where we are as well as to address some of the issues as
far as what is that path forward looking like.
As a way of background--and, by the way, I am Bryan Shaw,
the chairman on the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality,
for the record.
The flexible permit program is one of the tools in our
toolbox to allow us to accomplish our agency's mission, which
is to protect the environment in the state of Texas, to do so
to induce it to continue economic development. As we recognize
that we need to have both a strong economy and a strong
environment or we'll have neither.
So, toward that end we perceive that the Clean Air Act's
delegation of authority to States such as Texas not only gave
us an opportunity but we believe affords us a responsibility to
customize our environmental regs with the program to find
innovative ways to approach and to obtain the environmental
goals that are set either by our State or by the Federal
Government and to do so in a way that we can economically get
there and ensure that we have a strong economy so that we can
continue to improve our environment as well as recognizing the
strong influence that a strong economy has on the health of our
Texans because of the nutritional and other health care issues
that are positively effected by a strong economy.
If you look at the process of the flexible permit program,
it was a tool that was developed largely to help us to find
innovative ways to incentivize enhanced environmental
performance. We were able to trade flexibility to the regulated
communities for reductions in environmental emissions. This is
something that was on the heels of a Federal program known as
``Project XL.'' It's a program that we believed and to this day
believe not only does it provide for a stronger economic base
and in job creation because of that flexibility but also
provides opportunity for environmental reduction and ensures
the technique through the way that the program is set up.
It has been in the past, as is mentioned, there have been
letters exchanged between my agency and the EPA expressing
concerns about the permit program. There have even been
concerns expressed about individual permits. And when my agency
has been given the opportunity to sit down with the EPA and
address individual permits, we have been able to identify and
explain where the misperceptions occurred, where the permit
authorizations were indeed correct. And to this day, I'm
unaware of any permit that has been discovered where our
flexible permit program led to the exceedance of the Federal
requirements.
I think that's critical because we have indicated, I have
multiple times, that I stand ready to stand with the EPA to
identify a flexible permit when our program allows that
facility to then operate to exceed Federal requirements. And,
in fact, both the State, Federal laws as well as the State
regulations prohibit flexible permit holders from circumventing
Federal permit review to know where if the permit holders were
to try to use that permitting program to get around the
requirements of the Federal Government, the Federal emission
laws, we would have enforcement action and it would potentially
render that permit null and void.
And, so, we had this process where these letters were
exchanged over the years; and certainly it was
miscommunication. And if we tried to address those off and on,
we had occasional bouts of success and failure with regard to
communicating that to the EPA. And the lawsuit that was
mentioned previously where EPA was forced to go to the Federal
Register with their perceived deficiencies in the program
happened in 2009 and the final disapproval came in 2010. That
forced the EPA to lay out what the perceived deficiencies of
the program were.
This was actually a relief for me because it allowed us to
finally have EPA put into a legal context those concerns that
they had with our program. And we were able to then take those
concerns and explain how they were misconceptions. We did make
some changes in an agreed rulemaking process with the EPA, an
expedited process, to address and clarify concerns they had
with the program. Unfortunately, the EPA has yet to consider
those rule changes we made that only worked to clarify why our
program does indeed meet Federal requirements. And, instead,
they went ahead and disapproved our program without considering
those changes that we need to address and clarify, concerns
they had with the program.
With regard to the path forward, we believe that our
program has led to environmental enhances and the program was
developed and it also is one of the concerns I have is that as
we move away from the flex permit program, we've had several
unintended consequences. Among those are environmental benefits
that we had because of the way this program was set up which
will be lost if we allow companies to overcontrol facilities
located near grandfathered facilities, for example, and we've
got additional reductions from that and if we start
underflexing it, if you will, your options are--in many cases
my concern is to either increase those emissions or to shut
some of those facilities down.
We have a number of facilities that are in the process of
deflexing through the State. And I'm concerned that we may see
the impact of that as we move forward. But we stand committed
to allowing them to take advantage of the permitting tools we
have and work with the EPA for a path forward. Hopefully, we
can retain as much of the environmental benefit and economic
development aspects of the flexible permit program as we move
forward as possible.
Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shaw follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you very much for your
testimony.
And I was just reading a sentence from Ms. McCarthy's
testimony. She is the administrator for the EPA on air quality,
and she'll be testifying later today. But in her testimony she
said, ``Texas has been a part of the Clean Air Act success. For
example, in 2000 the number of bad air days in Houston exceeded
those in Los Angeles. Today Houston's ozone levels have
decreased so that the area is currently meeting the 1997 ozone
air quality standards.''
So, one of the perplexing things about the flex permit
issue is that it does appear that the flex permit worked well
for Texas and did--as a result of that, Texas was able to meet
the ambient air quality standards and did very well. I mean,
would you agree with that, Mr. Shaw?
Mr. Shaw. Yes, I would agree that the flex permit is one of
those tools in our toolbox that has helped to obtain hundred of
thousands of tons of reduced emissions based on what staff has
reported to me. And, certainly, it's been one of those tools
that has helped to incentivise companies to make voluntary
reductions, which I will submit is one of the best ways we can
move forward with environmental enhancement, to have
regulations that offer to incentivise companies to move forward
on their own, to develop better technologies.
Mr. Whitfield. And, you know, one thing about the Clean Air
Act, it is so complex and there are so many aspects to it that
any way that you can simplify it and still meet the goal, seems
to me to be an advantage.
And on the Tailoring Rule, for a minute--we'll switch from
there over to the greenhouse gas for just a minute. I know the
EPA has been sued for their Tailoring regulation and my
recollection is the Tailoring regulations would give the EPA
authority to regulate any greenhouse gas emissions above
100,000 tons per year. And as the law says, the Clean Air Act,
itself, says anything above 150 or 250, depending on what it
is. So, there's no question that the clear language is that the
EPA violated the Clean Air Act and State of Texas did not sue
them on the Tailoring Rule.
Did you or didn't you?
Mr. Abbott. We did.
Mr. Whitfield. And environmental groups have also sued them
on that. And--is that correct?
Mr. Abbott. I'm not sure if they have done so yet. We
anticipate those lawsuits coming, if they haven't been filed
yet.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, my understanding's that there was, but
I maybe should be corrected on that.
Mr. Abbott. I can't confirm it or deny it right now.
Mr. Whitfield. But I do remember when Ms. Jackson--Lisa
Jackson, the administrator of the EPA, appeared before our
committee. She was asked a question back on the greenhouse gas
issue, with--will your regulations be effective in reducing
greenhouse gases. And she said it would be negligible because
unless other countries are willing to take the same stand that
we do in America, it's in the stratosphere, it's very difficult
to control. And there's been a lot of discussion today about
China. So, we know that China is relying more and more and more
on coal. And, so, the whole issue here that bothers a lot of us
is the ability of America to remain competitive in the global
marketplace.
But--but on this--back to the flex permits, just a minute,
Mr. Shaw. Am I correct that you set an overall limit of
emissions; and as long as you fall within that limit, then
you're in compliance. Is that--is that true?
Mr. Shaw. That's correct. And it's actually more complex
than that. We actually require those companies to do what we
call ``worst case modeling'' in order to prove that if that
facility operates with that flexibility under that cap, if you
will, under the worst-case scenario, the worst emissions and
the worst location in that facility, that it will be protective
of the health and environment off-site. And, so, it actually
means that facility is going to be operating safer in normal
operating mode because they have to model the worst-case
scenario. So, yes, they do have to stay under that.
There are rumors that they can, then, spew the evil things
over the fence line. That's not correct. They have to upfront
model and improve under the worst-case operating errors to
ensure they meet the standards.
Mr. Whitfield. And over the 16 years that we've been
issuing these, it's my understanding you've issued over 120
permits and that EPA never expressed any opposition at the
time; is that correct?
Mr. Shaw. Well, there have been those letters we've talked
about. I think it's maybe 140. We can confirm the total number.
But there has been a hot-and-cold relationship. The EPA has
expressed concerns; we've addressed them in--on a--case by
case. And, in fact, in one facility the region administrator
was at a ribbon cutting and held his program up as innovative
and what should be taken back to the EPA in DC and be spread
across the United States as the type of program that we ought
to be having for combating environmental challenges.
Mr. Whitfield. I might just add, on the Tailoring Rule, Mr.
Abbott, that when we know that it strictly violates the letter
of law but the EPA--the officials at the EPA will tell you that
the doctrine they use to give them the authority to change it
administratively debate that they want to prevent an absurd
result. And the absurd result is that they do not have the
manpower, the money, or anything else to issue all the permits
and do anything everything they would be required to do if they
do not have the Tailoring Rule.
Mr. Abbott. Right. And we don't believe the so-called
``Absurd Results Doctrine'' is going to hold up in court. What
is absurd is that a regulatory agency can come in and have
unelected bureaucrats rewrite a law that the United States
Congress wrote. We don't think the court will uphold that
rewriting of a law by a Federal agency.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Green, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shaw, how long have you been the chair of the TCEQ?
Mr. Shaw. Since September of 2009.
Mr. Green. OK. And you know the letters we put in the
record. There has been an exchange of letters in the last 7
years, even back to President Clinton when the flex permits
were started in '94, I think. And they're--they--TCEQ has
worked out those differences between those administrations
since 1990.
Mr. Shaw. We had worked on regular basis, but I would say
that while we attempted to bring those to a point where we
thought the EPA would then approve the permit program, it's
sort of getting put on the back burner historically and then
maybe a couple years later there will be another letter. And,
so, it was--and interestingly, those same concerns in those
letters were finally in the Federal Register in 2009.
Mr. Green. And I guess this didn't happen in January of
2009. Those letters were far back and there's always been a
relationship between the EPA and the TCEQ. Sometimes it's good
and sometimes it's not so good.
Mr. Shaw. I think I described it as ``hot and cold'' on
this issue, sir.
Mr. Green. Yes. I understand how Federal agencies work.
Sometimes another fire picks up somewhere else and they get on
that, not unlike a lawyer having one file and going to another
one.
So, we heard that TCEQ is at an impasse on this deal coming
to a mutually agreeable resolution on deflexing the Texas
permits. And I understand the concern, I think is--and correct
me--that EPA needs to look back to ensure there are no Title V
violations on the SIP cap.
Are you still in negotiations with EPA or--and I know the
lawsuit has been filed; but, you know, frankly, I've been told
that because the lawsuit's filed, there's no new negotiations.
Frankly, I thought that was when most attorneys negotiated.
Mr. Shaw. We certainly stand ready to have additional
discussions. And the key thing is there's really not a lot of
fertile area for negotiations. I stand ready, but what has
happened instead, Congressman, is that most facilities because
of the uncertainty associated with the EPA's denial of the
program and the threats that they want, I believe I've been
told that I can't know specific permitting issues because of ex
parte prohibitions under the Texas statutes. But I've been told
that those permit holders have all indicated to the EPA that
they would agree to get into more conventional permits. And,
so, we have a number of them that I suppose are in-house going
through and converting from flexible permits to a conventional
permitting program.
And my concern is are we going to have negative
environmental components of that? That's sort of the path
forward at this point is companies are availing themselves of
an opportunity to get permits with more certainty.
Mr. Green. Are you hearing from individual companies on the
problems they're having deflexing their permits?
Mr. Shaw. I can't hear those because that would officially
be an ex parte prohibition. So, I'm not trying to avoid your
question, but I--my staff may be hearing those, but I cannot.
Mr. Green. I know we have a saying here, ``if it ain't
broke, don't fix it.'' And Texas air quality has improved and
Ms. McCarthy, who will be here later, will testify to that.
Having represented a lot of these industries that achieved that
reduction over a period of time and I congratulate them on
that. My understanding is that the EPA does not contest that
emissions have gone down, but rather they can't specifically
tie the use of flex permits to this reduction.
Is that your understanding?
Mr. Shaw. My staff--and, again, it makes it somewhat
difficult for me to look at individual permits. But when I've
asked staff specifically that question, my staff has identified
technologies that were developed through this flexible permit
program because it incentivized developing new technology to
overcontrol new facilities. That incentivized those companies
and I understand that some of those areas are in the cat
cracker unit. To reduce emissions, I suspect, if not, that
those have then led to nominal reductions in those flexible
permits holders but also led to reducing the control standard
or the threshold for other permit areas in Texas and across the
U.S. So, it incentivized development of greater technology for
pollution reduction.
Mr. Green. You may know this because I know we'll hear it
later from the EPA. The number of flex permits that have been
issued in Texas compared to our neighboring States, that I
understood in discussions with the EPA, part of the problem is
that other States are saying why can't we do this when Texas is
doing hundreds, and I don't have any problem with that; but
obviously some of the 48 States or 49 States may.
Mr. Shaw. I haven't heard that complaint from other States.
I know that there are a handful of other States that do have
somewhat similar programs, and some--including, I believe
Virginia and Florida have had EPA approve those fairly
recently. They do have a similar flexible permit type. They
call it something different, obviously. But it's similar to the
Project XL that I mentioned in my opening remarks. So, there
are other States that do have similar programs that EPA
apparently hasn't taken issue with yet.
Mr. Green. But Texas took advantage of it, and I don't
fault that, in the '90s. You gave us some rules that we abided
by to the best we could. But it seems like you give the numbers
from other States that are very small compared to ours, but
we'll get to that testimony later.
Attorney General, again welcome. Welcome home.
Mr. Abbott. Great to be back.
Mr. Green. You appeared before our committee in Washington
a few weeks ago, and your testimony states that Congress in
effect they should decide on regulating carbon dioxide
emissions; and, believe me, I agree with that. It should be a
congressional responsibility.
And I strongly agree with you. That's why I supported
delaying regulations. Given Texas' opposition and EPA's
approach to this issue, I'm curious, what type of Federal
carbon-controlling program could Texas support?
Mr. Abbott. Well, you know, my perspective comes from the
legal perspective. And that's really a policy-laden question
that I would have to defer to the policymakers.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Barton, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Each of you gentlemen is an official of the State of Texas
and as such have been elected by the people with the exception
of Mr. Shaw, who is appointed by the Governor and I think
confirmed by the Senate. But each of you do take an oath to
defend and uphold the laws of the State of Texas but you also
take an oath to defend and uphold the laws of the United
States; is that not correct?
Mr. Shaw. Yes, sir.
Mr. Abbott. Yes, sir.
Mr. Barton. So, there's not any of you that's here to say
``Let's just do what's good for Texas and don't worry about the
laws of the United States?'' I mean, we're all--we want to
defend the laws at both the State level and the Federal level;
is that not correct?
Mr. Abbott. That's correct, sir.
Mr. Shaw. Correct.
Mr. Barton. Now, Mr. Shaw, I'm going to ask you, as the
chief regulator for environmental protection, the chairman of
the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, is it your
understanding that the reason the Flexible Air Quality
permitting program was disavowed by the Federal government--was
it disavowed on its own merits, that it wasn't effective, or
was it disavowed because the State refused to submit a State
Implementation Plan incorporating the greenhouse gases into its
existing air programs?
Mr. Shaw. The flexible permit program was disapproved
theoretically because of concerns of it having deficiencies to
meet Federal programs. Although, interestingly, what the EPA
went forward with in the Federal Register was addressed both
verbally with officials in the EPA and especially with the
regional administrator. And when we addressed that those were
incorrect, the discussion moved from it fails to meet those
requirements to we don't want to have Federal flexible permit
programs. That's separate from the greenhouse gases----
Mr. Barton. Well, it's an important distinction. My
understanding at the time was that the Federal--the EPA was
disavowing our flexible air permits because of--of defects in
that as a stand-alone program. Not because the State was
refusing to submit greenhouse gas regulations to comply with
the endangerment findings. So, that you've got two separate
issues. You're looking at air quality and flexible permitting
of existing permits in one box and then the whole debate that
the Attorney General has educated us on is whether the Federal
Government has the right to basically make law on its own by
proposing these Tailoring Rules and all of that. So, it's two
issues.
Mr. Shaw. Correct.
Mr. Barton. It's not one that's linked. They didn't--they
didn't refuse or reject our air permits under flexible air
permitting program because of controversy on greenhouse?
Mr. Shaw. That's correct.
Mr. Abbott. I agree.
Mr. Barton. And Commissioner Staples, you agree?
Mr. Staples. Yes.
Mr. Barton. Now, having said that, did they--did the EPA
allege specific permits that were not in compliance? Did they
say the permit for Dow Chemical was not in compliance or did
they say the--generically the ambient air quality standard for
ozone in the North Texas region is deteriorating because your
flex permitting systems are not working?
Mr. Shaw. Yes. Their objections to these programs were
based on our not having the same program that they have. The
differences they perceived in theirs, but not on an individual
failure to meet the ozone requirements that were individual
permits. They did later take issues with individual permits.
But in the Federal Register announcement, clearly it was based
on those perceived initiatives. The program didn't do----
Mr. Whitfield. So, the letter that Mr. Green or Mr.
Gonzalez put in the record where EPA officials have had some
problems with their flex permitting, those letters don't allude
to a specific substantive difference. They basically refer to
how to implement a particular permit or something like that.
Mr. Shaw. Right. And--and to that end, when they have
identified individual permits they thought they had concerns
with, when we were able to sit down with them, we were able to
explain where those were misunderstandings were.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, Mr. Attorney General, I've got a
document--a sworn affidavit that Ms. McCarthy put in the court
record in one of the lawsuits that you're defending the State
on. It's dated October the 28th, 2010.
Have you seen that affidavit?
Mr. Abbott. Personally, I have not. I am aware of it
because it is a part of--frankly it was a part of the testimony
that was provided----
Mr. Barton. Is my time expired, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Whitfield. No. Go ahead.
Mr. Barton. In that--that's a sworn affidavit and in that
affidavit, at the end of the affidavit, she says that not only
with regard to Texas, but I think with regard to any State, the
EPA is not going to--to use a slang term--FIP a State program.
In other words, they're not going to take over for a State if
you don't have a State Implementation Plan that the EPA has
agreed meets all the requirements under the Clean Air Act and
their new greenhouse gas regulations. Isn't that true?
Mr. Abbott. That's true, and it is part of our lawsuit--
part of our FIP lawsuit in explaining to the Court why we think
that the EPA has acted illegally and improperly. And----
Mr. Barton. And her sworn statement was that they weren't
going to do anything for at least a year.
Mr. Abbott. Her sworn statement was they were not going to
do anything. They could not take over Texas' Air Permitting
program, quote, until December 2nd, 2011, at the earliest.
That, of course, is about eight months.
Mr. Barton. And how many days later did they do just that?
Mr. Abbott. It was--that was in October and it was about
two months later where they issued an emergency FIP rule on
December 23rd. The reason why I point that out is because it
was done right before the Christmas/New Year's holiday. And----
Mr. Barton. So, in October she says you've got at least a
year and then two months later they do exactly opposite what
she said they would do?
Mr. Abbott. Under the cover of darkness. I don't----
Mr. Barton. My time has expired, but we'll come back to it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Gonzalez, you're recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shaw, first of all, thank you for service and thank you
for coming to Washington and meeting with us. You've always
been incredibly informed and it's helped us, again, come to
where we are today, trying to understand who [inaudible].
Who is Dan Eder?
Mr. Shaw. Dan Eder is a former employee of the agency TCEQ.
Mr. Gonzalez. And the reason is we're going over the
history and correspondence between your agency and the EPA--and
there's numerous letters that have been introduced today--but
there is a letter back in March 12th, 2008, and that's the date
that I have here that's on it. And in it Congress meets Carl
Edlund, director of Multi-Media Planning and Permitting
Division of the EPA, does write a letter to Mr. Eaton and the
reason that I want to read this to you is that you referred to
the fact that other States have some sort of flex permitting
protocols and you didn't indicate whether they're substantially
different than the State of Texas. There may be a reason why
EPA may be looking at Texas differently than other States. I
think that may be the composition.
Let me ask you if this still holds true, because in Mr.
Edlund's letter, there's an enclosure. And it says unlike
flexible permit programs in other States, the Texas Flexible
Permit program is not limited to minor sources.
Can you clarify? Is that a distinction? Are those others--
those other flex permit programs in other States different in
that respect?
Mr. Shaw. That is one of those--the reason--there was
probably a lot of frustration because it was only in the last
year and a half that EPA was made to realize that their
perception that our program applied to major NSR was incorrect.
In other words, our flexible permitting does not apply to major
sources of NSR----
Mr. Whitfield. So, that would be incorrect; and, in fact,
in March 2008----
Mr. Shaw. EPA was--was confused about our program. And it
applied to major NSR [inaudible] where people specifically
prohibit companies from circumventing major New Source Review.
And that's one of the things that we were able to clarify then
whenever EPA clearly explained----
Mr. Gonzalez. To their satisfaction? Let me ask you that
because I'm not in your position. I--you say you've explained
it. I'm just wondering did they communicate that is a fair,
complete, and acceptable explanation?
Mr. Shaw. Not in writing, but we had several meetings. And
this is important because we had a meeting where we talked
about each of those individual items and it seemed that the
consensus within the room was ``we now understand this.'' And I
made the comment, to paraphrase, was not that we've addressed
that these perceptions or the perceived failures of our program
have been addressed, can we now move with how we can move forth
to get this permit program approved. And the discussion moved
to we are not interested in having the flex permit program
fixed. So, that was our concerns. We had those issues that were
legitimate----
Mr. Gonzalez. Well, I mean----
Mr. Shaw. And I think----
Mr. Gonzalez. And that when you get that kind of an
admission on a major issue, that it simplify would inquire and
request something in writing from them. OK. And simply to
recite it in letter and transpire it our discussion, that is
our understanding, if we don't hear from you, we will assume
that we are correct in our interpretation.
But my question is, I think we're going to go round and
round on these issues because your perception of things and
their perception of things are different. And that's something
that we just--I only have 5 minutes here.
I'm going to go to General Abbott. It's good seeing you
again. I must say it's been a lot more fun than our previous
encounters, but it is good to see you, sir.
Let me ask you a couple of questions about the lawsuit--or
lawsuits. And this is from a memorandum that was prepared by
the staff. In the 2007 decision, Massachusetts v. EPA, the
Supreme Court held that greenhouse gases, including carbon
dioxide are air pollutants under the Clean Air Act. Is that
accurate?
Mr. Abbott. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gonzalez. And, so, that means that EPA would be the
regulatory agency that would have jurisdiction regarding
certain policies enforcing, regulating and such pollutants
including greenhouse gases. Is that fair?
Mr. Abbott. The jurisdictional component of your questions
would be correct, that the issue does require a tiny bit of
lead which it sounds like you may be getting to, before they
can go ahead and begin that process of the regulation, they
must have arrived at the endangerment finding. So, there's a
predicate or a threshold that must be satisfied. And that's
exactly what the Supreme Court said, that their decision was.
Now, EPA, you can no longer avoid making the decision about
whether or not there is an endangerment posed by greenhouse
gases. You have to go ahead and make that decision and then if
you make that decision, there's several other predicates that
must be satisfied before they can begin the process of doing
the regulation.
Mr. Gonzalez. Fundamentally, then, I think you have an
argument that they have not met certain preconditions and such
requirements.
Mr. Abbott. That would be one umbrella, if you would. There
are several key points under that one umbrella or silo, but,
yes, that would be one.
Mr. Gonzalez. Mr. Chairman, if you'll allow me one last
question because it is the Attorney General, and I'm going to
read one paragraph from the memorandum.
Once greenhouse gas became subject to regulation and the
EPA issued the Tailoring Rule, State PESE permitting
authorities needed to ensure that they had adequate authority
to issue key PESE permits for greenhouse gases and that State
permitting requirements would not be triggered and so on.
Only Texas failed to take the necessary action. The
chairman on the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and
the Texas Attorney General wrote to the EPA on August 2nd,
2010, saying, quote, on behalf of the State of Texas we write
to inform you that Texas has neither the authority nor the
intention of usurping, ignoring, or amending each clause in
order to compel the permitting of greenhouse gas emissions.
Is it an issue of greenhouse gas emissions more than
anything else, as Mr. Barton has already pointed out that may
be a two-prong issue going on here.
Is that statement that I just read to you about the
intentions or the authority of Texas to do anything regarding
permitting of greenhouse gas emissions something that is going
to remain in place even if the EPA went through the three
conditions that you have already outlined?
Mr. Abbott. Well, a couple of things. The point of your
question seems like it asks about the permitting process, and
I'm not in charge of that. I would have to defer to Chairman
Shaw about that. On the legal side, it is our contention and
my--my position, unless I'm instructed otherwise by my client
or other clients in the State of Texas, to press on with our
lawsuit about greenhouse gases because of multiple reasons.
The--we--we live under the rule of law. And the EPA has
clearly violated the rule of law by failing and refusing to
follow the Clean Air Act, by failing and refusing to follow the
APA as well as other laws. And we--we believe that the
regulations that they have come up with for greenhouse gases
are completely noncompliant with the laws passed by the United
States Congress. And, also, I will submit that--I'm sorry.
Mr. Whitfield. No. Go ahead.
Mr. Abbott. I submit, also, that what the EPA is doing is
inconsistent with the Massachusetts v. the EPA decision upon
which they claim provides them the authority to do this.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you very much.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Chairman, could I ask a follow-up
question----
Mr. Whitfield. Sure.
Mr. Barton [continuing]. Since we were--yes. You're being
very generous in allowing both sides more than 5 minutes.
Your contention as the official legal representative of the
State of Texas representing the Texas Council on Environmental
Quality is that the EPA is violating the law because they're
clearly ignoring the plain statutory language of the Clean Air
Act and that any source that emits at least 100 tons per year
is subject to the Act.
Mr. Abbott. That's one of the things. That's--that's the
Tailoring Rule.
Mr. Barton. And my understanding is that the Tailoring Rule
is exempting massive facilities from that requirement and I
could speculate, but I don't won't do it, but--but that's one
of the contentions of the lawsuit is that the EPA is not a
legislative body and they're clearly legislating by exempting
under the Clean Air Act large numbers of facilities, that
according to the clear language, should be subject to the law.
Mr. Abbott. Well, it--it creates that level of uncertainty
because what they--the impression that we have is they have
created this one level for now and they are going to be
lowering that threshold later and when they lower that
threshold later, it will begin to get into farms, ranches,
hospitals, schools.
But here's the key point, if I could bring this back to the
one case that authorized and categorized the EPA to begin this
in the first place, and that is the Massachusetts v. the EPA.
And here's the key deal: What they said is if--if I could read
one sentence to you from this opinion.
If EPA makes a finding of endangerment, the Clean Air Act
requires the agency to regulate emissions of the deleterious
pollutants from new motor vehicles. I could repeat sentences
like that in here. I don't have time; but the bottom line, this
applies to new motor vehicles. It doesn't apply to stationary
sources like what they're using the Tailoring Rule to try to
apply to.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Staples, I've been told that you have a
previous appointment. Do you need to leave now or----
Mr. Staples. [Inaudible.] A few more minutes----
[Simultaneously speaking.]
Mr. Whitfield. OK. All right. Mr. Brady is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Brady. Thank you. I'll be [inaudible].
Mr. Whitfield, Chairman, thank you for hosting this and
coming to Houston.
Mr. Whitfield. Very much appreciated.
Mr. Brady. Ranking Member, to you, as well.
A quick question to [inaudible] Commissioner Staples and
the Attorney General. You testified that the Federal Government
violated regulations and timetables regarding our State
Implementation Plan. Are States allowed to ignore and violate
Federal regulations and timetables in this regard?
Mr. Abbott. Not that I'm aware of.
Mr. Brady. What happens when we do?
Mr. Abbott. We get sued.
Mr. Brady. I thought it might be appropriate for you to
respond to, as well [inaudible].
Commissioner Staples, thank you for your leadership, too.
You, as well, Commissioner.
Energy is a big part of the Texas economy, but agriculture.
As you [inaudible] before--we are very good at selling our ag
products around the world and reaping the benefits with jobs as
a result of that. If these greenhouse mandates piled a half a
billion dollars or more on our Texas ag producers, does that
make us less competitive? And what's the impact if they drive
the prices up when we're competing around the world?
Mr. Staples. Agriculture becomes extremely dependent on
energy for its production. In fact, it's about 15 percent of
the production costs, alone, for fuel and fertilizer and
chemicals and utilities. And each and every day we compete with
Countries that have lower labor standards than we do, lower
environmental standards than we do. And we're having and seeing
and dealing with this Environmental Protection Agency
regulating us away from market-based solutions. And that's a
concern and impact on jobs and food security.
Mr. Brady. So, we lose sales and it drives up the prices at
the dinner table because we lose sales, as well, for our
local----
Mr. Staples. Lose sales and lose the associated jobs with
that and the domestically-based food sources that Americans
have come to rely upon.
Mr. Brady. Thank you for testifying on this issue. I
appreciate it.
Chairman Shaw, Texas has outperformed the rest of the
country in reducing ozone and NOx emissions. That's correct?
Mr. Shaw. That's correct.
Mr. Brady. I get the impression from the EPA that we've
literally done nothing to really make that happen. And one
question is how much has Texas spent over the years to make our
air cleaner? Is it a couple thousand dollars or----
Mr. Shaw. No, Congressman. It's a fairly large expenditure.
The agency that I chair typically has about a billion-dollar
biannual budget. So, about $500 billion per year is spent in
the various aspects of what we do. Perhaps, more importantly,
if you look at these challenges that dictate fate meeting the
ozone in our metropolitan areas, one of the big concerns and
challenges have been that largely local sources are responsible
to the tune of about 60 percent of ozone count being Dallas-
Fort Worth and Houston are mobile sources which we are pre-
empted from regulating because they are Federally regulated
sources. That indicates legislature has appropriated and we've
spent almost a billion dollars over the last 5 to 10 years in
enhancing and speeding up [inaudible] over a motor vehicle to
get those reductions. And that's just one of the many areas of
expenditures. So, it has been a great investment that's taken
seriously. And we're seeing the fruits of that investment.
Mr. Brady. So, Texans have spent billions of dollars----
Mr. Shaw. Yes.
Mr. Brady [continuing]. To make our air cleaner and
businesses have invested, as well, over the last decade; and
yet the EPA is imposing and seizing our permits. Is that right?
Mr. Shaw. That's correct.
Mr. Brady. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, could I just--Attorney General,
far be it from us to say you can't go to the courthouse since
we're sitting at the South Texas College of Law. All right.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Brady. And I want to thank
the first panel. We appreciate your being with us and answering
our questions.
Mr. Barton. Could I ask one question to the Ag
Commissioner?
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, sir.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Commissioner, under the--under the--if
greenhouse gas regulations were to be implemented and you did
not have a Tailoring Rule, how much of Texas agriculture would
be subject to the Clean Air Act?
Mr. Staples. Let us thank you, the Congress, for exempting
us. Even though the rules say that we would be and you have
made certain that the appropriations process does not impact
that directly; but if we were, just--we'd have 575 dairy
facilities, 58 swine operations, 1300 corn farmers, and 28,000
cattle ranchers would fall under this permitting and reporting
process. And we're very concerned about that as it moves
forward. We're particularly concerned about the impact on our
energy costs today that we're so heavily intensive users of.
Mr. Barton. And is there any truth to the rumor that,
again, if greenhouse gas regulations were imposed on Texas
agriculture, that animal emissions would be mobile source
emissions under the Act?
Mr. Staples. We have seen many different scenarios that are
extremely troubling and we do support policies such as cat 3
methane from our animal facilities, carbon sequestration. There
are many things that we can do and want to do and are doing to
help address this in a market-based program.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, if this Tailoring act is ruled
invalid, you will come under it and the only way that would be
able to be stopped would be to change the law or stop
appropriations in some way.
Mr. Staples. That's absolutely right, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you all very much. And we look
forward to continuing to work with you.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I'd like to call up the second
panel. And on the second panel, we have Mr. James Griffin, who
is plant manager of Dianal America and he's also chairman of
the board of the East Harris County Manufacturers Association.
We also have Mr. James Marston, who is of the Environmental
Defense Fund, from Austin, Texas. And we have Ms. Kathleen
Hartnett White, Director of the Armstrong Center, Texas Public
Policy Foundation. So, I want to welcome all of you. We
appreciate you being with us this morning very much.
Well, once again, thank you all for joining us this morning
and we do look forward to your testimony. And at this time, Mr.
Griffin, we'll recognize you for your opening statements; and
you'll be recognized for 5 minutes and the light there will
denote where we are in the process. Thank you.
So, if you would like to proceed.

STATEMENTS OF JAMES GRIFFIN, PLANT MANAGER, DIANAL AMERICA;
JAMES MARSTON, ENVIRONMENTAL DEFENSE FUND; AND KATHLEEN
HARTNETT WHITE, DIRECTOR, ARMSTRONG CENTER, TEXAS PUBLIC POLICY
FOUNDATION

STATEMENT OF JAMES GRIFFIN

Mr. Griffin. Well, Mr. Chairman, and local Congressman Gene
Green and all the Representatives from Congress, welcome to
Houston, Texas, on this beautiful day in spring; and we just
appreciate you hearing from the constituents regarding the
important issues on greenhouse gas.
As you know, Houston is a global leader in energy and
almost 50 percent of all the petrochemicals in the United
States are right here in Houston. As we sit here in the shadows
of these refineries and petrochemical plants, I want you to
rest assured that we're in full compliance with the Clean Air
Act and our skies are bluer and we continue to improve in
emissions.
The industry has worked very hard on this and over the
years, working with the Texas Commission of Environmental
Quality, we've continued to reduce these emissions and achieve
compliance of with the Clean Air Act. And, of course, that's
delegated with the authorities of the EPA.
Again, my name is Jim Griffin, and I'm the chairman of the
East Harris County Manufacturers, called ``EHCMA.'' And I'm one
of your local plant managers. I've been in the industry for 30
years.
The East Harris County Manufacturers, EHCMA, is an
organization of 120 manufacturing facilities, made up of
refineries and petrochemical plants. We have 300,000 jobs here
in East Harris County. 300,000 good jobs, scientists,
engineers, skilled labor. The products that we make range from
products that go into healthcare. Of course, chemicals for
pharmaceuticals; ag chemicals, which we talked about earlier;
and, of course, the fuel that brought you in on your plane
today and fueled your car; also the plastics that make car more
energy-efficient and that plane more environmentally-friendly.
We do support regulations that are based on sound science
and result in healthful air quality for our region. We've
invested billion of dollars towards meeting regulations that
reduce the ozone in the Houston area, leading to the
unprecedented 2 years running of measured attainment with the
EPA's air quality standard in ozone. And we're very proud of
this accomplishment. Yet when it comes to greenhouse gas, we
believe that the EPA is heading completely in the wrong
direction.
EHCMA members fully expect that implementing greenhouse gas
regulations as planned and designed by the U.S. EPA will result
in closures of manufacturing facilities here in Texas and
across the United States. We already have a struggling economy
and this will do us further harm.
EHCMA fully supports action by Congress to strip EPA of any
authority to regulate greenhouse gases. Overly burdensome and
uncertain U.S. regulations which drive U.S. industry to
developing countries with less or no regulations will likely
increase greenhouse gas emissions.
Last night I was at a community advisory panel. Once a
month all the plant managers meet with the community and the
community sets the agenda. Last month we covered air emissions.
We do that every year. The trend is continue to improve. Last
night's agenda was all about the economy and jobs and the
importance of the industry to this community.
EPA's greenhouse gas regulations require a convoluted
regulatory path that is neither appropriate nor supported by
EPA's authority. In order to move the program into play so
quickly, EPA required individual States to develop State
Implementation Plans in a fraction of the time required to
develop these plans. The net result is 12 to 18 months for
permits and high costs for permits, and it's unfortunate that
Region VI is not represented here today because we met with
senior officials, our committee, our environmental committee,
our experts. And Region VI officials were unable to answer many
questions that must be resolved in order to issue the very
first Texas greenhouse gas permit.
EHCMA urges members of Congress to work towards
congressional legislation that fully strips EPA of any
authority to regulate greenhouse gases unless and until
Congress adopts new legislation structuring the policies and
granting the authority to EPA.
Prudent regulations must not only be based on sound science
but also recognize the balance between clean air and a strong
economy. Texas has proven we can do both. In my job as a plant
manager, my boss is in Tokyo. I work for a global company. It's
a very capital-intense business. When we make decisions on
where to spend capital, we base that in big part due to
regulations; and when regulations are burdensome and uncertain,
we spend that capital in other geographic locations around
world.
So, again, thank you for allowing East Harris County
Manufacturing to address the esteemed House and Energy
Committee and we sure do appreciate you being in Houston.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Griffin follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Griffin.
Mr. Marston, you're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES MARSTON

Mr. Marston. Thank you. I'm Jim Marston. I'm the Regional
Director of the Environmental Defense Fund and have been for 22
years.
In 1867 Mark Twain wrote, ``The most outrageous lies that
can be invented will find believers, if a man only tells them
with all his might.'' Sadly, I think this committee and many
members of Congress have been told a bunch of Texas-sized
whoppers by Texas officials. And my testimony is really to talk
about the myths and the lies that have been permeating this
debate. I'll talk about a couple of them in my oral testimony;
and, certainly, will welcome questions on the rest.
Let's start with the idea that this is somehow an Obama
Administration vendetta against Texas. Since 1994 EPA has been
saying the Texas flex program is illegal. It is a unique
program. It's illegal, not like anything else in the country.
And the Bush Administration in 2006 and 2008 wrote to TCEQ and
said the program is illegal. And in 2007 said every one of the
permit holders under the flex permits to tell them their permit
was not legal. This is not new. There also is--and I will
agree, the air quality has improved in Texas; and we're happy
about that. But it did not improve because of the flex permits.
In my testimony, I have six programs that are documented to
improve the air quality in Texas. I'll be happy to talk about
those in detail. But they're not the flex program.
As proclaimed by Professor Shaw that the--the flex permit
program improved our air quality reminds me of the rooster who
believes that his crowing caused the sun to come up. The truth
is that where we are on the flexible permit issue is really a
much ado about nothing. Seventy-four companies had flex
permits. Seventy-one of them have already come into EPA and
said, ``We get it. We're fixing it. And we'll have a legal
permit within a year.'' This is an issue that's now already
passed. It's not an ongoing issue.
And EPA is not also picking on Texas in regard to its
greenhouse gas permits. The reason why we got sued, we were the
only state that did not actually ask to get its permitting
program in line. What we should have done is what Wyoming did.
Start moving toward fixing our permit. If we didn't like it,
sue like Wyoming. We got our permit program taken over because
we did not file what other States did.
Finally, let me talk just a bit about the science.
Congressman Barton, you and I agree on a couple of things.
Mr. Barton. Well, miracles do occur.
Mr. Marston. You and I agree we need a college playoff
system.
Mr. Barton. Good.
Mr. Marston. And we also agree that Texas A&M is a fine
university. I'm a little confused----
Mr. Barton. That's not debatable.
Mr. Marston. I'm a little confused why we're here today and
why you didn't take this committee and, frankly, Professor Shaw
and the Attorney General down to A&M to the preeminent climate
scientists there. And I wish you would ask them what their
opinion is on the climate science. If you had--and they've just
published this--they say we are all, the tenured and tenure
tract faculty members of the atmospheric science program at
Texas A&M University. We believe science is clear. Climate
change is happening. It's caused mainly by humans. And if we
don't act soon, we could have serious adverse impacts.
I know the committee has already voted out this bill to
strip EPA of the greenhouse gas authority. Before you actually
go to the floor, I ask that--with that bill, I ask you all to
go talk to the Aggie scientists. Please ask the Aggies about
what role science plays. It's clear. And I know we think that
this is the going to harm the Texas economy for claiming this.
But there will be winners and losers in the greenhouse gas
regulations. The States that are going to win are those who
have large amounts of natural gas, a lot of wind and solar,
have geologic formations that can handle carbon dioxide
storage, where we use enhanced oil recovery, we have a good
clean community, and where we have little energy deficiency
investments.
By the way, welcome to Texas. If we do it right, God has
placed Texas in a perfect position to win under a low carbon
economy.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Marston follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Marston.
Ms. White, you're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KATHLEEN HARTNETT WHITE

Ms. White. Thank you. I, also, would like to add I was
chairman and commissioner of the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality for 6 years previously, and I've observed
comments--my comments, in part, come from observing EPA actions
over 25 years. And this is not business as usual.
On March 4th an editorial in the Wall Street Journal
referred to an--EPA's unprecedented regulatory spree. And I--I
very much agree that I have never observed in the 40-year
history of EPA what is going on now. Not merely issues like
greenhouse gas regulations which get, appropriately, most of
the headlines but the number of major rules now with billion-
dollar impacts at EPA's own estimate and not merely million-
dollar impacts, all of which have an effective date which may
converge in the very near future, like 2012 to 2015. And part
of the written testimony that I submitted has a time line,
which shows the magnitude of these rules.
So, I want to offer to this hearing something a little
different, which, because of confines of time, will be very
brief. It's highlights of 10 of these I call ``mega-major
rules.'' And as an alarm bell that most people would view from
a source which has no vested interest in the issue, the
National Electric Reliability Council, NERC, on the basis of an
analysis of only four of these rules, NERC concluded there's a
risk of loss of up to 77 gigawatts of electricity in this
country by 2015. Other studies, one done by Credit Suisse and
others have found that those are actually conservative numbers
and that perhaps 100 gigawatts of U.S. electricity could be
lost.
On the State level, for those NERC numbers means a risk of
a loss of about 5700 megawatts of Texas electricity. This is a
growing, growing State, our population and economically. ERCOT,
Electric Reliability Outfit in Texas, projected this State
needs up to 183,000 megawatts of electricity by 2020 to meet
demand at that time. So, if--I think that it is fair to say
from what most of you, as disinterested sources, the magnitude
of impact of the EPA rules that are coming down the pike now is
something we have never experienced.
As many have said here before, I would also like to draw
attention to the extraordinary record of economic improvement
in Texas. This city, Houston, Texas, home of the Nation's
petrochemical complex, with a Gulf climate that is--uniquely
enhances ozone formation, did what almost no one would predict
on the basis of what was really a statewide effort. Everybody
worked, in my opinion. The State legislature, the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality, industry invested
billions, State and local government, voluntary groups. It's
really an extraordinary. The day when I was chairman that we
finalized the plans for Dallas--in 2007 for Dallas and Houston,
I believe it was no more than two weeks later EPA proposed a
significant change in that standard. So, the goal post
continually goes over.
But for reasons of very little time, just let me go very
quickly through the ten rules coming down the pike, either
adopted, proposed, or amended. Of course, EPS's greenhouse gas
regulation.
The Clean Air Transport Rule, which in EPA's own estimate
would cost about--the private sector about 7 billion.
The Cooling Water Intake Structure Rule would impact about
444 electric-generating plants. That's 30 percent of the
national capacity, with potential costs of 64 billion. That
rule would be to prevent fish ``impingement'' and has no real
human health impact.
The Coal Combustion and Residual Rule, affecting the units
of disposal of fly ash, bottom ash, and residuals after coal
combustion. The EPA has not decided whether they may classify
those materials now used as valuable materials in road
materials, in drywall, and other things. EPA may classify them
as solid waste or either hazardous waste. The estimate on the
cost of compliance if solid waste is 43 billion and if it's
hazardous waste, perhaps 80 million.
We proposed just last week what is called the ``Utility
Maximum Achievable Control Technology Rule.'' It's probably the
whopper of them all. A 900-page rule to control emissions of
mercury and hazardous air pollutants have cost estimates of
over 100 billion.
The NERC report, that this risks perhaps 15 gigawatts of
electric utilities.
And then all the new ambient air quality standards. Never
has EPA taken on changes in four of the national standards for
four criteria pollutants: Ozone, PM, sulfur oxides, and
nitrogen oxides.
The ozone proposal would, pending and could be finalized at
any time, according to congressional research service, would
increase the number of non-attainment counties in the Nation
from about--from currently about 85 to 650 of the approximately
3,000 counties in the country. For Texas that might mean going
to eight or twelve non-attainment counties, including Brewster
County, Texas, which is about the most sparsely populated part
of the country.
I won't go into particulate matter but now, because of rule
changes several years ago, actually country dust is not immune
to control measures under a particulate standard. And the EPA
has even mentioned that no-till days may be something that
Texas farmers face in the future.
Utility Boiler Rule, one of many of these rules that have
the intense opposition from organized labor, the United Steel
Workers, their numbers claim that rule risks 700,000 U.S. jobs.
And then the Portland Cement Rule could have a remarkably
broad impact. It impacted 165 of the 181 Portland Cement kilns.
It was interesting to learn that we import now about 20 million
tons of cement from--importing cement seems to be quite a
challenge--but from China. And this rule has estimates of
increasing that--that number to 50 million tons of imported
cement.
At this time of our struggling economy and high
unemployment, I think it's really important that U.S. Congress
really looks at the magnitude of all these rules, and what they
mean. A kind of potential impact which has at EPA, I don't
think has ever--could ever have had in the past.
I think--and one quickly. Science is at the root of all
this. And I think maybe everyone here that testifies wants
good, rigorous sound science to ground our standards for
environmental protection. I believe we need actually
legislative reform to set really clear criteria to the science
that EPA legally uses to base its standards.
Thank you, sirs.
[The prepared statement of Ms. White follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Ms. White.
And how long were you the chairman of Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality?
Ms. White. Yes. I was chairman for 4 years and the
commissioner for 2 years.
Mr. Whitfield. And did you deal with this issue on the
flexible permits during your tenure?
Ms. White. It never really came up in a sharp way. No. I
remember--I remember the good news about it in the time--an era
where there was far more easy cooperation with EPA. So, we----
Mr. Whitfield. What were the years that you were the
chairman?
Ms. White. I was--2001 to 2007.
Mr. Whitfield. And during that time, there was never a
significant issue over this?
Ms. White. I dealt with the regional administrator on a
regular basis and there was never a time when this issue was
ever raised----
Mr. Whitfield. And did you feel that Texas' flexible permit
program worked and accomplished----
Ms. White. I did very much and I thought it was a way of
actually getting more emission reductions from many of the
facilities by using a very creative and targeted method that
still allows them to vary it--vary production in parts of their
unit, but ultimately to get more emission reductions.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, Mr. Griffin, does your company have a
flexible permit or----
Mr. Griffin. No. We have an NSR, New Source Rule.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. And you're in compliance, as far as you
know?
Mr. Griffin. Yes, we are. And I would comment on that and
you heard Dr. Shaw talk about flexible permit as a tool. And I
have operated at plants that had a flexible permit. We don't
have it at the current plant that I have. It's single source;
but, you know, the way I would look at it is if you had two
stacks like this and they could total 20, it really doesn't
matter if 18 is coming out of here and 2 out of here or 10 and
10. It's a bubble over the plant and it gives that plant
manager absolutely the skill to work with his engineering team
and reduce the overall emissions.
My particular plant, it isn't the tool for my plant. But,
again, we have 130 petrochemical plants that are all a little
bit different.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, in preparation greenhouse gas emission
regulations, does your company emit enough greenhouse gases
that you would be over 100,000----
Mr. Griffin. We would be below that level, sir.
Mr. Whitfield. You----
Mr. Griffin. My particular plant.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. So, if the Tailoring Rule determined to
be invalid, then you would be included at that point. And are
you taking the steps now to address that issue?
Mr. Griffin. No, I'm not.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Now, Mr. Marston, let me ask you a
question. Did you support the EPA's Tailoring Rule?
Mr. Marston. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. And do you think that it's a--that it will
withstand court challenge?
Mr. Marston. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. And you say that because why?
Mr. Marston. Because the EPA has a lot of authority to
interpret its own statute and the lawyer--the APA--or, first
off, let's go to Massachusetts versus EPA.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, no. I don't want to get into that. I
just want to know about the Tailoring Rule.
Mr. Marston. OK.
Mr. Whitfield. And you think it's valid, though? In other
words, you are willing stand----
Mr. Marston. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. OK. Ms. White, I had noticed that EPA
proposed in the Federal Register an audit program for Texas'
flexible permit holders accompanied by consent agreement and
final order. That was basically an enforcement decree. And,
although, it was labelled as voluntary, the audit agreement to
allow continued operation, it's my understanding is not subject
to negotiation. It requires, number one, an admission of
violating Federal law.
Are you familiar with that?
Ms. White. Yes, I am.
Mr. Whitfield. And then, also, it's my understanding,
mandates payment by the company to a community project. And I'm
not aware of anything in the Clean Air Act that gives EPA
authority to say, ``You're going to pay a fine and I want you
to make it to this community project.''
Now, you've been involved in these issues much longer than
I have. Am I correct in my----
Ms. White. I think you are correct and I think that is what
I will call ``rulemaking by enforcement action,'' which is
adding something which is not--which EPA is not authorized as
an EPA action in formal rule.
I--I--your comment about the audit, I think, is a very
important one. As a former regulator, I feel the flexible
permit issue is really about rule language and terms between
TCEQ and EPA, yet EPA chose to interpret that to mean all of
the facilities who are in legal compliance with their State-
issued flexible permit are violating Federal law and subject to
enforcement offers a voluntary audit but it is an enforcement
consent decree is what it is, requiring acknowledgement of
violating Federal law.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Well, thank you. My time has expired,
and I recognize the gentleman, Mr. Green.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me just ask, that issue of payment to a community
project in lieu of a fine has been around for, it seems like,
decades and you weren't aware of that while chair of TCEQ?
Because I know a lot of my industries have done that and we've
had a win-win. One, they recognized their wrong but we also had
some benefits in our community.
Ms. White. Those are what we call in Texas, ``supplemental
environmental project.'' That's an option to the enforcers
sometimes that has various criteria. And on the Federal level
there also are those. This was--and I won't remember the exact
language in the proposed EPA audit, which I have read, but it
just--it binds the person who signs the audit of a community
project, but I believe would be determined by members of the
community and not by--I mean, the supplemental environmental
project that the State of Texas uses as well as EPA. They're
very orderly and as far as what kind of project for this and
what open-ended----
Mr. Green. Oh, I thought that that was a shock to you that
that program was available because I know a number of companies
have--some of the companies have benefited from the public
relations efforts that we worked on. I submitted some
statements and some letters into the record. And one was when
you were chair of TCEQ, to Steve Hagle, who was a special
assistant.
Ms. White. He was in the Air Quality Permitting Control
Program. I'm not sure of his exact position at the time.
Mr. Green. And we have a letter dated in April of '06 to
him expressing the concern and follow-up on a meeting in '05
and it seemed like in your testimony that you weren't aware of
the disagreement between the EPA and TCEQ and the State of
Texas on the flex permits.
Ms. White. It was--in the 6 years I was in the office, it
was never brought to my attention, and I recall this
specifically because right after I left, I remember I heard
about EPA had expressed concern about the program.
Mr. Green. Well, we have a copy of a letter that was sent,
I guess, to every flexible permit holder that was dated
September of '07 and this letter is April 11. And understand, I
know TCEQ is a big agency, and--but there were correspondence
or was correspondence between TCEQ and EPA prior to January of
2009.
Let me go back. Mr. Griffin, I want to welcome you here. I
appreciate it. I'm glad we were able to work it out to get an
invitation to the East Harris County Manufacturers. I've worked
with you and you've worked with our office for years. And it's
great--on Port security, on air quality, on quality of life.
It's amazing. And you represent a great bunch of companies that
not only provide a tax base and employees' jobs but also just a
resource in our community to work with.
I'd like to ask you about the deflexing issue and the
company's perspective. And I may have talked with you. I've
talked with a lot of companies along this channel about my
concern that deflexing may slow down some of the things they
have to do because any given day, at any given minute, whether
it's from Rhodia that's the closest petrochemical plant to
downtown all the way out to ExxonMobil in our district, there
are things going on and they need to have the ability to get
permits and to expand their business. I know right now you go
over the Beltway 8 bridge, and there's a Shell plant, a huge
expansion there.
Have you and any of the companies had problems getting
permits under the deflexing on any of the plant expansions?
Mr. Griffin. Yes. You know, certainly--you know, the issue
with permitting, it's a very, very arduous process. You know,
if you've looked at air permits, they write volumes and
volumes. And I like to use the terminology we have so many
calories to spend a day and we can optimize the process and we
can grow our business or we can yet take another spin at
permits. These permits worked. They work, the results are
there, and we're held accountable. You know, I often get asked
about the TCEQ. You can probably tell by my accent, I was not
born and raised in Texas.
Mr. Green. Stay around awhile, you'll get our accent.
Mr. Griffin. Yes, sir. I'm working on it. But I have
operated plants in Illinois and Ohio. And what I would tell you
about the TCEQ is they're tough but fair and these permits
work.
Mr. Green. Yes, but--well, since the battle between TCEQ
and EPA--and I know plants now are having to get their permits
through the EPA. Has there been a problem at any of those
plants, that you know of, because we've asked our plant
managers and anyone else, including our new members, that we
want to know if there's a problem because the last thing we
want to do is shut down the biggest petrochemical complex in
the country.
Has there been any--have you heard of any problems or
anything?
Mr. Griffin. Yes, I don't have exact examples to share with
you today, but I'll go back to our membership and get some more
definition on that.
Mr. Green. Great. And you know how to get ahold of me----
Mr. Griffin. Yes, sir. You've been very accessible. Thank
you.
Mr. Green. Ms. White, let me go back to you. In December
2002 the EPA finalized its reform of New Source Review
regulations and did not include flexible permit programs but
did include plantwide applicability limits called ``PALs.''
They're provisions that allow caps under an actual emission-
based concept, not in an allowable-based concept such as Texas'
flex permit. And yet in February 2006, Texas adopted a separate
PAL in its New Source Review regulations and retained its
flexible permit regulations.
Shortly thereafter, the EPA forwarded a letter to TCEQ
informing Texas of EPA's concerns with the flexible permit rule
and its reasons why it does not consider the current flexible
permit rule to be approvable as a SIP provision. Then in
February of 2007, the EPA additionally met with TCEQ where they
discussed concerns with the flexible rule.
Did TCEQ respond to this? And, again, this was under your
watch as chair, I guess. When did you actually leave in 2007, I
guess?
Ms. White. August.
Mr. Green. August. OK. So, it was during that time. I have
some other questions that, Chairman, I would like to submit to
you on what happened and how far back this disagreement goes
with the TCEQ.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
Mr. Barton, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I just want to read a
Tweet that came out not 2 minutes ago from Mr. Armendariz. He--
he didn't have the time to come to a formal field hearing of
your subcommittee and Mr. Green's subcommittee, but he is in
Houston. This is what he Tweeted out about--oh, about 45
minutes ago.
``Fantastic morning so far in Houston with Juan Parras''--
and I apologize if I don't get the pronunciations right--
``Matthew T., Hilton K. and others at the EJ Encuentro. I am
humbled by their dedication.''
So, he is here in Houston.
Mr. Whitfield. In Houston?
Mr. Barton. He's in Houston. He's just not at the formal
hearing of the Energy and Power Subcommittee.
Mr. Green. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we've got the boss
here that will testify next.
Mr. Barton. Well, that's good and I'm glad that she's here.
And I give her credit for that.
Mr. Marston, before I ask my formal questions, are you any
kin to Ed Marston?
Mr. Marston. I'm not. A lot of people ask me that. But my
father is Dale Marston, who was in the oil business for 37
years.
Mr. Barton. OK. Well, Mr. Ed Marston is a good friend of
mine, and I thought maybe you were related to him in some way.
Mr. Marston. I've heard good things about him. I don't know
him.
Mr. Barton. OK. You talk about the State officials
basically telling lies and doing illegal actions, if I heard
what you said correctly.
Mr. Marston. Well, I do think that there's been lies from
Texas officials and it's in my testimony and I'll describe lots
of those.
Mr. Barton. All right. Can you give the committee even one
letter where EPA has rejected a flexible permit here in Texas?
Mr. Marston. Well, certainly the letters in 2007----
Mr. Barton. No. Can you give us a copy where they rejected
a letter?
Mr. Marston. Well, they've only----
Mr. Barton. So, the answer is ``no''?
Mr. Marston. No. You're asking a question----
Mr. Barton. I'm asking a question. I want a straight
answer.
Mr. Marston. It does not have an answer to it----
Mr. Barton. Is there an existing copy, that you're aware
of, the rejection letter of a flexible permit here in Texas--
flexible air permit in Texas?
Mr. Marston. Until Texas lost the power over its permitting
and never--never corrected the flex permit, there was no
authority and no process----
Mr. Barton. Now, that's--so, there is no rejection letter?
Mr. Marston. I'm sorry, sir?
Mr. Barton. There is no rejection letter?
Mr. Marston. Well----
Mr. Barton. I want to read something from the appendix that
you sent. This is your--your information----
Mr. Marston. Yes, sir.
Mr. Barton [continuing]. That you provided to this
committee.
Mr. Marston. OK.
Mr. Barton. This--this is the signed by Mr. John Blevins,
who is the Director of Compliance, Assurance, and Enforcement
Division of the United States Environmental Protection Agency
in Dallas, Texas. So, this is a letter----
Mr. Marston. Yes, sir.
Mr. Barton [continuing]. That he signed and you provided to
the committee.
Mr. Marston. What was----
Mr. Barton. It says----
Mr. Marston. What----
Mr. Barton. Listen, listen. I'm going to read this. You
submitted it. I'm going to read it. And then you can tell me--
--
Mr. Marston. My only question----
Mr. Barton [continuing]. If this was a rejection letter.
Mr. Marston. OK.
Mr. Barton. OK? TCEQ and the EPA both agree that it is now
time--this is in 2007--that it is now time to focus resources
on ensuring that all major sources with the State of Texas have
federally enforceable State Implementation Plan-approved
permits. The two agencies are working together--are working
together to develop a flexible permit rule that can be approved
as part of the Texas State Implementation Plan. Both TCEQ and
the EPA have been aware of issues related to the flexible
permit rule and have worked over the last several years to
address various permitting issues as part of EPA's program
revisions including permit streamlining within the context of
Title V, the Federal PAL program, and the New Source Review
reform. Because TCEQ is committed to ensuring the continued
success of its efforts to maintain and improve the air quality
of Texas, EPA is providing its assistance to ensure that the
sources are also meeting their Federal obligation under the
Clean Air Act.
Does that sound like they're rejecting the Texas flexible
permitting program?
Mr. Marston. Well, sir, you're reading part of the letter,
but it told you----
Mr. Barton. I'm reading what you provided to the committee.
Mr. Marston. I don't think you read the entire letter, sir.
Mr. Barton. There is not one letter on the record where
TCEQ has had a flexible permit rejected. There are letters--and
some of them boilerplate--that seem to be just put a different
date and--and various intermediary officials have--have
questioned some parts of it. But there is not until this year a
rejection of even one permit.
Mr. Marston. May I answer your question?
Mr. Barton. Now, I want to ask Ms.--you were the chairman
of Texas Council of Environmental Quality----
Ms. White. Yes.
Mr. Marston. May I answer your question?
Mr. Barton. I think you have failed to answer my question
because you can't answer it, sir.
Mr. Marston. Will you let me answer?
Mr. Barton. I'm going to ask her. Did you, as your
authority as chairman of the Texas Council of Environmental
Quality ever receive a rejection letter?
Ms. White. No.
Mr. Barton. Did you ever have a discussion with a senior
official at the EPA in Dallas or in Washington where you were
told that they were going to reject the flexible permitting
program in Texas?
Ms. White. No.
Mr. Barton. Were you ever briefed by your staff of such a
concern at the Federal level?
Ms. White. No, I was not. It was not brought to my
attention and in my many, many conversations and interaction
with the former regional administrator, the issue of flexible
permits never were brought up.
Mr. Barton. OK. Well, Mr. Chairman, time is expired, but I
have asked the Attorney General of Texas, I have asked the
chairman of the Texas Council of Environmental Quality, I have
asked the commissioners of the Texas Council of Environmental
Quality repeatedly to give me documentary evidence where the
Federal EPA officials in Dallas or in Washington have done what
Mr. Marston claims they have done and they have repeatedly told
me, admittedly, not under oath, we haven't asked them to put
their hand on a Bible, that that's never happened. There have
been normal discussions about tweaking the program and things
of this sort, but there has never been a rejection not only of
the whole program but of a specific permit within the program.
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Gonzalez, you're recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank the members for taking time to be here today. We do
appreciate your testimony today.
Again, areas that we can agree on and that is when you have
a Federal Government working with another other form of
identity, they should be partners. There should be reasonable
timelines and there are going to those that at are issue. And
they should, as far as possible and with these days of
camaraderie come politely with solutions and answers to
whatever the problems may be.
Now, the way I see, the only thing missing here is you have
two differences of opinions as to what the problem is. For one
party the problem exists. For the other party, it does not. So,
maybe that's why things have come to a screeching halt.
And, Ms. White, what years were you with the TCEQ?
Ms. White. From fall 2001 to August of 2007.
Mr. Gonzalez. All right. So, that would be the time period.
And I know that you may have not been specifically involved in
the ongoing questioning of the flexible permit protocol and
requirements in the State of Texas, but there is no doubt that
the record is replete, whether it was with Clinton or whether
it was the Bush Administration, now the Obama Administration
about the efficiencies of the flex permitting process in the
State of Texas.
But I'm going to ask you because I want to go back to the
simple question because I think we're all going to talk about
this because we just are ignoring what is the obvious.
Do you believe that greenhouse gases are an air pollutant?
And then the question is to Ms. White who has the most
experience in this in the years that you served at State level.
Ms. White. I will answer you in my opinion legally. Under
the Supreme Court that--the 2007 Supreme Court ruling, under
the language of the Federal Clean Air Act, carbon dioxide or
other greenhouse gases might fit under that.
Mr. Gonzalez. Do you think----
Ms. White. I am not----
Mr. Gonzalez. Massachusetts versus EPA, now it's a Supreme
Court of the United States--it ends there. It doesn't matter
what we have to say, the legislative branch or the executive
branch. That's the way our founding fathers said it should be
and it's served us well.
Did it not find that greenhouse gases are an air pollutant?
Can we agree on that?
Ms. White. It said under the broad, broad language in the
Federal Clean Air Act, carbon dioxide and--and carbon dioxide
and oxygen is--as something in the ambient atmosphere could be
determined a pollutant.
Mr. Gonzalez. OK.
Ms. White. Could be determined a pollutant. That's a legal
decision--in a legal decision that EPA----
Mr. Gonzalez. How about carbon dioxide that comes out and
is inhaled by cars? Did they establish that as an air
pollutant?
Ms. White. I don't think--I don't think----
Mr. Gonzalez. And I don't want to be--I think General
Abbott could have better addressed some of these things, but I
used up all my time and then additional time.
But I do believe that General Abbott did acknowledge that
Massachusetts versus EPA did establish carbon dioxide are a
greenhouse gas or greenhouse gases as air pollutants. Now, I
know what the General is saying. He's saying, ``Yes, Charlie,
but only those that are emitted from the tailpipes of cars.''
And that sounds fairly reasonable except that I believe--and I
think where this is going to end up, I'm not the lawyer for
this and I'm surely not going to be the judge--but once you
identify that as an air pollutant, it becomes regulated under
the EPA, does it not?
Ms. White. Not--no, it doesn't. There's--and--and the
Attorney General referred to this. The EPA--and this is the
most important for most people and for our country--in deciding
the importance whether it is a pollutant that endangers human
health. And that is the legal decision that EPA makes as the
so-called endangerment finding. And that was the decision the
Court left to EPA.
Mr. Gonzalez. And EPA--and I know you are going to argue
with the manner in which it has arrive at that determination
and the timeline and the process. What if the timeline and the
process and the reasoning is basically found to be valid? Would
you still believe that greenhouse gases are air pollutants?
Ms. White. I really--it doesn't matter to me what you call
them. I do not believe that carbon dioxide endangers human
health.
Mr. Gonzalez. All right. That's my whole point. Now, the
other point I want to make in my last few seconds is the same
arguments that we've had today--and, believe me, I believe that
this so prosperous a nation the we can even do better--because
we have under the Clean Air Act and we did it and we have under
the Clean Water Act. The same arguments that are here today,
that's it's all going to be [inaudible] in jobs are--were
advances at that time. There's no doubt that we learned lessons
and we were more efficient about doing it.
I think we can still do it. This is the United States of
America. We're not some other Third World country. We're not
someone else out there that doesn't have the history that we
have, the pride, innovation, and the creativity that this
country has.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Mr. Gonzalez. And I want to
thank the panel very much for being with us this morning. We do
appreciate your testimony and we look forward to working with
you.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Chairman, before--before we let this--I
want Mr. Marston to be given every opportunity, if he wants to
take advantage of it, to try to answer my question. My time ran
out. So, I didn't----
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Barton. I wasn't able to give him that, and I don't
want him to walk away----
[Simultaneously speaking.]
Mr. Barton. I don't want him to go away and say he wasn't
given a chance to answer his question.
Mr. Marston. I am a very proud Horned Frog.
Mr. Whitfield. So, would you like to respond, Mr. Marston?
Mr. Marston. Well, I do think those--the letters in 2006
and 2008 gave fair notice to the TCEQ and the permit did not
meet the legal standard. They tried working with the agency for
a long time. They were hopeful they could work out an
agreement. In the end, the agency made some minor modifications
but never made enough to meet the Federal Clean Air Act.
Sadly, we're in that predicament because they wouldn't go
further. Texas has a program that's unique among the States and
they're in this predicament because they have a program that's
different than everybody else, it doesn't follow the
requirements of the Clean Air Act.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Thank you all very much. And we look
forward to working with you as we move forward.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time we'll call up the witness on
the third panel, and I saw that she came. That's Ms. Gina
McCarthy, who is the Assistant Administrator for Air and
Radiation, United States Environmental Protection Agency.
And, Ms. McCarthy, we appreciate your joining us here today
in Texas and we look forward to your testimony. We were
disappointed that Mr. Armendariz was not able to be with you
but he did send a letter saying that he was attending another
event here in Houston. So, we're delighted you're here and
appreciate your coming down from Washington.
And at this time, I'd like to recognize you for your 5-
minute opening statement.

STATEMENT OF GINA McCARTHY, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE OF
AIR AND RADIATION, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

Ms. McCarthy. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member
Green, Members of the Committee, I'm pleased to be here in
Houston to discuss how EPA is implementing the Clean Air Act to
protect our locale.
I bring Al's regrets. I'm sure he would have loved to have
been here if he didn't have a prior speaking engagement.
Air pollution threatens human health. It contributes to
asthma attacks, other bronchial disorders, nervousness, and
developmental problems, cancer, and even death. The very young
as well as the elderly are especially vulnerable. Every citizen
in every State, including Texas, has the right to the health
protection provided by America's Clean Air Act.
For 40 years the Act has reduced air pollution for all of
us to breathe easier. In the last year alone, programs
implemented pursuant to the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990
are estimated to have reduced premature mortality risks
equivalent to saving over 160,000 lives, preventing millions of
cases of respiratory problems, including bronchitis and asthma,
and enhanced productivity by preventing 13 million lost
workdays.
In 2000 Houston's air quality was worse than Los Angeles'.
Today Houston is meeting the '97 ozone air quality standard.
Why? New Federal and State pollution control regulations. These
include tighter Federal standards on passenger vehicles and
diesel truck emissions, and vigorous enforcement of Clean Air
Act requirements focussed on the largest polluters.
However, few of the Federal emission control standards that
gave us these huge gains in public health were uncontroversial
when they were issued. They were adopted amidst claims that
they would be bad for the economy and bad for the employment.
It is terrifically misleading to say that enforcement of
the Clean Air Act has cost jobs. That claim is simply untrue.
Enforcement of the Clean Air Act has saved lives and allowed
economy to grow. Families should never have to choose between a
job and healthy air. They're entitled to both, and the Clean
Air Act has delivered on both.
In contrast to doomsday predictions, history has shown that
we can clean up pollution, we create jobs, we grow our economy
all at the same time. In the 40 years since the Act passed, the
Gross Domestic Product of the U.S. grew by more than 200
percent. In fact, some economic analysis suggests that the
economy is billion of dollars larger today than it would have
been without the Clean Air Act.
One of the important benefits of the Clean Air Act is that
it ensures equal public health protection nationally.
Unfortunately, the Texas air permitting program does not ensure
the same level of public health protection to its citizens that
other States provide. And citizens in Texas have time and again
asked EPA to rectify this problem. For example, the Texas
program allows changes to occur at industrial facilities
without adequate public notice, allows increases in actual
emissions to go unchecked. It doesn't ensure the enforceability
of the permit requirements.
Unfortunately, the Texas State Government rules simply
trust industrial sources to take action to protect public
health without giving the citizens of Texans the ability to
verify the results. No other State allows this. Instead, they
ask for inherent enforceable permits that provide flexibility
to industry. Even in Texas fewer than 10 percent of the major
air pollution sources have these so-called flexible permits.
These flexible permits failed to comply with Clean Air Act
requirements to protect public health. EPA has been raising
issues with Texas' permits since the 1990s. The problem
worsened last decade when the Texas Government failed to take
action to adjust their flexible permit program as other States
did to keep it in line with the rules of the agency and with
court cases that clearly said that the permit needed to be--the
permit system needed to be adjusted.
Then in 2006, 4 years ago, under then President Bush, EPA
wrote a letter to the State of Texas outlining our concerns
with the air permitting program and the failure of State
Government to fix these programs.
In 2007 EPA sent letters to every one of these flexible
permit holders, letting them know that they had to worry about
being in compliance both with their flexible permit and with
EPA's Clean Air Act to ensure that they had a federally
enforceable permit.
We continue to work hard with representatives in industrial
facilities, Texas officials, and other concerned citizens to
fix this Texas air program. Our regional office in Dallas has
long consulted with the Texas Government and citizens in
efforts to achieve a State program that meets the necessary
obligations under our Nation's Clean Air Act. I have personally
come to Texas to try to work through these problems with the
State, industries, environmental groups, and other
stakeholders, as have other EPA officials and members of my
staff.
Our goals are rules that meet the minimum requirements of
Federal law and clean air permits that are understandable to
the public, that are enforceable by their regulators, that are
legally valid, and that protect public health to the full
extent that the Clean Air Act requires.
A more recent problem has also arisen and that is really
unique to Texas. And that unlike all other States, Texas' State
Government is refusing to cooperate with EPA to address
greenhouse gases in its permitting processes. It has forced EPA
actions to prevent industry from being placed in an untenable
position of having an obligation to obtain a legally valid
permit addressing greenhouse gases before starting major
construction, but when they have no way to obtain such a
permit.
In January, that's why EPA stepped up and hopefully
temporarily began to issue and be responsible for greenhouse
gas permitting in the State of Texas. Without that action,
sources could not obtain legally required permits, projects
could not go forward, and economic and jobs would really
suffer. Some try to emphasize this recent disagreement between
the State and EPA as if for decades EPA has not had to work
with the State year after year to push and prod to get Texas to
do what the Clean Air Act requires. This is simply not the
case. But what is unique about greenhouse gas permits is that
Texas has decided that it would simply not do what the Clean
Air Act required and, in addition, it would take action to sue
EPA and the Federal Government to ensure that we could not do
what the Clean Air Act required.
It's time for this bickering to stop. It's time for us to
work together to find a common ground to deliver an effective
Clean Air Act program, one that the Texas State Government can
clearly implement, one that will meet legal obligations, one
that would be amenable to the State, one that would provide
clear public health protection, that is cost effective and that
the people in this State deserve to have delivered to them in
accordance with the laws of Congress.
We pledge to keep trying to work with Texas leaders in the
spirit of partnership and not adversarial politics to achieve
these goals. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. McCarthy follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Ms. McCarthy, thank you for your testimony.
And, you know, one of the reasons Congress is getting
really interested in this Clean Air Act and wants to reassert
ourself is primarily because there is so much animosity about
the whole issue. And you, in your opening statement, talk about
how Texas has filed a lawsuit to prevent you from doing your
job. I asked Lisa Jackson at our last hearing to provide us
with the total number of lawsuits pending against the EPA
today. She hasn't had enough time to do that yet. But I would
ask you to do that. And I will tell you that Columbia Law
School did do an analysis and they presented us with 290 pages
of current lawsuits pending against EPA.
So, you're probably involved in one of the most--agencies
that has more lawsuits than any other part of the Federal
Government. And that's one of the reasons we want to try to
revisit the Clean Air Act, itself.
I would ask you--one of things I find puzzling, as a
layman, is that if you--in your testimony, you said that Texas
had done a good job on its ambient air quality standards and
ozone and it's really cleaning up and meets the 1997 standards.
Well, if you have a flexible permit program that sets an
overall emission cap over one particular industry that allows
maybe one machine in there to exceed limits but another one to
emit below limits and the overall comes within the regulated
limit, why is that a problem?
Ms. McCarthy. Well, not all flexible permits are alike, Mr.
Chairman. And, so, the agency worked very hard over the course
of the past----
Mr. Whitfield. Well, excuse me for interrupting. But are
you--you're saying, then, that not all of these permits that--
that have--some of these permits, they exceed their limit
overall. They exceed the overall limit?
Ms. McCarthy. I'm saying that fundamentally the provisions
of the Clean Air Act are not complied with in the way that the
State of Texas has designed its program.
Mr. Whitfield. Ma'am, could you tell me the specific legal
authority under the Clean Air Act that gives you the authority
to say that the flexible permit is illegal?
Ms. McCarthy. Actually, the--the Federal Government has the
ultimate authority to ensure Clean Air Act compliance.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Ms. McCarthy. We--we essentially enter into contracts with
States about how they can co-regulate with us.
Mr. Whitfield. But is there a specific----
Ms. McCarthy. There is a specific----
[Simultaneously speaking.]
Ms. McCarthy. We have actually noted----
Mr. Whitfield. Is there is specific section of the Clean
Air Act that gives you the authority?
Ms. McCarthy. I actually would have to come back and tell
you what the specific section is, Mr. Chairman, but we have
noticed our decision to disapprove the flexible air permits.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, would you do that for me, just to----
Ms. McCarthy. Sure.
Mr. Whitfield. And provide that?
Ms. McCarthy. Sure.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. Now, in the testimony before one
of the panels here today before you, one of the witnesses said
that other States have similar flex permits. Is that true?
Ms. McCarthy. No, no.
Mr. Whitfield. No, that's not true?
Ms. McCarthy. No, that's not. Although other States use
flexible permits, EPA has developed a flexible permit program
that we call our ``PAL permit,'' which is similar to what
you're describing. It is in no way similar to Texas. Texas is
missing--really consistently missing fundamental principles
under the Clean Air Act discounting enforceability----
Mr. Whitfield. OK. But what EPA does----
[Simultaneously speaking.]
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. Enforceability----
Mr. Whitfield. EPA does allow flexible permitting?
Ms. McCarthy. Absolutely. Absolutely.
Mr. Whitfield. But you're saying that in Texas, they do not
enforce it----
Ms. McCarthy. That's correct.
Mr. Whitfield. They do not enforce it?
Ms. McCarthy. We have issued rules----
Mr. Whitfield. Tell me the three things they don't do in
Texas that bothers you.
Ms. McCarthy. They don't require emissions to be calculated
by actual emissions. They look at emissions based on what they
assume that the plant could generate running 24 hours, 7 days a
week, which we call----
Mr. Whitfield. OK. And what else?
Ms. McCarthy. They don't provide transparency. They don't
provide enforceability, they don't provide reporting, they
don't provide monitoring of the climate. So, they are
unforceable under Federal law.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. And the other States that have similar
flexible permits, they do all of those things that you say?
Ms. McCarthy. That's correct.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, if that's true, why did it take the EPA
16 years to take some action?
Ms. McCarthy. Well, let me try to clear that up. The
actual--the--Texas proposed this permit--this flexible permit
back in 1994. Actually '92, then it was approved in '94. During
that process we were looking at piloting different types of
flexible permits. We actually wrote the State a letter and said
you're going way out in front of this. We haven't yet developed
our own rules about that----
Mr. Whitfield. Look, I'm running out of time.
Ms. McCarthy. OK.
Mr. Whitfield. So, let me just--so, basically----
Ms. McCarthy. Well, let me----
Mr. Whitfield. Let----
[Simultaneously speaking.]
Ms. McCarthy. Let me look at my----
Mr. Whitfield. So, initially----
Ms. McCarthy. Let me say that we put them on notice.
Mr. Whitfield. Initially, you all worked with them and over
time, you just felt like it was not----
Ms. McCarthy. No. We put them on notice when they developed
it that they might have to adjust it.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Ms. McCarthy. The rules--they did not adjust themselves to
the rules that were enacted.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Ms. McCarthy. And they did not adjust themselves in court
cases that told them that the way in which they were
calculating emissions in their permits were----
Mr. Whitfield. Now, let me ask this one final question----
Ms. McCarthy. Yes, sir.
Mr. Whitfield [continuing]. Since my time has expired, too.
We were already talking about all of the lawsuits pending
against EPA.
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. We know there's a lawsuit pending on the
Tailoring Rule, correct?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. And in your testimony, you had indicated
that if the Tailoring Rule was invalid, that the permitting
authorities would have to spend in the neighborhood of $24
billion to issue these permits. And the question I would have,
if the EPA Tailoring Rule is determined to be invalid by the
court, are you all--do you have a plan right now to deal with
that?
Ms. McCarthy. We do not believe that the Tailoring Rule
will be invalidated. We believe it's consistent with Federal
law.
Mr. Whitfield. But there is a pending court case?
Ms. McCarthy. There are many; but there are--in every rule
that we do, we have challenges.
Mr. Whitfield. So, you're not making any significant plans
on this?
Ms. McCarthy. We do not need to, no, sir.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Green?
Mr. Green. Ms. McCarthy, how long have you been with EPA?
Ms. McCarthy. I have been with EPA since June of 2009.
Mr. Green. OK. So, it's relatively recent?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Green. Following up on what the chairman said, and I
talked about it in my opening statement, in August of 2008, the
Business Coalition of Clean Air, Texas Association of Business,
and Texas Oil and Gas Association filed suit against the EPA to
take action on pending permits related to the SIP actions and
the flexible permits. In July of 2009, there was a settlement
reached between you two on that lawsuit regarding that.
So, you know, this goes back to what the EPA was told and
the agreed settlement by the parties was that EPA would enforce
what you're trying to do now.
Ms. McCarthy. Yes, that's correct. We were sued by citizens
and industry, and it resulted in that settlement.
Mr. Green. And I know you testified that this started
actually in 1992 and goes back. I'm looking at a timeline and
in late 1994, Texas adopted its flex permit regulations. Did
EPA notify them at that time that EPA wasn't through with their
New Source Review program and that their rules may be
inconsistent so that was in late '94.
Now, October of '94 EPA sent a letter to--at that time TNRC
Commission--TNRC expressing concerns regarding the proposed
flexible permit and the SIP revision. We're talking about
October 1994.
Ms. McCarthy. That's correct.
Mr. Green. This has been an ongoing discussion between
whatever agency we call it in Texas and the EPA----
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Green [continuing]. Under at least three Presidents.
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Green. And I guess that's my concern. You know, I like
the flexible permits. I didn't come to Congress until '93, but
20 years before that, I served in the legislature. And let me
address Congressman Barton's concern. I remember in my 20 years
in the legislature, we complained with the EPA on lots of
issues, but we also recognized that they had the preemption
right and over that 20 years, that was suggested many times
that EPA could take over the permitting in Texas, I know
between 1973 and 1993. And that's why the privacy of the
Federal law is the issue here. And I know----
Ms. McCarthy. It is also the protection of the industries
who are operating under the permits that may not protect them.
Mr. Green. Well--and that's my concern. And I don't know if
you were here earlier, but at any given time any of the plants
in our district are doing things that they need permits to do
because they're expanding. We're fortunate. Most of those
plants and our refineries have all expanded beyond the
production of gasoline, but they need to have things going on.
And they just can't have a battle between a Federal agency and
a State agency or otherwise that would shut down the investment
in our community.
So, frankly, I'm a little frustrated. I have some questions
about the PAL program, but I'd also like--somewhere along the
way, we have to get the attention and say, TCEQ and the State
of Texas need to sit down. They may do it on the Attorney
General's lawsuit that he's filed, but there is going to be a
negotiated settlement not unlike what was done back in 2009
that's from the lawsuit filed in 2008. And that's what the
hesitancy, I think, everyone has of doing anything. Because we
have to deal with it.
And I just encourage you, as best you can, to sit down with
TCEQ and the Attorney General under that lawsuit and see what
we can come up with. But we already have a settlement on the
earlier lawsuit in 2009.
Now, let me--I know the Chairman asked about the difference
between the Texas flex permit and the plantwide applicability
limits. Can you explain the difference between what the Texas
flex permit does and the PALs? And why wouldn't Texas be able
to fit under some of those plantwide applicability limits or
PALs?
Ms. McCarthy. I--I mentioned this before, but let me try
and be clear. The Federal PAL is based on actual emissions. The
Texas Flexible Permits are based on allowable emissions.
Essentially what this means is that in Texas, a plant could
significantly increase its pollution and not have to use the
proper pollution control technologies.
Secondly----
Mr. Green. Well, we----
Ms. McCarthy. I'm sorry.
Mr. Green. Go ahead and finish.
Ms. McCarthy. The number of--the permit program in Texas
fails to meet a number of provisions to ensure that the permit
is enforceable and the process is open entry apparent to the
public. And, finally, the permit process in Texas does not meet
the requirements of the Clean Air Act.
Mr. Green. OK. When you show actual emissions, that's done
by either--and we have fence-line monitors in so many of our
plants already. We have so many monitors in East Harris County.
That would be what we would need to find out, what was actually
being emitted. Is that true? That's part of it?
Ms. McCarthy. The total emissions and what timetable. That
is the currency of the Clean Air Act. That's right, actual
emissions. What you can measure leaving the plant that can
injure public health.
Mr. Green. So, we actually have some facts on the ground
because I can tell you, I know, ExxonMobil, the biggest
refinery in Texas and the country, actually, has fence-line
monitoring right now. And I can go down--and I know Jim knows
for sure, there's a whole bunch that in the last 10 years, even
though it wasn't necessarily required, but they were doing it.
So, they have the capability now to do that.
Mr. Chairman, you've been gracious; and I appreciate you
letting me run over my time.
Mr. Whitfield. You say they have the ability for the actual
emissions----
Mr. Green. I think they're measuring right now.
Mr. Whitfield. Actual emissions?
Mr. Green. Actual emissions.
Ms. McCarthy. We--we actually--we model those and we
measure them directly, that's correct.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Barton, you're recognized 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you.
Well, first of all, thank you for showing up.
Ms. McCarthy. Thank you for having me.
Mr. Barton. It's amazing to me that the lady from
Connecticut can fly 1400 miles and our Region VI Administrator
can come to Houston but can't come and actually appear before
an official committee of the United States Congress.
Ms. McCarthy. He did send his regrets. He would have loved
to have been here.
Mr. Barton. Well, we will have an opportunity hopefully in
the future to have him before our committee or subcommittee.
But I am sincerely appreciative of your being here.
I listened to--I read your testimony. I listened to what
you said in response to the chairman's questions and the
ranking member's questions and I feel like I'm in some
alternative universe. I have not reviewed comprehensively all
the documentation that's gone back and forth between the EPA
and the State of Texas since the early '90s, but I have at
least scanned most of the relevant documents. I have yet to
find one that substantiates what you said in your testimony,
that the Texas Flexible Permitting program is not transparent,
it's not enforceable, it doesn't comply with the Clean Air Act.
Let's set aside for a minute--I know there's a debatable
issue about whether the greenhouse gases are regulated under
the Clean Air Act. I know that you have the Supreme Court
decision and the endangerment finding, which I think the
endangerment finding is very flawed; but I'll put that aside
and just focus on the Clean Air Act and its amendments.
There are six criteria pollutants and the only one that
Texas, unless you tell otherwise, is in noncompliance on is in
some parts of the State, ozone. Do you agree with that?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Barton. So, which of these flexible permits--and Mr.
Marston, I think said there were 70. I've been told there are
180. So, I don't know what the exact number is, but it's a
finite number. Where in the Record do we have the documentation
that they have been noncompliant in terms of their emissions
being larger than allowed under the Clean Air Act? I don't find
it.
Ms. McCarthy. Well, let me explain. We did put a public
notice out. We explained the reasons why we were proposing
this. There's a due process here. We put that out September of
'09. We explained what was wrong with the process----
Mr. Barton. Where--where--where do you substantiate and
back up what you've just said, that they're in noncompliance?
Ms. McCarthy. It's in the notice. And any--any--and since
that time any permit that has been a logic error----
Mr. Barton. Can you--can you give the committee----
[Simultaneously speaking.]
Mr. Barton [continuing]. An example of----
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. We have objected----
Mr. Barton [continuing]. A permit that is noncompliant?
Ms. McCarthy. I can get all of the permits since--that have
been issued since October--I'm sorry--September of '09 that we
have objected to. And there have been many. I'm now in the
process of trying to be corrected, either by going to the State
or EPA----
Mr. Barton. And I'm--I'm not trying to be argumentative.
Ms. McCarthy. No, I'm trying to explain. There are many.
Mr. Barton. I just--I don't see in the record where TCEQ or
a particular company has knowingly and willfully violated the
Clean Air Act on the regulated pollutants--again, separate
greenhouse gas, which is a different debate that's--you know,
your testimony would have one believe that we're some sort of
an outlaw State and our regulatory authority kind of snubs its
nose at the EPA and doesn't even require enforcement of the
basic standards. Yet somehow our emissions are within the
allowable, except for ozone. And, in that, even you admit we're
making tremendous progress. It doesn't jive.
Ms. McCarthy. Well, I think we're confusing the actions
that you take to address ozone with a permitting program that
is solely designed to mitigate additional emissions that
contribute to air pollution.
Mr. Barton. But ozone is part of that.
Ms. McCarthy. It is part of that. But the efforts that have
been ongoing at the Federal level are through the State
implementation planning process. And, then, what has been
successful in reducing very high levels of pollution down to
more manageable levels.
The permit process had nothing to do with that. That is not
what contributed to that success. That is simply a way to try
to make sure that you're not going to go back to fully emitting
pollutants that will then bring you out of attainment with
ozone standards.
Mr. Barton. OK. My light's already on amber. Let me--I want
to follow up with something that I asked the Attorney General.
Ms. McCarthy. OK.
Mr. Barton. Because of the lawsuit that the State of Texas
has against your agency, you filed an affidavit in Federal
court on October the 28th of 2010 in which you--you've,
obviously, under oath, say that the information you're giving
in this affidavit is correct and la-tee-da, da, da. And in that
affidavit at the very end and in the annex--the appendix that
you add to it say that it is not the intent and you had no
knowledge that EPA is going to revoke any existing permits
until at least 2000--in December of 2011. Yet within a few
months, if not a few days, your agency did exactly what you
said they wouldn't do.
How do you reconcile that?
Ms. McCarthy. I believe that my statement was referencing
the fact that we were taking action to try to work with 13
States that needed to make adjustments in their own State laws
in order to provide an opportunity to greenhouse gas
permitting. And what----
Mr. Barton. This is--this is regarding directly the State
of Texas.
Ms. McCarthy. Well, that----
Mr. Barton. It says no permitting authority will be in
place as of January 2nd, 2011. FIP cannot be promulgated until
December the 2nd, 2011, at the earliest. It's specifically on
Texas.
Ms. McCarthy. The particular issue that you're talking
about is part of a larger effort to get 13 States into a
position to either immediately regulate, to regulate
afterwards, or to delegate back their----
[Simultaneously speaking.]
Mr. Barton. Well, did you know at the time that you made
this affidavit what the EPA was going to do with regards to
Texas?
Ms. McCarthy. What I wasn't aware of is that the State of
Texas prior to that had not made a statement either by the
Governor or by the agency, itself, that it would simply refuse
to regulate greenhouse gas permits, period.
Mr. Barton. But this has nothing to do with greenhouse
gases. We're talking about the State Air Quality permit.
Ms. McCarthy. I'm sorry. I'll have to look at it. I thought
we referencing the greenhouse gas permitting process.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentlemen, the has time expired. Do you have
another question, Mr. Green?
Mr. Green. No. I'm just interested because, again, I know
Texas, starting in '92, '94, really, we had--sometimes they
call them ``loopholes'' in Washington, sometimes they call them
``opportunities'' to be able to create a program that would
make it easier and--and, you know, the EPA has been, it looks
like from the records, we can't quantify what you're doing. But
it's been going on so long that we just need to deal with it.
And we had one court case already that was an agreed
judgment. Maybe we have to have another one to see what we need
to do in Texas. But my concern is with the fight between Texas
and EPA, I want to make sure Mr. Griffin's plants can still do
what they need to be doing, producing the products--but, also,
without being held up by our fight between two States and there
are--the country and the State.
Ms. McCarthy. Congressman, I'm unaware of any business that
has been interrupted as a result of our attempt to work with
the State in resolving the issue.
Mr. Whitfield. Ms. McCarthy, I have one other question and
one comment and then, I think, Mr. Barton has another question
or a comment or two.
Under your SIP Call Rule, which was proposed in September
2010 and finalized in early December 2010, you all require
Texas and other States to changes their laws and regulations by
December 22nd, 2010, in order to comply with the new greenhouse
gas permitting requirements. And, usually, when you do these
change in the State implementation plans, you typically give
States up to 3 years.
So, why in this instance did you give them, like, weeks to
amend their State Implementation Plan?
Ms. McCarthy. Well, what we did was we worked with all of
the States and we developed a process where we would either
take over the permitting, ourself or else they would identify a
phased approach where they would be able to provide
opportunities to change their laws and then take back the
permitting process. In the rule we gave a number of choices to
States on how to do this. What we were unaware of is that Texas
would choose neither to accept or reject our offer but simply
to refuse to do the greenhouse gas permitting, period. Which
forced our hands in order to protect the interests of the
business here to be able to get permits in a timely way, to at
least temporarily take that----
Mr. Whitfield. What I was told is that Texas made EPA aware
of their position in August of 2010.
Ms. McCarthy. I am not aware of that.
Mr. Whitfield. We--I mean--well--oK. Let me just make a
couple of other comments. One, would you please have your legal
department provide us with a list of at least a number of
lawsuits pending today against EPA and the actual budget
amounts to defend those lawsuits in your budget.
And then, number two, just a legal analysis, maybe a two-
page or so from your legal authorities on what the Federal
authority is for your position on the flex plans--the flex
permits.
Ms. McCarthy. All right.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. Mr. Barton?
Mr. Barton. Isn't it Mr. Green's turn?
Mr. Green. Following up on what the Chairman said, could
Texas, by Administrative Rule, change their--what it takes to
statutory law changed by the legislature?
Ms. McCarthy. I believe it would take statutory change, but
we will work with them in whatever they feel is legally
appropriate.
Mr. Green. Because I know sometimes most States meet every
year. The Texas legislature only meets every 2 years and most
governors don't really want the legislature there. So, they
don't call special sessions. And we've had that problem in the
past. A good example is the State--Children's Health Care
Program created in '97. Texas didn't go back in session until
'99 and didn't have any law until 2 years later for the
Children's Healthcare Program. And, you know, our legislature
is only in session in the spring of every odd year, which is
sometimes good.
Ms. McCarthy. We'd like nothing better in the world
[inaudible] to phase approve legal authority to do it more
quickly, we'll certainly be able to help you with that.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Barton, you're recognized.
Mr. Barton. Madam Administrator, am I correct in that the
disagreement between Texas and EPA on greenhouse gases is a
separate issue than the disagreement between Texas and EPA on
their flexible permitting program under the other terms of the
Clean Air Act?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Barton. They're two separate issues?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Barton. OK. Now, you said in your testimony and you
said in response to a question that Texas is not requiring
monitoring of their flexible permitting program?
Did I hear you correct?
Ms. McCarthy. Not sufficiently providing an opportunity for
enforcement under the Federal law.
Mr. Barton. Now, I'm not familiar with all the plants here
in the Houston area; but I have several cement plants, I have a
General Motors assembly plant, I have some defense plants, I've
got a coal plant--several coal plants, several natural gas
power plants. I have a number of qualified facilities under the
Clean Air Act in my district and I that almost--I think every
one of those, they have continuous monitoring of their
smokestacks?
Ms. McCarthy. They may very well. I'm not saying there is
no monitoring, certainly; and I'm not implying that the
businesses are doing anything inappropriate.
What I'm suggesting is that the permit that they're
operating under doesn't provide sufficient detail for it to be
enforceable under Federal law and to mutual compliance.
Mr. Barton. I don't----
Ms. McCarthy. They simply don't have the recordkeeping
requirements and in some cases, the monitoring necessary for us
to measure actual emissions and to determine whether or not
there are increased emissions when they're making and providing
the changes, that the State allows to happen without public
process and without permitting.
Mr. Barton. Well, we just have a disconnect here because
I'm, personally, familiar with several of the plants, again, in
my congressional district that have continuous monitoring for
SO
2
and NOx and ozone. I'm aware in the Dallas-Fort
Worth area and I assume here in the Houston area that you have
these ozone monitors that are not plant-specific that are at
locations around the community that continuously monitor and
you're saying those are noncompliant with Federal law?
Ms. McCarthy. What I'm saying is that--that the flexible
permit is based on what's allowable for emissions and not based
on actual emissions. It is a critical issue under the Clean Air
Act.
Mr. Barton. But isn't that a resolvable issue without
revoking all these permits that have been existence for 16--I
mean, you've known about it for 16 or 17 years.
Ms. McCarthy. Well, we're kind of stuck between a rock and
a hard place here. Because they were called ``regulators,'' the
region respectfully worked for many years to try to resolve the
problem. We were, then, sued because we didn't take quick
interim action. We were sued by citizens under petition, the
new supervisor of the business community who was worried about
the legality of their permits. We were then forced to take the
type of action that is now raising your eyebrows. I understand
this.
None of us want to be in this position. If we could sit
down, we could easily resolve this problem. And, in fact, we
are doing that. It's just--it's just we now do not have a
flexible permit program under the State that the State and
major industries can rely on to receive permits that will meet
Federal requirements under the law.
Mr. Barton. Well, I have a different opinion of our State
regulators than Mr. Marston does. I think they're people of
good conscious, and they want to enforce law--both the State
and the Federal law and they want to work with our Federal
officials at EPA. I also believe that our industry groups want
a clean environment. I mean, they live in the same communities,
they shop in the same shops, they have the same health interest
as a regulator in Washington, DC.
And when I look at the record, I go back 16, 17 years--and,
again, I've not looked at every document. I can't stand here
and take an oath that I've read every document. But the
documents that I have read really refer to kind of generic--I
won't say ``minor problems,'' but just general disagreements
and uncertainty that they don't show what you just said. They
don't say, ``You're not monitoring. You're not doing it. You're
not''--I don't see any of that.
And--and I would--you know, Mr. Green and I are not of the
same political party, but we share the same general conclusion
on this flexible permitting program that it ought to be able to
be worked out. I don't see any irreconcilable issues here. If
you need more monitoring, I have a pretty good feeling that the
TCEQ people will agree to more monitoring.
If you need some more transparent paperwork process, if you
need a different calculation methodology, I've not--and I've
repeatedly pushed the State officials, you know, tell me the
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth about what's
going on here.
So, is it--is it the Obama Administration's position that
under no terms or conditions are they going to approve the
flexible permitting program for existing facilities in Texas at
all?
Ms. McCarthy. Absolutely not. In fact, Texas does take
advantage of our PALs Program. We certainly can take care of
the 10 percent of major sources that are using the flexible
permit. We certainly can provide an opportunity to transform
those permits into Federally enforceable, compliant permits.
Mr. Barton. Well, if can----
Ms. McCarthy. And I'd much rather do that on a programatic
level than individually. But right now we're working
individually.
Mr. Barton. If we can get some concrete issues that need to
be addressed, I am sure that Chairman Whitfield and Chairman
Upton, and Mr. Green, and Mr. Waxman and--I mean, whoever you
want to be in the negotiations, can work with EPA in Washington
and TCEQ in Texas and we can resolve this issue.
I mean, I just--I can't stress enough, Mr. Chairman, it is
important that we have an environmental program Nationally and
at the State level that every citizen has confidence in that's
going to give us the best air quality and the best water
quality that is obtainable in the modern era with the
technology that's available.
Mr. Whitfield. I agree. It almost seems to me, from what
you've said, that the objection is that in the flex permitting
language, it does not say certain things; and, yet, we know
that these industries around here we were just talking about,
you didn't mention the difference between actual and what is
allowed because it almost seems like the language in the permit
needs to be changed to make sure that you're giving the
information that you need.
Ms. McCarthy. Mr. Chairman, it's a much more fundamental
issue than that because under the Clean Air Act, if you
significantly increase your emissions, you're required to look
at controls and modernize them.
So, what you're doing is providing--by basically casting in
stone allowable, you are never going to operate those
facilities from that point forward at an increased emissions--
--
Mr. Whitfield. And you're talking about individual sources
of emissions within an industry, as well?
Ms. McCarthy. Or the entire facility.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Ms. McCarthy. It's not that we're requiring unit by unit--
--
Mr. Whitfield. And you will have your legal department
provide us with a two-page or so----
Ms. McCarthy. I will. And if I may, I am not indicating or
trying to malign anybody at TCEQ. I've been met many of the
commissioners and met with the staff. They're honorable human
beings. I think right now we've made a lot of progress that we
had to make since we had the noticed our disapprovals of their
permit process being objected to permits. I wish we could do
this in a little more gracious way so that it wasn't--so this
disagreement wasn't so apparent. We are getting there. It's not
easy, but I will pledge EPA's continued cooperation with TCEQ
and we will get there.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, good. You know, I think there's
something wrong when we've got a Government agency with 290
pages of lawsuits pending. Of course, I recognize that the law
encourages the lawsuits and the law also gives Federal judges
authority to reimburse the legal cost.
But we appreciate your time today. We look forward to
continuing to work with you on a lot of issues. And we'll keep
the record open for 30 days for any additional material or
questions.
Mr. Green. I just want to thank South Texas Law School--I
have a lot of friends and family who attended here--for
allowing us this venue.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, so do I. And I appreciate the staff for
helping get this organized. And with that, we'll conclude this
hearing.
[Whereupon, at 12:17 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]


