- THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 5: RECENT E.P.A. RULEMAKINGS RELATING TO BOILERS, CEMENT MANUFACTURING PLANTS, AND UTILITIES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 5: RECENT E.P.A. RULEMAKINGS
RELATING TO BOILERS, CEMENT MANUFACTURING PLANTS, AND UTILITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

----------

APRIL 15, 2011

----------

Serial No. 112-41

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 5: RECENT E.P.A. RULEMAKINGS
RELATING TO BOILERS, CEMENT MANUFACTURING PLANTS, AND UTILITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 15, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-41

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-217 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ANNA G. ESHOO, California
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
Vice Chair                         GENE GREEN, Texas
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JIM MATHESON, Utah
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              Islands
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JAY INSLEE, Washington
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  JIM MATHESON, Utah
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             GENE GREEN, Texas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   LOIS CAPPS, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio)
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     6
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................   322
Hon. John D. Dingell, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Michigan, prepared statement................................   355

Witnesses

Tom Fanning, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer,
Southern Company...............................................    14
Prepared statement...........................................    17
Answers to submitted questions \1\...........................   357
Anthony F. Earley, Jr., Executive Chairman, DTE Energy...........    39
Prepared statement...........................................    41
Answers to submitted questions...............................   374
Michael J. Bradley, Executive Director, The Clean Energy Group...    58
Prepared statement...........................................    60
Answers to submitted questions...............................   380
Paul Kempf, Director of Utilities, University of Notre Dame......   226
Prepared statement...........................................   228
Answers to submitted questions...............................   398
John Walke, Senior Attorney and Clean Air Director, Natural
Resources Defense Council......................................   237
Prepared statement...........................................   239
Answers to submitted questions...............................   413
Dirk Krouskop, Vice President, Safety, Health, and Environment,
MeadWestvaco Corporation.......................................   297
Prepared statement...........................................   299
Answers to submitted questions...............................   416
Aris Papadopoulos, President and Chief Executive Officer, Titan
America, LLC...................................................   316
Prepared statement...........................................   318
Answers to submitted questions...............................   417

Submitted Material

Business Wire article, ``State-of-the-Art Emissions Scrubbers at
Constellation Energy's Brandon Shores Power Plant Commence
Commercial Operation,'' dated March 1, 2010, submitted by Mr.
Shimkus........................................................   335
Letter, dated July 1, 2011, from Tom Thompson, Chairman, Putnam
County, Georgia, Board of Commissioners, et al., to Mr. Upton,
submitted by Mr. Scalise.......................................   352

----------
\1\ Additional information provided by Mr. Fanning is available
at http://www.pacificorp.com/content/dam/pacificorp/doc/
Energy_Sources/Integrated_Resource_Plan/2011IRP/
EEIModelingReportFinal-28January2011.pdf and http://
www.anga.us/media/210391/annual%20energy%20outlook%202011.pdf.

THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 5: RECENT E.P.A. RULEMAKINGS
RELATING TO BOILERS, CEMENT MANUFACTURING PLANTS, AND UTILITIES

----------

FRIDAY, APRIL 15, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:03 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed
Whitfield (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Shimkus,
Walden, Burgess, Scalise, McMorris Rodgers, McKinley, Gardner,
Pompeo, Griffith, Barton, Upton (ex officio), Rush, Inslee,
Dingell, Markey, Green, Capps, Gonzalez, and Waxman (ex
officio).
Staff present: Maryam Brown, Chief Counsel, Energy and
Power; Allison Busbee, Legislative Clerk; Cory Hicks, Policy
Coordinator, Energy and Power; Heidi King, Chief Economist;
Mary Neumayr, Counsel, Oversight/Energy; Greg Dotson,
Democratic Energy and Environment Staff Director; Caitlin
Haberman, Democratic Policy Analyst; and Alexandra Teitz,
Democratic Senior Counsel for Energy and Environment.
Mr. Whitfield. We will call the hearing to order this
morning, and I look forward to the testimony of our panel.
Before we get started, I want to just make a couple of comments
relating to administrative issues. We had invited EPA
representatives to testify at our hearing on Wednesday as well
as today, and they were unable to attend. As a result of that,
we are going to have another hearing and we are going to invite
representatives of the agency to come. We know that there is
more than one or two people that can testify over there, and I
think that on this issue that we are looking at today, as well
as others, it is imperative that we have testimony from EPA. So
my staff is going to work with minority staff to schedule a
time for Administrator Jackson or her designee to come before
us in May after the Easter recess for a hearing with them.
So this is another hearing on our--and now I am going to
recognize myself for a 5-minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

This is another hearing on the American Energy Initiative
in which we look at the impact of EPA regulations on providing
fuel for our transportation needs and generating electricity
for our other needs.
In an interview with the San Francisco Chronicle back in
January of 2008, then-Presidential candidate Barack Obama, when
asked a question, said that his administration was going to
have the most aggressive cap and trade system that was out
there. Then he said so if somebody wants to build a coal power
plant, they can. It is just that our policies will bankrupt
them because they are going to be charged a huge sum for all
that greenhouse gas that is being emitted. That will generate
billions of dollars that we can invest in solar, wind, and
other alternative energies. Well, he was not successful in
adopting a cap and trade system, but it is quite clear that EPA
is taking up the mantle, and they are determined to pass
regulations to increase the cost of coal and make other energy
sources more competitive.
Today we are going to focus on only three of the multitude
of regulations in the queue at EPA in which they are moving
with unprecedented speed, and all of these are under Section
111 and 112 of the Clean Air Act. First, we have the utility
rule, which affects the HAP standards for new and existing
coal- and oil-fired electric generating units and new-source
performance standards for fossil fuel-fired EGUs.
Second, we have the cement rule, which affects HAP
standards and new-source performance standards for the Portland
Cement manufacturing industry.
Third, we have HAP standards for large and small boilers.
We also have a rule establishing new standards of performance
and environment and emission guidelines for commercial and
industrial incinerators.
And a fourth rule regarding secondary materials that are
solid wastes.
I might also mention that every one of these rules is the
result of a court settlement or a consent decree. It is
becoming quite clear that lawsuits are the method now being
used to regulate at EPA. In fact, just under the Clean Air Act,
there are 509 lawsuits pending at EPA.
So we see this pattern of third-party groups filing
lawsuits, EPA entering consent decrees, federal judges
issuing--giving legal fees to the parties that brought the
lawsuits in the first place. So if there was ever an act that
is promoting lawsuits, it is this act.
Now we know from these regulations that plants are going to
close. We know jobs are going to be lost. We know wholesale
electric rates are going to go up. We know America is going to
be less competitive in the global marketplace. And we know that
there are some witnesses today who are going to speak in favor
of these regulations. And there are those who say these
regulations are good for America because it is going to create
new industries and create new jobs. And as one of our witnesses
said, that may be true sometime in the future, but we know with
certainty it will eliminate real jobs today and inflate
wholesale power rates today, not in the future. And then we
need to be concerned about our capacity, we need to be
concerned about reserve margins, we need to be concerned about
the cost. These regulations alone, under EPA's conservative
estimates, will cost industry over $14 billion a year.
So these are significant rules that have a dramatic impact
on America as we try to revive our economy. And so I look
forward to the testimony. I know that we need to have people
supporting these rules, and we need to have people opposing
these rules, because we need a national debate on the direction
that EPA is going and the method that they are using to get
there. To try to have a 60-day comment period on a 1,000-page
rule with 1,000 additional technical pages is unacceptable.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. So at this time I recognize the gentleman
from Illinois for his 5-minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having
this hearing, and I want to thank all of the guests for
attending today's hearing.
Mr. Chairman, I must say that your argument sounds
persuading, but some of it is not persuading that the EPA is
the real culprit here. Today, Mr. Chairman, we will hear
testimony from a variety of stakeholders on proposed or
finalized EPA rules regarding the maximum achievable control
technology, or MACT, and other standards for power plants,
cement facilities, boilers, and incinerators. Mr. Chairman,
Section 112 of the Clean Air Act mandates that EPA establish
technology-based standards to reduce hazardous air pollutants,
HAPs, that may contribute to increased cases of cancer, birth
defects, and other harmful defects, and adverse environmental
impacts.
We will all understand that EPA is required by law under
the Clean Air Act to issue each of these rules on a specified
schedule, and all of these schedules were actually mandated to
be completed by the year 2000. Initially we all know that
facilities will have an additional 3 and in some cases even up
to 4 years to comply with these rules, plus we are finalizing
in State or federal authorities determines that additional time
is necessary to install pollution control.
Now Mr. Chairman, I am not a math major, but it would seem
to me that if these rules were supposedly issued way back in
2000 and we are now in the year 2011 and facilities will still
have up to 3 to 4 years to install these controls once they are
finalized, then plant operators will have at least 15 years of
delay in meeting these standards, even if all these rules were
finalized today.
Today, Mr. Chairman, we will be hearing contrasting
testimony by interested stakeholders on how compliance with
these rules will impact energy rates and reliability, jobs and
the economy as well. This is the time for us to consider the
impact of these rules on rates and reliability on jobs.
First is those utility companies that have been proactive
in preparing for these rules and some of these utility
companies have been proactive in preparing for these rules,
which everyone understood to--that they were coming. These
prepared utility companies will testify on how these rules are
balanced and they are reasonable. That EPA has engaged the
industry in a transparent manner, and they have no problem
meeting these standards because they have already invested in
these controlled technologies.
These forward-thinking companies which must be commended
and applauded and lifted up will also testify that implementing
these pollution control technologies can indeed advance
economic growth, inspire innovation and competitiveness, and
actually create well-paying jobs through the installation of
scrubbers, air quality control systems, and other pollution
control equipment.
In addition to these economic benefits, we will also hear
about some of the health and environmental benefits that
compliance with these rules would bring. Specifically, just a
reduction in mercury and particulate matter alone will lead to
significant and tangible health benefits, including the
prevention of thousands of premature deaths, non-fatal heart
attacks, chronic bronchitis, and associated asthma cases.
Unfortunately, we will also hear the other side of the
story as well. Naturally, these companies who have been less
active in planning and investing in pollution control
technologies over the years will testify that they are, as a
result, unprepared for compliance and will request additional
time to do so. In essence, they are going to be whining at the
table. Since there is no legislation up for a debate now today,
I will reserve judgment on the merits of pushing these rules
down the road for future action once again, and I look forward
to today's testimony and the subsequent questions of our
witnesses.
Mr. Chairman, with that I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. At this time I recognize the
chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee, Mr. Upton of
Michigan, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Upton. Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too regret that
EPA was not able to be with us this morning.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

The American Energy Initiative is an ambitious effort to
take on all of the energy-related issues that the Nation faces
today and into the future. With high and rising gas prices,
Middle East instability, and a domestic economy struggling to
regain its footing and create jobs, the current energy
challenges certainly are great, and with global industrial
competition and related worldwide energy demand going nowhere
but up, we need to take these issues on now before they get out
of hand.
What is most disturbing is how many of these energy
challenges are self-imposed. Two days ago this subcommittee
heard from Alaska's entire congressional delegation--many of
them--as well as local officials--all of them--and energy
company representatives from the State. Alaska is practically
begging to produce more of its substantial reserves of domestic
oil and help bring down future gasoline prices. The fact that
EPA continues to stand in the way is both inexplicable and
unacceptable. America has plenty of outside enemies who would
love to cut off our energy supplies. We don't need to make
things worse by being our own enemy as well.
Every bit as bad are EPA regs that raise electricity costs
and stifle our manufacturing competitiveness. Our fifth day of
the hearing on the American Energy Initiative deals with a set
of regulations, those impacting utility steam generating units,
boilers, and cement. Raising the cost of operating utility
steam generating units means higher electricity prices for
everybody. Since boilers and process heaters are used at nearly
every manufacturing facility, they also certainly raise
manufacturing costs. Few, if any, of the other countries,
including our industrial competitors, are pursuing similar
policies to raise costs. Needless to say, there is not much of
an export market for EPA's ideas and how to run this part of
our economy.
With unemployment long stuck above 8 percent, higher in
manufacturing areas like mine, we need to be mindful of regs
that make energy more expensive and discourage investment in
the domestic manufacturing sector. Beyond power plants and
manufacturers, other facilities with boilers, such as
universities, will face higher operating costs at a time when
State governments are hard-pressed to increase funding levels
in tuition bills that are already way too high for most
students to pay.
The goal is not to repeal these regs; it is to advance them
in a reasonable way. Regs that reduce emissions without
reducing manufacturing activity and jobs or creating other
undue hardships.
I look forward to the discussion and plan to incorporate
what is learned into the American Energy Initiative.
I yield to Mr. Barton.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman--both Mr. Chairmans.
Thank you for holding this hearing.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

We have a very difficult economy. We all know that. The
Environmental Protection Agency, I think this is our third or
fourth hearing this week in which they have been invited to
attend and I think they have come to one. We could call them
the Evaporating Personnel Administration, I guess. They don't
seem to ever show up and be accountable.
Mr. Rush. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Barton. I will, on your time. I am always happy to
yield on your time.
They have consistently--they being the EPA--made
problematic decisions with their proposed regulations, rulings,
and in some cases, pulling the existing permits as they have
done in Texas without cause. These threaten our Nation's energy
security at a minimum and our economic opportunity for sure.
The regulations that EPA is proposing as the subject of
this hearing will decrease reliability in our energy sector,
increase the cost of our energy, and kill jobs. The latest and
greatest scheme to regulate the hazardous air pollutants from
power plants under the Clean Air Act Section 112 will amend the
new source performance standards with regard to the new utility
maximum achievable control technology, or MACT. Some people
call it big MACT standards. This would cause an adverse effect
on coal and oil electric generating plants throughout our
country.
The EPA seems to be going after a number of different
industries, but it is apparent to me that they are actually
attacking the most prevalent economical resource generation in
the United States, and that is the coal industry.
The timeline that EPA is proposing is unworkable,
unreasonable, and uneconomical. Their statistical data are
skewed. They base their proposal on the average of the 12
best--12 percent best performing plants in the country. The
results do not reflect the real life activity of existing power
plants across the Nation. With so many compliance factors
involved, no one plant can possibly expect to comply with all
of the MACT limits on all modes of operation.
To comply with the EPA's utility MACT proposal, it will
cost $11 billion annually across the electric generation
industry. Cement is an additional $1 billion. Under the boiler
rules, $2.3 billion is indicated by the EPA in cost to the
refinery industry. If you add that up, that is almost $14
billion, Mr. Chairman.
And finally, last but not least, I do find it troubling
that Lisa Jackson, once again, is a no-show at a very important
hearing that she has had every opportunity to be in attendance.
The MACT truck is about to overrun us all, and she is not even
here to comment on the proposed regulations.
With that I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Barton follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much. Mr. Waxman is on his
way. He has been delayed, so he will have a 5-minute opening
statement when he gets here, but in the meantime, I want to
introduce our panel. We do appreciate all of you coming to help
us examine in a more thorough way the implications of these
regulations.
We have Mr. Tom Fanning, Chairman, President, and CEO of
Southern Company. We have Mr. Anthony Earley, Executive
Chairman, DTE Energy. We have Mr. Michael Bradley, Executive
Director of The Clean Energy Group. We have Mr. Paul Kempf,
Director of Utilities at Notre Dame University--University of
Notre Dame. We have Mr. John Walke, who is the senior Attorney
and Clean Air Director for the Natural Resources Defense
Council. We have Mr. Dirk Krouskop, Vice President, Safety,
Health & Environment at MeadWestvaco Corporation, and we have
Mr. Aris Papadopoulos, President and CEO of Titan America.
We thank all of your for being here. We have one vote on
the House Floor right now. We like to start these hearings
early so we don't have to be interfered by votes, so we have
one Member going over to vote. He is going to come back, but in
the meantime, we will go on and get these opening statements
going because we want to get them on the record.
So Mr. Fanning, I will recognize you for 5 minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF TOM FANNING, CHAIRMAN, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, SOUTHERN COMPANY; ANTHONY F. EARLEY, JR.,
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN, DTE ENERGY; MICHAEL J. BRADLEY, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR, THE CLEAN ENERGY GROUP; PAUL KEMPF, DIRECTOR OF
UTILITIES, UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE DAME; JOHN WALKE, SENIOR
ATTORNEY AND CLEAN AIR DIRECTOR, NATURAL RESOURCES DEFENSE
COUNCIL; DIRK KROUSKOP, VP, SAFETY, HEALTH & ENVIRONMENT,
MEADWESTVACO CORPORATION; AND ARIS PAPADOPOULOS, PRESIDENT AND
CEO, TITAN AMERICA LLC.

STATEMENT OF TOM FANNING

Mr. Fanning. Thank you. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member
Rush, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting
me to testify today.
Southern Company is the leading energy supplier in the
Southeastern United States, and one of the largest generators
of electricity in the Nation. We work hard every day to ensure
that our customers have access to reliable and affordable
power. Like the rest of our industry, we are committed to
working with our communities, stakeholders, and our customers
to continue reducing our environmental impact. That is why
Southern Company in recent years has invested over $8 billion
in environmental controls, and intends to spend up to $4.1
billion to comply with existing, revised, or new rules over the
next 3 years.
We are glad that you are examining and discussing the
utility MACT rule that EPA recently proposed. We are very
concerned with this proposal and believe that if adopted, it
could put the reliability and affordability of our electric
supply at risk. The rule would impact plants responsible for
nearly 50 percent of total electricity generation. It would
impose an unrealistic 3-year timeline for compliance at a time
when the industry is laboring to comply with numerous other
mandates. The result could be the reduced generating capacity
below the minimum required to provide reliable service and also
cause electric rates to substantially increase.
However, we believe these risks can be reduced or avoided
by moving forward on a reasonable schedule that reflects
industry experience and the challenges of upgrading the
Nation's generating fleet.
I have four points for your today.
The first is that the timeline for this rule is
unreasonable. The Agency has proposed to allow only 60 days to
comment on one of the most burdensome and expensive rules that
was ever put forward. We looked at nine other less complex
rules, and found that EPA has allowed between 120 and 180 days
for comments on each of them. This is nearly a 1,000-page rule
with nearly 1,000 more pages of technical supporting documents.
Sixty days is plainly inadequate for the industry to analyze
this rule and its effects, and to offer meaningful comments.
But even a greater concern is the 3-year compliance period
that would follow this particular MACT rule. A study conducted
for the Electric--Edison Electric Institute by ICF concluded
that for U.S. by 2015, over 80,000 megawatts of scrubbers and
over 160,000 megawatts of fabric filter baghouses will be
required to be constructed. Almost 80,000 megawatts of current
coal capacity will retire and have to be replaced. As the CEO
of a company that has installed more pollution controls than
any other utility, I tell you that this cannot be done in 3
years.
That leads to my second point, which is that this rushed
timeline could put the reliability of the Nation's electric
generating system at risk. The major challenge of complying
with these new rules is ensuring adequate reserve margins, that
is, the generating capacity that is available during times of
high demand or during interruptions in service from base load
plants. According to Bernstein Research, the impact of utility
MACT rule on smaller plants will cause regional capacity
margins to plummet by 7 to 15 percentage points into the single
digits in some regions. Other studies have reached similar
conclusions. The result will be a greater risk of power
outages.
My third point is that the rushed timeline will also impact
electricity affordability. The construction of the massive
numbers of controls that I mentioned, plus the costs of
replacing the coal plants that will retire will require
utilities to spend as much as $300 billion by 2015. This huge
cost will certainly show up in customers' power bills and will
threaten jobs and any economic recovery.
My fourth and final point is that there is a better way to
continue to improve our environmental performance while
protecting our customers, reliability, and jobs. We need a
realistic compliance schedule based on historical experience
that allows us to retrofit existing plants and to begin work on
any replacement capacity. A realistic schedule would allow
upgrades to be made in an orderly fashion without placing
reliability in jeopardy or imposing undue additional cost
increases on our customers.
To conclude, we believe that the utility MACT proposal on
its current schedule and in its current form puts at risk the
reliability and affordability of power in the United States.
These risks can be reduced by extending the rulemaking schedule
and the timeline for compliance. During that time, we can work
to improve and refine the proposed rule, and simultaneously
better prepare for any changes in our generation fleet. This is
a commonsense solution that all stakeholders should be able to
support.
I thank the committee for holding this important hearing
today and giving me the opportunity to testify. I look forward
to any questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fanning follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Fanning, and Mr. Earley, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANTHONY F. EARLEY, JR.

Mr. Earley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
subcommittee for the invitation to address a subject with
critical implications for the future of our industry and your
constituents, the customers that we serve.
Sometimes we focus too much on what we disagree with, but I
want to emphasize one thing that we all should be able to agree
on, and that is the importance of a reliable and affordable
electric system. We only need to think back to the massive
blackout of 2003 to understand the ubiquitous role that
electricity plays in our economy and in our personal lives.
Let me start by emphasizing that progress on the
environment is vital, but it must continue on a schedule that
can be efficiently and cost-effectively managed without
requirements that jeopardize the economy and with the
sensitivity to preserving the balanced mix of generation
technology that has served us so well in the past.
My message today is not do nothing. My message today is to
do something that will continue the tremendous progress we have
already made. The key to success will be managing the timing,
using a commonsense approach to achieve improvements, and
ensuring the benefits actually do justify the very real cost in
terms of money and jobs.
I want to make it clear why this commonsense measured
approach is appropriate by dispelling the myth that we face
some immediate environmental crisis. The progress that our
industry has made in cleaning the air since the Clean Air Act
was adopted in 1970 is one of the great environmental success
stories, and I will use my own company, DTE Energy, as an
example. Over the last 35 years, we have reduced particulate
emissions by more than 90 percent, and sulfur dioxide and
nitrogen oxide by more than 70 percent; at the same time
increasing generation output by approximately 45 percent. Other
electric utilities have accomplished similar results. The
bottom line is our children are breathing air today that is far
cleaner than the air that we inhaled as children. Having said
that, we continue to make improvements. We are investing
billions of dollars in environmental controls and clean energy
technology.
My concern with the EGU MACT is that it derails this
approach and has very serious consequences. The proposed rule
is flawed in a number of ways.
First, it provides insufficient time to address these
extremely complex issues. This rule will have far-reaching
economic and energy supply impacts. Allowing just a 60-day
comment period is totally inappropriate. The goal of completing
these regulations by November seems equally inappropriate,
considering the enormous amount of public comment that this
rule is going to generate. Too much is at stake to move forward
without proper vetting.
Second, the proposed rule focuses on technology-based
standards for some of the emissions, and for some of the
emissions, there is sparse data available to support these
standards. The EPA is proceeding with regulations under the
mistaken belief that reasonably priced technology solutions are
currently available to control acid gasses, non-mercury metals,
and organics. For example, the low estimate for early plant
retirements is based on the belief that the industry can meet
acid gas limits using dry sorbent injection. It appears that
the EPA made this determination based on one 3-week trial on
one boiler type. Even the company that performed that
evaluation recommends a more complete trial to better
understand the technology. I can't think of any business that
would be willing to invest millions or billions of dollars on a
single 3-week trial that may or may not be applicable to the
entire U.S. coal fleet.
The third and most troubling flaw of the proposed rule is
choosing not to pursue health-based standards. The EPA is
committing our customers to funding billions of dollars in
technology investments without knowing the potential health
implications and without serious consideration of the
ramifications to the economy and ultimately to the public.
EPA's own analysis concludes that reducing the emissions
covered by the rules offers only minimal health benefits.
Almost all of the benefits they assigned to these regulations
is associated with the expected coincidental reductions in
particulate emissions, something that is already regulated
under another part of the Clean Air Act.
Even if EPA is right about available technology, can we
afford to spend billions of dollars when we have no solid
understanding of whether it can be worthwhile or not? Whether a
conscious decision or not, the regulations will have the impact
of driving companies to retire significantly more of their
older coal fire units than EPA estimates. With plant closings,
lost jobs, and lost tax base at stake, we must be prudent in
our decision-making, particularly in this economy.
In closing, I would like to stress that our end goal is the
same: continued progress on the environmental front. I ask that
you ensure that there is sufficient time for EPA to make sound
decisions, to understand whether a health-based standard would
reduce the real impacts on our customers and the economy, and
to evaluate the adequacy of control technologies so we don't
unnecessarily undermine the viability of a diverse energy mix.
This approach has served us well in the past, and it will
continue to serve us well in the future. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Earley follows:]

Mr. Upton [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Earley. Mr. Bradley?

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL J. BRADLEY

Mr. Bradley. Good morning, Chairman----
Mr. Upton. You need to hit that mic button down below.
Mr. Bradley. Good morning, Chairman, Ranking Member Rush,
and members of the subcommittee. My name is Michael Bradley,
the executive director of The Clean Energy Group. I am
testifying today on behalf of The Clean Energy Group's Clean
Air Policy Initiative, a coalition of electric power companies.
The member companies are some of the Nation's largest
generators of electricity, serving nearly one-fifth of all U.S.
electric customers. On behalf of my member companies, I
appreciate the opportunity to speak with you today and offer
the following observations on the proposed Utility Toxics Rule.
The rule provides the business certainty required for the
industry to move forward with capital investment decisions. The
proposal, while not perfect, is reasonable and consistent with
the requirements of the Clean Air Act. The electric sector,
overall, is well-positioned to comply. The Clean Air Act
provides sufficient time to comply, as well as the authority to
accommodate special circumstances where additional time is
necessary.
It should be no surprise that EPA issued this rule. Since
2000, the electric industry has known that hazardous air
pollutants would be regulated under the Clean Air Act. Now,
over a decade later, EPA is under a quarterly deadline to
finalize the rule by November. Additionally, EPA conducted an
extensive data collection effort with the cooperation of
industry to ensure that the standards were based on real world
operating experience.
The proposed standards are not as burdensome as some
electric sector members anticipate. In fact, if there was any
surprise, it was the degree of compliance flexibility proposed
by the rule. For example, the proposal includes work practice
standards for dioxins rather than initial limits, surrogates
for certain hazardous air pollutants, as well as the ability to
average among units at a facility. We are evaluating specific
technical issues with the rule that we think need to be
addressed, but we expect continued engagement with EPA will
lead to a final rule that is both balanced and flexible.
The technologies to control hazardous air emissions,
including mercury and acid gasses, are commercially available.
Also, the industry has extensive experience with installation
and operation of these controls. Companies will generally have
3 years to comply once the rule is final. We believe that the
vast majority of generating units can meet this schedule for
several reasons.
First, to their credit, many companies have installed major
components of pollution control systems that will be required
to comply. For example, 60 percent of the Nation's coal
capacity has already been retrofit with scrubbers. We are not
starting from scratch.
Second, EPA allows compliance flexibility in the rule by
allowing power plant owners to average their emissions across
all the boilers at a facility. Almost 20 percent of coal
capacity that currently lacks scrubbers is co-located at plants
with existing scrubbers for the potential to average.
Third, historic experience shows that the industry has the
capacity to install a large number of pollution control systems
in a relatively short period of time. Between 2008 and 2010,
the industry installed about 60 gigawatts of scrubbers and 20
gigawatts of advanced NOx controls.
Fourth, most of the controlled technologies that will be
required to comply, like activated carbon injection and dry
sorbent injection, can be installed in less than 2 years. If a
company is unable to comply in time, the Act allows up to one
additional year to install the necessary controls. This will
allow companies to manage multiple control installations and
avoid potential reliability concerns. Furthermore, EPA has the
authority and has used this authority in similar situations to
provide additional time beyond the 1-year extension.
To conclude, the Clean Air Act amended by Congress in 1990
with overwhelming bipartisan support and signed by George H.W.
Bush requires regulations that limit hazardous air pollutions
from the electric sector. In 2000, EPA took the first step
towards regulating those emissions, and over a decade later,
EPA now is working to finalize the rule. While complying with
these obligations will require planning and significant
resources, many companies are on their way to complying. There
is no reason to delay the implementation of the Utility Toxics
Rule. Proceeding on schedule with the flexibility that is
available will provide the business certainty that the industry
is looking for.
Thank you for your time, and I would welcome any questions
you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bradley follows:]

Mr. Upton. Thank you. Mr. Kempf?

STATEMENT OF PAUL KEMPF

Mr. Kempf. Good morning, Chairman Upton and members of the
committee, and thank you for inviting me to testify before the
committee today.
I am the director of utilities at the University of Notre
Dame. The university is a national Catholic university located
in Northern Indiana, 90 miles east of Chicago. It has a campus
of 1,250 acres with over 140 buildings and a student enrollment
of 12,000. Notre Dame was the first university in the U.S. to
generate electricity powering lights in its main building
shortly after Edison made incandescent lighting practical. The
university takes seriously its leadership role in demonstrating
stewardship, sustainability and social justice, and therefore
seeks to be a leader in all areas, including energy and
environment. We are proud of the efforts of our student group,
Green ND, and our Office of Sustainability, which have led a
number of energy and environmental projects. I appreciate the
opportunity to tell the committee about the challenges facing
Notre Dame and many other universities across the Nation as we
strive to comply with the full range of pending EPA
regulations.
We at Notre Dame are most immediately concerned about the
suite of four rules known as the boiler MACT rules. These rules
will significantly impact many universities, including Notre
Dame, which installed their own utility plants to ensure
reliable and affordable source of energy for their campuses.
These plants are efficient, cost effective, and environmentally
sound source of energy for universities. EPA's final rules,
however, impose unrealistic and costly requirements that EPA
has not justified by corresponding reduction of hazardous air
pollutants.
EPA's boiler MACT rules will require significant changes,
many of which are not achievable, affordable, or realistic in a
timeframe set out by EPA. Improving environment at reasonable
cost benefit rates is certainly in all our best interests, but
the recent rules will require significant additional capital
and operational expenses, assuming compliance is even possible.
Compliance testing costs alone will likely increase nearly 20-
fold from the expenses based on levels of testing and testing
frequency.
Universities face unique challenges in adapting to new
rules. Most universities plan over a decade or more. Also,
universities are unable to make the types of changes that are
options for businesses. We cannot consolidate with other
universities, move to a different state, or even overseas.
Raising prices for our customers would be a hike in tuition
imposed on our students and their families, already stretched
by the Nation's struggling economy.
At Notre Dame, we have had a combined heat power system
since 1953, one of the first universities to adopt this highly
efficient and environmentally conscious means of producing
energy. Our CHP system includes three coal fire boilers and
three gas and oil boilers, and produces 55 percent of the
campus's electrical demand. This fuel diversity offers a hedge
against volatility, shortages, and market factors. Regulations
should not make it impossible to sustain the reliability and
energy security provided by our system.
When the original boiler MACT rule was issued in 2004, the
university upgraded its control to achieve that regulation, but
then the boiler MACT rule was vacated by the courts. The
university was left to decide whether to proceed with its $20
million investment in pollution control equipment, or halt the
project. We decided to complete the project and achieve
emission reductions. We were left to see whether our new system
would be sufficient to comply with the EPA's revised boiler
MACT. Now nearly 4 years later, we are faced with a revised
rule that is patently different from the original rule, and one
that presents uncertain compliance capabilities for our
investment. EPA's capital cost estimate for compliance in the
'04 rule was estimated at half a million dollars per solid fuel
boiler. We spent nearly $7 million to comply with that rule.
Now for new boiler MACT, EPA projects capital costs of $2.2
million per unit. With this wide disparity between EPA
projected costs and actual costs, it is difficult to plan.
Twenty million dollars in a university setting could
provide a full year of tuition for 500 students or a full 4-
year scholarship for 1125 students. Before we commit more
millions of dollars for resources, EPA should take the
necessary time to address the fundamental issues with the
rules. We are not publicly funded. These added costs of
compliance are directly borne by our students and their
families, who are committed to our tradition of offering an
excellent education as economically possible to our students.
Yet with these rules on the horizon, maintaining that tradition
is more challenging than ever before.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for this opportunity to testify
before the committee. I welcome any questions you or other
Members may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kempf follows:]

Mr. Upton. Thank you. Mr. Walke?

STATEMENT OF JOHN WALKE

Mr. Walke. Thank you, Chairman Upton and members of the
subcommittee. My name is John Walke and I am Clean Air Director
and Senior Attorney for the Natural Resources Defense Council,
a national public health and conservation organization with 1.2
million members and online activists nationwide.
Power plants, industrial boiler, and cement plants are the
largest emitters of mercury and scores of other toxic air
pollution in the country today. Mercury is a powerful brain
poison that damages the developing brains of children and
fetuses, lowering IQs and harming motor functions. These
polluting facilities emit many other toxic air pollutants as
well that cause cancer, heart attacks, strokes, asthma
symptoms, and premature deaths.
Yet these industrial facilities still are failing to comply
with basic clean air requirements to reduce their toxic
pollution after two decades after passage of the 1990 Clean Air
amendments. This inexcusable situation is due to unlawful
delays, along with plainly illegal standards by EPA under the
prior administration, standards that were overturned in courts
by unanimous decision rendered by judges appointed by
Republican and Democratic Presidents alike. These delays in
court decisions resulted in EPA under the present
administration inheriting the obligation to re-propose and
reissue standards that comply with the Clean Air Act and
protect the public.
Now that EPA has final and proposed mercury near toxic
standards for the three industrial sectors at issue today,
these standards will deliver enormous benefits and health to
the American people. Yet today's hearing is serving as a
platform for industry officials to urge the delay of these
lifesaving mercury and air toxic standards. Members of this
committee in recent days have acknowledged they are crafting
plans to delay these generationally important health
safeguards.
If there is one thing for you to remember from my testimony
today, it is this. Delay would mean more deaths and disease on
a truly staggering scale. If these health protections were to
be delayed by even a single year, such delay would result in up
to 26,000 premature deaths, 16,500 nonfatal heart attacks,
178,000 asthma attacks, 18,000 hospital admissions and ER
visits, 1.3 million days when people would miss work or school,
and nearly 8 million days when people would restrict their
activities.
If delay is pursued, I am unaware of any other proposal or
legislation to have been entertained in Congress that would
inflict this level of hardship upon the American people's
health in a single year. I respectfully appeal to the members
of this committee to be straight with the American people about
the deadly consequences of delay. The American people deserve
to have these choices put in sharp relief. The choice between
enforcing the law and securing these tremendous health benefits
every year are blocking law enforcement and sacrificing public
health.
Americans have a right to understand how many people would
be allowed to die due to the weakening or delay of these health
safeguards. How many more pregnant women and children will be
poisoned by mercury in their bodies if Congress delays or
weakens health safeguards covering these industries? How many
additional hundreds of thousands of cases of asthma attacks,
heart attacks, and trips to the ER would be permitted to occur?
Before Congress even considers setting the country on this
course, I urge you to convene legislative hearings not with
lawyers, lobbyists, and corporate executives, but with doctors,
nurses, and respiratory therapists. Please invite a panel with
a pregnant mother-to-be, a religious leader, and a specialist
in neurotoxins to discuss the impacts of delayed cleanup on the
most vulnerable in our care, the more than 300,000 newborns
each year in the U.S. that may have been overexposed to mercury
in utero, increasing their risk of neural developmental
effects.
These EPA rulemakings have been conducted pursuant to clear
statutory authorities and court orders following court
decisions that vacated and remanded earlier unlawful standards
issued by the prior administration for these industries.
Indeed, for critics that complain about the concentration of
several standards by the current administration during its
first 2 years, there is a very simple explanation. EPA, under
the prior administration, violated the Clean Air Act repeatedly
over two terms, courts sent those standards back to EPA for
correction, the prior administration left office without fixing
those standards, and now the current administration must fix
the standards to follow the law.
We Americans deserve to have our government follow the law,
to enforce the law. Americans have the right to clean air, a
right conferred in the Clean Air Act of 1990 by a Republican
President, 89 Senators, and 400 Members of this House. Congress
should not take away our right to clean air.
In conclusion, there can be no claim that EPA lacks
statutory authority to protect Americans against poison and
cancer-causing chemicals. There can be no complaint that EPA is
acting too quickly after well over a decade of delay, fueled by
special interest and law-breaking. There should be no
willingness to entertain delays of health protections that will
avoid up to 26,000 deaths, nearly 180,000 asthma attacks, and
mercury poisoning of society's most vulnerable. I respectfully
ask you to let the clean air work to protect the health of all
Americans.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walke follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. Mr. Krouskop, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DIRK KROUSKOP

Mr. Krouskop. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member Rush, and
members of the subcommittee, my name is Dirk Krouskop and I am
the Vice President of Safety, Health, and the Environment at
MeadWestvaco. MeadWestvaco is a global leader in the packaging
industry, producing high quality paperboard and plastic
packaging, in addition to operating school and office supply
and specialty chemical businesses. We operate and market our
products globally with approximately half of our 17,500
employees based in the United States. At MeadWestvaco, we are
proud of our leadership and sustainability, and our
longstanding record of environmental stewardship.
Today I am here representing MeadWestvaco; however, we are
also members of a number of organizations that represent
manufacturers whose members share concerns similar to those
that I am expressing today on behalf of MeadWestvaco. I would
like to thank you for the opportunity to discuss the challenges
that manufacturers face in boiler MACT and other related rules.
We applaud this subcommittee for your commitment to ensuring
that laws are implemented in a reasonable and fair manner.
Environmental legislation has produced significant improvements
in air and water quality over the past several decades, and
improvements year over year continue.
What has also changed and at an increasing pace in recent
years is the global nature of our businesses. Today, many
businesses, including MeadWestvaco compete globally. We must
produce cost competitive products that can be sold into global
markets; we must compete against products from overseas; and we
must compete in global markets for the capital required to meet
regulatory demands, and hopefully still be able to grow our
businesses.
A key issue for the committee's consideration is the
cumulative effect of many new regulations which are confronting
manufacturers like MeadWestvaco nearly simultaneously. Paper
and wood products manufacturers are facing over 20 major
regulations from EPA's Clean Air Act program alone. The pace
and volume of regulation is not sustainable not only for the
regulating community, but also for the government.
I have attached a diagram to my written testimony that
shows the clean air regulations in the pipeline that will
affect forest products manufacturers. This picture gives you an
idea of the regulatory train wreck from just one EPA program,
and it doesn't even take into account the hundreds of other
regulations we must comply with every day.
As detailed in my written statement, this regulatory
environment increases our costs, makes us less competitive on a
global basis, and ultimately results in lost jobs.
The forest products industry, like so many other
manufacturers, has been hit hard by the economic crisis. Since
2006 when the housing downturn began, the forest products
industry has lost 31 percent of its workforce, nearly 400,000
high-paying jobs, largely in small rural communities that can
least afford to lose them. The closing of a mill in a small
town has a severe ripple effect when that mill is the largest
employer and a major contributor to local taxes and community
programs.
Here are a few of the many regulations we are concerned
about. EPA's recently finalized Boiler MACT rules will cost our
industry well over $3 billion, and continues to ignore what
real world best performing boilers can achieve. While Congress
authorized EPA to adopt a health-based approach to target
controls for certain emissions below the health threshold, EPA
decided not to use this authority and reversed its previous
precedent.
EPA is also considering redoing the Pulp and Paper MACT
issued a decade ago, even though MACT is supposed to be a one-
time program. This could add another $4 billion in capital
costs beyond Boiler MACT.
The National Ambient Air Quality Standards Program has
greatly reduced emissions of criteria pollutants, yet further
tightening is underway. Even before the latest ozone standard
is fully implemented, EPA is tightening still further, 2 years
ahead of the statutory schedule. Collectively, the revisions of
all the National Ambient Air Quality Standards rules could cost
the forest products industry over $8 billion in capital costs.
These constantly changing air quality regulations impede
rational, long-term decisions about capital spending,
particularly for projects that do not return profits to the
bottom line.
So what are we asking? Well, we applaud the subcommittee's
effort to address the impacts of EPA regulations, and we
believe Congress needs to act. As you know, EPA requested from
the court an extension of a deadline for finalizing the Boiler
MACT rules to get them right. The court did not grant this
request. We would respectfully request that Congress act to
stay the final Boiler MACT rules until EPA does get it right,
reset the date for defining resources, allow facilities more
time to comply, clarify that renewable and recyclable materials
are traditional fuels, and ensure that the rules are achievable
and less burdensome.
We also urge this committee to continue its efforts to
shine light on the impact of EPA regulations facing
manufacturers over the next decade. The threat of continued
erosion of global economic competitiveness in the United States
is real. Contributing to transparency and analysis of the
impacts of regulations on the United States is critical to a
future healthy and robust economy.
In summary, we know that the current wave of pending new
regulations is unsustainable. This uncertain regulatory
environment not only costs current jobs, but it also prevents
new jobs from being created. The tangled web of rules impedes
investment and too often leads to the decision not to invest,
or companies simply invest overseas. Others roll the dice,
hoping today's rules will change by the time their project is
completed. Investments in energy efficient projects, mill
modernization programs, and new biomass boilers already have
been affected by rules such as Boiler MACT. Unfortunately, it
is easier to see the jobs that are lost after the fact, but the
greatest damage may be unknowable. The projects never built,
the products never made, the jobs never created.
Thank you for listening, and for your willingness to help.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Krouskop follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. Mr. Papadopoulos, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ARIS PAPADOPOULOS

Mr. Papadopoulos. Mr. Chairman and committee members, my
name is Aris Papadopoulos. I serve as CEO of Titan America, a
cement manufacturer and concrete----
Mr. Whitfield. Would you turn your microphone on?
Mr. Papadopoulos [continuing]. United States employing over
2,000 Americans. I presently chair the Portland Cement
Association that represents 97 percent of U.S. cement capacity
with nearly 100 manufacturing plants in 36 States and
distribution in 50.
Cement is to concrete what nails are to wood. It is the
glue that holds together our bridges, roads, dams, schools, and
hospitals. At $6.5 billion combined revenue, we are a
relatively small industry, but without us, the entire trillion
dollar construction economy would come to a halt. Without
cement, our already deteriorating infrastructure would continue
to degrade to unsafe levels, along with our communities and
quality of life.
The Great Recession hit our industry hard. Cement demand
dropped in half. Profitability has been wiped out. Yet, we
sought neither handouts nor bailouts. We cut costs, which sadly
included more than 4,000 jobs. What remains are 15,000 well-
paying jobs, with average compensation of $75,000, and a higher
presentation of minorities.
This is a dynamic industry. In its century-long history,
cement producers have demonstrated commitment to continuous
improvement and environmental stewardship. Many of our
facilities have existed for over half a century, and we have
never seen any empirical data of the health impacts that Mr.
Walke referred to. In fact, the only proof that EPA has
presented are computer-generated models that only have helped
to generate more fear.
In the decade prior to this recession, we invested tens of
millions of dollars in modernizing and expanding facilities
with state-of-the-art technologies that significantly cut
energy intensity. Today, the U.S. has a world class cement
industry, which recycles 12 million tons a year of industrial
and urban byproducts like tires, fly ash, and wood chips that
would otherwise be land-filled; however, recent regulations put
all of this at risk.
In a time when our industry is crippled by recession, the
EPA has bombarded us with multiple regulations that we believe
both undermine economic recovery and damage the long-term
environment. Several rules in particular pose immediate
damage--danger to the industry. Referring to their acronyms,
NESHAP, with a 2013 compliance deadline, and CISWI plus a
companion to the definition of recycled materials threaten to
destroy the industry's recycling success story.
NESHAP would cause 18 cement plants to shut down during the
next 2 years. This rule as written is technically and
economically unachievable, in fact, setting standards demanded
by no other country in the world, even advanced European
countries. The net result would be reduction of domestic
capacity. When the market demand recovers, it would be met by
imported cement. This means losing thousands more American
jobs. Furthermore, shifting production overseas to places that
have far lower standards than ours increases emissions,
emissions that EPA itself admits will eventually travel to and
fall in the U.S.
EPA needs to wake up and stop treating our industry as if
we are utilities, realizing that we are not assured to return
on capital, and production can move overseas. These regulations
represent a hidden tax imposed on domestic production. PCA
recently completed a study analyzing the impacts of EPA rules
and concludes that NESHAP and CISWI rules impose a combined
compliance burden of $5.4 billion in the next 4 years, equal to
85 percent of the industry's total annual sales, while
increasing production costs by 20 percent. NESHAP and CISWI
would force almost 25 percent of U.S. plants to shut down. We
could lose an additional 4,000 jobs. Assuming economic recovery
through 2015, reduced capacity will raise foreign imports to 56
percent of U.S. consumption.
These EPA rules make investing in the U.S. unattractive for
overseas. In the end, neither the economy nor the environment
win. American jobs and investment are lost, while more
pollutants are emitted offshore. Less recycling leads to more
land-filling. Dependence on foreign cement follows the road of
dependence on foreign energy. The combined effects of
increasing global demand for construction materials and cement
being more cumbersome to import than oil will mean that
shortages and price volatility become more common. This could
hurt the entire construction economy, with impacts on
infrastructure, housing, commerce, and jobs.
As to infrastructure, I would like to share with you some
positive news. Recently lifecycle assessment research by MIT
confirms that cement and concrete can play a key role in
mitigating greenhouse gas emissions by building truly
sustainable roads and structures. We are the battery in the
sustainable infrastructure Prius. It follows that we would want
to produce these strategic materials here in the U.S. to the
benefit of both economy and environment.
Congress needs to step up and take back legislative
ownership by establishing win-win policies like those suggested
by MIT's research, create a climate that encourages rather than
discourages domestic investment by taking immediate action to
address onerous regulations and place a near term moratorium on
more rules. With construction sector unemployment near 30
percent, Congress must craft legislation that replaces harmful
regulations with policies that promote job growth, investment
certainty, responsible environmental stewardship, and
collaboration. This will revive private sector confidence,
create good jobs for Americans, and restore economic
prosperity.
Thank you for this opportunity. I would be happy to answer
any questions.
[The statement of Mr. Papadopoulos follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Papadopoulos. We appreciate
the testimony of everyone on the panel, and Mr. Waxman has come
in so I am going to recognize him for 5 minutes for his opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for recognizing me and
for the courtesy of allowing me to give this statement out of
the usual order.
Mr. Chairman, I fear that what we are seeing is another--in
a series of assaults on the Clean Air Act. Chairman Whitfield
announced yesterday that after the recess we will consider
legislation to delay implementation of the rules to reduce
toxic air pollution from utilities, boilers, and cement plants.
I think that would be a major setback for clean air. If we
delay these requirements to clean up toxic air pollution, our
children and many other Americans will suffer serious, and in
many cases, irreversible harm.
Toxic air pollution from power plants, industrial boiler,
and cement plants include mercury, lead, which harm brain
development in babies and children; arsenic, chromium and
nickel, which cause cancer; and acid gases, which damage the
lungs and contribute to asthma, bronchitis, and other chronic
respiratory disease, especially in children and seniors. These
facilities also emit particulate matter, which causes heart
attacks, strokes, asthma attacks, hospital admissions, and
premature death.
And these are big sources of pollution. Power plants are
the largest source of mercury air pollution in the country.
Boilers are the second largest source of mercury air pollution.
And guess what? Cement plants are the third largest source of
mercury air pollution in the country.
A few weeks ago when this committee reported legislation to
repeal EPA's authority to reduce carbon pollution, my
Republican colleagues argued that they weren't trying to weaken
the Clean Air Act. They weren't trying to block regulations to
stop toxic emissions, and they really do support clean air.
The chairman of the full committee said, and I quote,
``EPA's ability and obligation to regulate and mitigate air
pollutants like particulates that cause soot, ozone that causes
smog, carbon monoxide, lead, asbestos, chloroform, and almost
200 other air pollutants would be protected and preserved.''
That was last month. This month, they are directly
targeting EPA's ability to protect the public from these very
pollutants.
Let us be clear. Delaying these rules will hurt a large
number of people, especially children. Cleaning up cement
plants will avoid 17,000 cases of aggravated asthma and 1,500
heart attacks each year. Cleaning up boilers will avoid 2,600
and 6,600 premature deaths, 4,100 heart attacks, 4,400 hospital
and emergency room visits each year. And cleaning up power
plants will avoid somewhere between 7,000 and 17,000 premature
deaths, 11,000 heart attacks, and 120,000 cases of aggravated
asthma each year.
For every year these rules are delayed, thousands of
Americans will die prematurely. Each year there will be over
150,000 cases of aggravated asthma, and many of them children.
There will be 1.3 million additional lost days of work.
It has been 40 years since we adopted the Clean Air Act,
and the three industries that are the largest sources of toxic
air pollution in the country still don't have to use readily
available technology to clean it up. American families have
waited long enough.
Over the years when I worked on clean air, I have heard
complaints about the costs of regulation more times than I can
count, and every time, once we set the standards, industry
applied American ingenuity and technical know-how and gets the
job done, almost always below the projected costs. I have every
confidence that they will do it again here.
But that won't happen if Congress repeals or blocks the
Clean Air Act and stops EPA from doing its job. Some of these
regulations have been delayed over a decade, and it is time
that we let EPA get on with its job.
I yield back the balance of my time, and thank you so much,
Mr. Chairman, for allowing me this opportunity to make my
statement.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Waxman. I think the last
amendments to the Clean Air Act were 1990, and I do think
Congress has a responsibility to review these acts and even
make changes when necessary, and one of the reasons we have had
these hearings is to try to get the testimony of different
groups to see what they think about it.
I would ask Mr. Fanning and Mr. Earley, just to start off
with, Mr. Waxman, who is quite familiar with the Clean Air Act,
said that technology is readily available to meet this utility
MACT standard, and also said that historically industry gets
the job done below anticipated costs. Would you all react to
that, those two statements?
Mr. Earley. Yes, Mr. Chairman, a couple of observations.
First of all, the Clean Air Act amendments of 1990 gave us
tremendous flexibility. The concept of emissions allowances
gave us the opportunity to schedule the addition of new
environmental controls over a timeframe that made sense to
minimize costs. This rule does not give us that flexibility. It
is on a very tight timeframe that is going to drive costs up
and actually strain the ability to actually install the
equipment because of limitations on people and equipment and
the like.
The second issue is around the availability of technology.
As I mentioned in my testimony, with respect to acid gasses,
the EPA assumes that dry sorbent injection technology will
achieve the standards that they have set, and yet, they admit
that it is based on one 3-week study on one particular type of
boiler. Well, in our industry there are dozens of different
boiler types and when you start injecting materials into the
boiler, it does have an impact on how the system operates. We
have no assurance that that technology is going to work. I
don't think it is appropriate to bet millions or billions of
dollars on a technology that may or may not work. It doesn't
make sense.
That is why time will give us a chance to ensure whether
that technology does, in fact, work, or whether those
technologies are not going to work and we have to look for
something else.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Fanning?
Mr. Fanning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
These standards that are proposed are unlike any other that
has been proposed, and unlike acid rain, NOx, CARE rule, the
Clean Air Interstate rule, these standards require compliance
with unit specific emissions by a specified date, and that date
would appear to be unreasonable.
When you think about the evaluation period that we have for
this rule, 60 days for a 1,000 page proposed regulation, with
1,000 pages of underlying documentation, some of which we
haven't even seen yet, it is not clear that the science being
proposed will, in fact, work. There are significant
disagreements that we have, nod I must say that Southern
Company is by far the leader in our industry in proprietary
research and development. We have deployed over $10 billion--
will have deployed over $10 billion of environmental control
equipment. We have developed our own environmental control
equipment that performs at levels well in excess of industry
standards and is able to be deployed 10 to 20 percent cheaper
that what our peers are able to do.
We don't believe that some of the levels that are proposed
are workable, and I think just following on what Tony said, I
think that when you consider what the EPA has proposed in terms
of what will be required as a result of this rule, 24,000
megawatts of scrubbers, I think the number will be more like
80. They have a very low number for what might be the
retirements, and therefore will have to replace that generation
to provide reliability for the benefit of our customers. We
think that number is going to be 70 to 80,000. So this is a
very different landscape.
Mr. Whitfield. OK, thank you, Mr. Fanning.
Mr. Dingell, I yield to you.
Mr. Dingell. You are most courteous, Mr. Chairman.
This question, just yes or no. To our last two witnesses
who commented here, Mr. Fanning and Mr. Earley, what you are
really telling us is you need more time to see to it that the
requirements that are imposed upon you will, in fact, work, and
give you a solution that's in the public interest as opposed to
just big expenditure money. Is that right?
Mr. Earley. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your
courtesy.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. Mr. Papadopoulos, in your
testimony you had indicated that you would anticipate that
cement factories would actually close down if this rule is
implemented? Is that the case?
Mr. Papadopoulos. That is correct, Mr. Chairman, especially
particularly older plants----
Mr. Whitfield. Excuse me, bring it closer to you.
Mr. Papadopoulos. Yes, particularly older plants that
cannot really justify these large investments would be the ones
that close down. And plants that don't have the----
Mr. Whitfield. How many would that be?
Mr. Papadopoulos. Well, we are talking about 18 plants in
just one room, and probably another two or three plants from
the recent rule on waste, CISWI rule.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, my time is expired so I will recognize
the gentleman from Illinois for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. I thank the chairman.
Mr. Walke, I think it is, Mr. Fanning in his testimony is
being quoted as questioning the motivation of your group--Mr.
Bradley. Mr Bradley, Mr. Fanning in his testimony is being
quoted as questioning the motivation of your group. He said,
reportedly said that quote, ``Some companies see a chance to
increase their bottom lines when they reduce reliability and
higher costs that EPA regulations would produce.'' Can you
speak to the competitive advantage being realized today by
companies generating electricity from coal without any
environmental control? Sir, why do your companies support EPA
regulations to restrict emissions from generating plants? Are
you all reaping a windfall here?
Mr. Bradley. We've known that these regulations have been
coming for over 10 years. The vast majority of companies have
been planning ahead. The utility industry across the board has
taken measures in advance. As I indicated, 60 percent of the
capacity of the coal capability is already retrofitted with NOx
emissions. It has been widely deployed. The issue around direct
sorbent injection, I think, is a little outdated. We have seen
in the EPA's database--this is to control acid gasses--dozens
of sources that have been tested, dozens of plants that have
deployed the technology, and we have been real familiar with a
couple of plants that have tested the technology and believe it
is going to be the key to compliance.
The baghouse fabric filter undertakings are going to be
expensive, but they are doable. We think a lot of the
technology can be deployed in 2 to 3 years. But I have to
underscore the fact that every plant is different. Every plant
has to be treated with specific engineering and design
capabilities.
When it comes to reliability and reserve margins, we think
the place to go to assess that is the North American Electric
Reliability Council. At least in the southeast, they have
projected very healthy reserve margins over the course of the
future, 2014 to 2019. Given the history and the innovation that
the industry has brought to the table in the past, we believe
that there is no reason to introduce legislation to delay the
implementation of the Utility Toxins Rule.
Mr. Rush. Thank you.
Mr. Papadopoulos, it has been reported here, and I have a
copy of an article from the News and Observer, I guess this is
a local paper, about your company's ``ill-advised resort'' to
going to court. Are you familiar with what they call a SLAPP
suit?
Mr. Papadopoulos. I am sorry, Congressman, I didn't
understand your question.
Mr. Rush. I said are you familiar with what they--what is
being--what is termed a SLAPP suit?
Mr. Papadopoulos. No.
Mr. Rush. All right. A SLAPP suit is a suit by which a
company uses litigation to try to chill public protest against
a company or a project. I want to bring to your attention a
report that your company sued a pediatrician, Dr. Hill, and a
mom, Ms. Kayne Darrell, over statements they made opposing a
proposed Titan plant near Wilmington, North Carolina, and as I
understand it Ms. Darrell repeated allegations that had been
published in the press and Dr. Hill said that some people would
get sick and some would die if the plant was built, and they
made the statements at a county commissioner's meeting a year
earlier, and at the time they spoke Titan's permit application
said the plant would emit almost 1,500 tons of SO
2
,
over 2,000 tons of NOx, and about 350 tons of fine
particulates.
What do you say about this suit?
Mr. Papadopoulos. Honestly, I can't understand what you are
saying, Congressman. What is your question? Maybe----
Mr. Rush. Well, my question is, Do you believe in the
Constitution?
Mr. Papadopoulos. Excuse me?
Mr. Rush. Do you believe in the Constitution?
Mr. Papadopoulos. Of course.
Mr. Rush. Do you support the Constitution?
Mr. Papadopoulos. Did you ask if I swear to the
Constitution?
Mr. Rush. Do you support the Constitution?
Mr. Papadopoulos. Support, yes.
Mr. Whitfield. Your time is expired.
Recognize the chairman of the committee, Mr. Upton, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Fanning and Mr.
Earley, I guess Mr. Earley, in your testimony you talked about
if these utility MACT rules--if the timing stays 60 days to
review, begin to see and implement 1,000 pages of regulations.
You indicated in your testimony that you would be probably
forced to retire nearly one-third of your plants? Is that
accurate?
Mr. Earley. Yes, Mr. Chairman. We estimate between 20 and
30 percent of our capacity will have to be retired, if these
rules stay as they are.
Mr. Upton. And how fast would that have to occur?
Mr. Earley. That would have to happen over the next 4
years. There would not be enough time to build new capacity to
replace it, given the time table of this bill.
Mr. Upton. So we would have to purchase power from somebody
else?
Mr. Earley. We would be forced to purchase power on the
open market.
Mr. Upton. And how easy is that to do?
Mr. Earley. Well, if the power is available, it is easy to
do. What will happen is it will drive the price of electricity
on the market. The laws of supply and demand can't be repealed,
and we will be paying more and our customers will be paying
more for electricity.
Mr. Upton. And how much more do you think that would be?
Mr. Earley. Our estimate is that the overall cost to our
customers is in the range of 25 percent increase if these
regulations are implemented.
Mr. Upton. So as we come from Michigan where we are already
getting pounded with higher unemployment, this would add to
those costs in a pretty dramatic way?
Mr. Earley. Absolutely, Mr. Chairman, and remember, it is
on top of environmental controls that we already have installed
that our customers are paying for, and the multiple regulations
that are in the pipeline which will add to these costs. So it
will be a significant burden for our customers that are
challenged and are struggling to recover from the Great
Recession.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Fanning, is that about the same case for
Southern Company, too?
Mr. Fanning. Yes, sir, we estimate the economic impact
would be an increase in prices of about 25 percent for the
southeast, and it would impair reliability potentially, which
hurts economic growth.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Papadopoulos, some of us suggest to clean it
up, some of us would say these regs come in, we will move them
out. Where is your competition for cement? What--who--what
other countries compete, Mexico and China? Are they your prime
competition?
Mr. Papadopoulos. Back when we had----
Mr. Upton. I don't know if your mic button is on.
Mr. Papadopoulos [continuing]. When we had a very strong
construction industry, let us say in 2005, the U.S. was
importing about one-third of its cement needs, and the
countries it was coming from, Asia was a big importer, China,
Thailand, Korea, countries in Latin America, Mexico----
Mr. Upton. What type of regulations do they have on
producers of cement in Mexico and China?
Mr. Papadopoulos. Well, they are moving but they are
decades behind us.
Mr. Upton. Decades behind us.
Mr. Papadopoulos. Decades behind us.
Mr. Upton. And what will the--if you kept all your
production in the U.S., what will the additional costs be?
Mr. Papadopoulos. Well, as we pointed out here through our
study is to comply with just a couple of these--and we don't
know if this is the end of the pipeline. This is a big
uncertainty in our industry and probably other industries. It
is going to take $5.5 billion, 85 percent of our annual sales.
It is, on the other hand, not even going to help our costs. It
is actually going to increase our costs by 20 percent, making
us even less competitive with imports from overseas.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Fanning, could you walk me through the
``Frankenplant'' exercise that you cited in your testimony?
Mr. Fanning. I am sorry, could you state it again?
Mr. Upton. The ``Frankenplant''?
Mr. Fanning. Oh, yes, sir. So a lot of the design
characteristics that would follow the implementation of a MACT
for different kids of emissions are designed to provide a MACT
for one and then another and then another. It does not take
into account the consolidated impact of all the emissions and
therefore a single design.
What they would do is pull together the maximum available
control technologies for each different design, and therefore
create a plant, frankly, that may not be workable. That is why
we use the phrase ``Frankenplant''.
Mr. Upton. Mr. Kempf, I confess I am a Michigan man.
Mr. Kempf. That is OK.
Mr. Upton. I will be in South Bend tomorrow. That is where
my plane comes in. I vote for the Irish in a lot of different
ways. Great university. We have a very good rivalry, as you
know, and as I visit some of my universities, Western Michigan
University as an example, I visited their power plant.
So you have spent $20 million on your facility in the last
10 years?
Mr. Kempf. Correct, that was our activity to achieve the
original MACT that was promulgated.
Mr. Upton. And it does not comply with these regs?
Mr. Kempf. Well, the equipment that we purchased, obviously
we sought a margin of compliance below the limit so we are in
the '04 rule, but the new limits that are proposed are below
the guarantees that we achieved from the manufacturers of the
equipment.
Mr. Upton. Thank you, and my time is expired.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman's time is expired. Chair now
recognized Chairman Emeritus Waxman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There was testimony, Mr. Fanning told us that ``The major
flaw in EPA's analysis is that it makes overly optimistic
assumptions about the effectiveness and availability of certain
control technologies,'' specifically, dry sorbent injection, or
DSI. Mr. Earley's testimony stated that EPA makes its
determination about DSI based on one 3-week trial. Mr. Bradley,
what can you tell us about DSI?
Mr. Bradley. I can tell you that I am not exactly sure how
EPA judged its estimate on DSI. I can also tell you that in the
NEDS database, you can look and see that dozens of units have
been retrofitted with direct sorbent injection. These typically
are smaller units, but it is a key component to achieving
compliance with the standards.
Mr. Waxman. So it is already in use?
Mr. Bradley. Absolutely.
Mr. Waxman. I see. It is my understanding that the
industry's cost assumptions and projected retirements depend on
DSI not being available as EPA projects. Could you elaborate?
Is that----
Mr. Bradley. Certainly. I think there have been a variety
of analyses looking at this situation, prior to EPA proposing
the rule. Now that the rule is out and the standards are set,
and the standards are not as aggressive as I anticipated--this
is for mercury, for PM and for acid gases--and they introduced
quite a bit of flexibility that I think a lot of folks in the
industry didn't anticipate. When you take all that into
account, I think you are going to see the costs are going to be
lower than what has been projected, and certainly the
retirements will be less.
I think it is important to recognize that NERC looked at
retirements prior to EPA's rule coming out, and their
projection is in the range of 15 gigawatts. If you look at
EPA's estimate plus what they saw happening naturally due to
economic drivers like low gas prices, they are pretty much in
the same range. But you know, it probably is going to be on the
lower side of the ranges that have been proposed previous to
the rule.
Mr. Waxman. Well, Southern Company disagrees with you. Now
that we have heard from Southern on this topic before today, in
2004, Southern weighed in on EPA's first attempt to reduce
mercury from power plants. They said that mercury control
technologies were not commercially available and that the
industry couldn't meet standards based on such controls. In
fact, Southern official Larry Monroe stated, and I want to
quote him, ``With straining to do it, it is in the 2015 to 2018
timeframe that industry can get there.'' Three years later,
without any EPA requirements to use mercury specific control
technology, it was already in use on 11 units. Today, almost
100 units are using the technology. These standards could and
should have been adopted years ago, and if industry hadn't said
the cleanup couldn't be done, we would have already done it.
Mr. Walke, can you explain how these rules have been
delayed? Why have we seen delay after delay?
Mr. Walke. Yes, Congressman Waxman. The rules were delayed
in the 1990s due to lateness in carrying out steps that
Congress had demanded in the 1990 amendments to report to you
all about the dangers of toxic pollution from power plants. But
then EPA Administrator Browner in 2000 made a finding that
should have required those standards to be adopted--to go into
effect about 4 years later. Instead, the Bush administration
did a total U-turn and adopted a rule that was struck down in
2008, consuming the entire 8 years of its two terms, preventing
any regulation of arsenic, lead, and the rest from power
plants. In fact----
Mr. Waxman. Rather than get going and getting this
accomplished, we saw delays. Industry pushed for delays.
Mr. Walke. I have to say there was strong pressure from
some of my co-panelists to prevent EPA from adopting those
regulations, and the Bush administration succumbed to that
pressure and decided to do that.
Mr. Waxman. And the courts rejected their arguments.
Mr. Walke. Not only did a court with Republican and
Democratic appointees reject the arguments, but in fact they
quoted Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland for the absurdity of
the legal argument that the Bush EPA had relied upon in
unanimously rejecting that rule.
Mr. Waxman. Well, at last EPA's proposed a defensible
standard. It is consistent with the Clean Air Act. It would
save thousands of lives, prevent brain damage in untold numbers
of children. I don't think we should be shocked to see the
industry here today asking for as long as 10 years delay. These
rules have been delayed long enough and industry has had plenty
of notice. We must not deny our children these protections any
longer.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Barton, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me say it at the beginning that I will stipulate that
mercury is a poison and a pollutant and SO
2
is a
pollutant and these new standards, if adopted, would reduce
those pollutants. I will stipulate that.
Having said that, it is a puzzlement to me that if you look
at the indices for air quality in the United States, according
to the criteria of pollutants that are covered under the Air
Quality Act, our air quality is improving almost everywhere in
the country. In the areas it is not, it is primarily places
like Southern California where you have just a tremendous
number of people and huge number of mobile sources and a
geography that traps the pollution from tailpipes, and it is
just very, very difficult to clean that up.
So you know, if you look at the facts and then you look at
these proposed standards, I will even stipulate that they will
make the improvement in the pollution control. The question is,
Is it worth the cost? And if you want to know what the cost is,
just look at what happened at the TVA yesterday. TVA announced
a settlement with EPA that is going to close 18 of their coal
boilers, close one of their coal-fired power plants, reduce the
amount of electricity capacity by 16 percent. They also agreed
to spend an additional $5 billion in the next few years on the
plants they are not closing and the boilers they are not
closing.
If we adopt these standards, that is what you are going to
see across America. The other plants are just going to close
because it just doesn't make sense to spend the money, and you
don't get the environmental--I stipulate you get the cleanup in
terms of lowering emissions, but there is not a real health
benefit.
Now I want to apologize to you, Mr. Wade--Walke--Wade----
Mr. Walke. Walke, Congressman.
Mr. Barton. Walke, I am sorry. I am not being facetious.
Mr. Walke. No, sir.
Mr. Barton. We tried to get the EPA here and they wouldn't
come, so you are the next best thing, OK?
Mr. Walke. I am not sure how I feel about that, Congressman
Barton, but----
Mr. Barton. It is not personal, I assure you.
Mr. Walke. I will not take it personal.
Mr. Barton. But you were saying----
Mr. Rush. Will the gentleman yield just for a moment?
Mr. Barton. Very briefly.
Mr. Rush. I see the gentleman refer to we tried to get the
EPA to come. I just think that that is consistent with what we
have been experiencing in the last couple months. We have given
the EPA proper notice, and I know they have got a lot of
employees over there, but they have very few employees who have
this kind of expertise and who are supervisors who--that is the
reason why Chairman Waxman and I----
Mr. Barton. They have had since November, the first Tuesday
in November to get ready, Mr. Rush, and we have had a number of
hearings. I would encourage you to encourage them to show up so
we don't have to----
Mr. Rush. With all due respect to the emeritus and the
Members on our side, we sometimes--we don't get notice until
the last minute, so we have to scramble and we are here in the
same building and operating in very close contact with you, and
we have to----
Mr. Barton. Reclaiming the time, and I would ask unanimous
consent for 3 additional minutes, or at least 2. I don't know
how long Mr. Rush took, but I have some pretty important
questions I would like to ask.
Mr. Rush. I have no objection.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
Mr. Barton. OK. Now let us go back to you, Mr. Walke.
In your testimony, you say that these standards would save
17,000 lives in terms of premature deaths a year, I think. Is
that not correct?
Mr. Walke. That is taken from EPA's projecting that up to
17,000.
Mr. Barton. You stipulate it is a number you got from
somewhere else?
Mr. Walke. Yes, sir.
Mr. Barton. I want to ask every private sector individual
here, I will start with Mr. Fanning. How many cases in your
company were there last year of mercury poisoning reported?
Mr. Fanning. None that I know of.
Mr. Barton. Does anybody know of any mercury poisoning
because of emissions from any of your plants? Do you know how
many there were in the country last year? Zero. What about
SO
2
, any of you have any history in your plants of
SO
2
poisoning? We cut SO
2
emissions by 50
percent in the last decade, and this, if implemented, cuts it
another 50 percent but takes it from four million tons a year
annually to two million.
Now Mr. Walke, again, it is not your statistic, but it is
reported all the time. There is absolutely nothing to back it
up.
Mr. Walke. Congressman Barton, let me----
Mr. Barton. Do you know how many--let me ask you. How many
pounds of mercury is omitted from an average 500 megawatt coal
plant a year?
Mr. Walke. Congressman Barton, those are attributed to
deadly soot pollution----
Mr. Barton. Do you know the number?
Mr. Walke [continuing]. Not mercury, so I want to be clear
on the basis for my claim. It is particulate matter that kills
people. EPA is not claiming----
Mr. Barton. All right, then let us see that backed up.
Mr. Walke. OK, I would be happy to, and that is a great
thing for this committee to convene a hearing on with the
National Academy of Science----
Mr. Barton. Every 500 megawatt coal-fired power plant
produces 3 pounds of mercury a year, 3 pounds. According to Mr.
Walke's testimony, these standards reduce that 91 percent.
Well, that is great. So you go from 3 pounds a year per plant
to .3 pounds per plant, but that is per year.
Now to actually cause poisoning or a premature death, you
have to get a large concentration of mercury into the body. I
am not a medical doctor, but my hypothesis is that is not going
to happen. You are not going to get enough mercury exposure or
SO
2
exposure or even particulate matter exposure. I
think the EPA numbers are pulled out of the thin air, and I am
going to ask that we send an official document to EPA. Let us
back them up, because the entire premise for going forward with
these standards is that you get such a tremendous ratio of
benefits to cost because they claim, according to Mr. Walke's
testimony, which he is an honest man and he has got it from
somewhere, is $140 billion annually. But if you really don't
have the benefit because you are not having the medical
negative, but you really have the cost--and if you don't think
the costs are real, just look at how many factories are closing
and going to Mexico and China. Look at the population of Mr.
Dingell's home city, Detroit, Michigan. It has fallen by 40
percent, I think, in the last 20 years. If you don't think
those are real--so if we are going to have a real debate about
these standards, Mr. Chairman, we need to start getting some
real numbers from the EPA and getting the EPA up here--if it
takes Mr. Rush's help, Mr. Dingell, Mr. Waxman's, because if
their benefits are not real and the costs are real, we are
absolutely wrong to force these standards.
And with that, I have overextended even my extended time,
and I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Well thank you. I might mention to the
gentleman that there was an article in University of Michigan
Law Review recently not too long ago that was quite critical of
the method used by EPA in calculating health benefits.
Mr. Barton. That is why we need the EPA here.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Michigan, Mr. Dingell, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you and I thank you for
your courtesy in yielding to me earlier. I would like to
welcome my old friend Mr.--constituent friend. He heads a very
fine public spirited company and I would like to ask him this
question. Is there a difference between what DTE has been able
to do at several power plants in my district? I know that you
have been making significant investments as you referenced in
your testimony to upgrade the environmental performance of
these facilities, and I know that there are some problems in
what is being contemplated under the proposed rules. Is that a
correct statement?
Mr. Earley. That is correct.
Mr. Dingell. All right. Now tell us what the differences
are between EPA and DTE, and what it is they are requiring you
to do and what it is you believe would be in the best economic
interest of the company, and if it will repair industry jobs in
Michigan.
Mr. Earley. Well, Mr. Chairman, the prior Clean Air Act
amendments of 1990 gave us tremendous flexibility in terms
about timing and the ability to sequence adding equipment by
the ability to go out and buy allowances on the market. So as
you know, we have spent several billion dollars at our Monroe
power plant, but we didn't have to build all of the equipment
at once. We were able to phase it in over time.
This rule will require every single unit on our plant to
comply by a specific date. That will drive the costs up and it
will force us, in many cases, up to 25 percent of our coal-
fired power plants will have to be shut down because it will
just not be economic.
The other point that I know you are aware of, we talk about
imposing these requirements on utilities, we are imposing on
our customers. For a utility, this is an opportunity for
investment. Economically, we are not hurt by it as a regulated
utility, but our customers----
Mr. Dingell. What you are telling us they are forcing you
to make investments that are not in the best interest of your
customers for a momentary gain which, if you could go forward
with your regular construction plans and improvement plans you
would not make and you would serve better your customers and
produce just as much clean air, but at a much lower energy cost
and at a much lower emission of CO2? Is that right?
Mr. Earley. That is absolutely correct.
Mr. Dingell. Very good. I would like to have you submit a
bit more on that answer so that we have that in the record.
Now if--let us see. As I understand, then, that there are
several older electrical generating facilities that are
scheduled to be shuttered in the next decade, and as you have
indicated, that that shuttering will be hurried up and you will
be compelled essentially to move instead of to nuclear, which
you are contemplating doing, moving to natural gas combined
cycle generating systems. Is that right?
Mr. Earley. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. And that constitutes a complete change in the
investment plans that you have in the company, is that right?
Mr. Earley. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Very good. Now, these questions for Mr. Walke
and Mr. Krouskop. It is my understand that EPA requested
additional time for the rule. Is that right?
Mr. Krouskop. For the boilers rule, yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. All right, and you agree with that statement,
Mr. Earley?
Mr. Earley. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Has industry filed a motion for a stay on the
Boiler MACT?
Mr. Krouskop. We are continuing to work both from the
perspective with EPA for reconsideration, requesting a stay,
and also are considering from a judicial standpoint what are
options are for requesting a stay.
Mr. Dingell. I have been hearing that this would be a good
solution to the problem, that EPA would not oppose that kind of
step and that that would help us resolve the problem that lies
before us. Am I correct in that?
Mr. Krouskop. I think that it is generally correct. I think
EPA certainly indicated they needed quite considerable
additional time to get the rule right. At the same time,
though, there are some elements of the Boiler MACT rule which
EPA has been resistant to correcting the way we believe they
are, and that really is around the health-based compliance
alternative, which is part of the Clean Air Act, and we believe
that is appropriate.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you. I have got 9 seconds to ask this
question, Mr. Earley. So we can say here, Mr. Earley, as a
result of your testimony that the requirements of Utility MACT
go beyond your facilities and your jobs. In other words, there
is a potential for impacts to go well beyond the electrical
generating sector and to compel you to make business decisions
that may be well beyond and well different than what you had
made that may not be either in the interest of your consumers
or in the interest of the public and might very well result in
wasteful use of energy, and of capital. Is that a correct
statement?
Mr. Earley. That is correct, Chairman.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you, and I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Shimkus for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to go
quickly, too, to get through my questions. We wanted the EPA
back here again. We had them here yesterday in coal combustion
waste. There's a President Executive Order that says all the
new regulations have to comply with an economic analysis. What
we found out yesterday in the hearing is just even though EPA
does an economic analysis, they don't translate to that job
impact. So if there is an economic analysis there is going to
be a job impact, so we welcome EPA to hopefully coincide with
the President Executive Order doing an economic and a job
analysis, because that is what this is about, complying without
destroying jobs.
First thing, Mr. Bradley, have you ever designed a power
plant?
Mr. Bradley. Have I ever denied?
Mr. Shimkus. Designed.
Mr. Bradley. Designed, no.
Mr. Shimkus. Sited?
Mr. Bradley. No.
Mr. Shimkus. Built?
Mr. Bradley. No.
Mr. Shimkus. Raised capital to build one?
Mr. Bradley. No.
Mr. Shimkus. Conducted a payroll for the power plant?
Mr. Bradley. No.
Mr. Shimkus. Provided healthcare benefits for the
employees?
Mr. Bradley. No.
Mr. Shimkus. OK, thank you. In your written testimony on
page 4, you state that Constellation recently installed a major
air quality control system at its Brandon Shore facility, and
that construction was completed in 26 months. Now time is one
part of this debate, it is a key issue in implementation. Is
that an estimate? That construction took a little over 2 years,
is that accurate?
Mr. Bradley. The construction itself took 26 months.
Mr. Shimkus. And I would turn to and ask for unanimous
consent to put into the record an article that states that that
construction was at least a 3-year construction. So I would ask
you to re-look at that, because I don't think that is correct
in your testimony.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Bradley. I can provide you with more----
Mr. Shimkus. I would be happy to see whatever documentation
you have. The company says it was a 3-year construction, so
they dispute your opening statement.
Mr. Fanning and Mr. Earley, what happens if there is a race
to build in this 3-year timeframe on cost of equipment, metal,
employees? What happens to the overall cost of these projects?
Mr. Fanning. Well, they go up dramatically.
Mr. Shimkus. Dramatically, three-fold, four-fold?
Mr. Fanning. Sure.
Mr. Shimkus. And what happens to the cost to the consumer?
What are you going to have to do?
Mr. Fanning. Raise prices.
Mr. Shimkus. Does anyone dispute that? Mr. Earley, do you
dispute that?
Mr. Earley. No, I agree with Mr. Fanning on that.
Mr. Shimkus. OK, let me go to Mr. Kempf. I, too, have great
respect for the institution of Notre Dame. I am a Missouri
Lutheran. Hopefully I try to be devout--I am being serious
here.
In your opening statement, you say that the EPA has not
justified by corresponding environmental health protections
from reduction of hazardous air pollutants. So you are staking
Notre Dame's institutional position and it is very similar to
the comments by the Chairman Emeritus Barton on the whole
mercury debate, that 2 pounds versus .2 pounds, there is no
mercury poisoning reported last year. Aren't you staking the
university's position that there--these have, as you say, is
not justified by corresponding environment and health
protection from reduction of hazardous air pollutants?
Mr. Kempf. I don't know that I am the person who can make
that statement for the whole institution. I think our concern
is that we want to make sure that----
Mr. Shimkus. But you are making it for this--in this
testimony today----
Mr. Kempf. Correct.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. As the director of utilities.
Mr. Kempf. We are looking for a fair and balanced
regulation that we can achieve at a reasonable cost.
Mr. Shimkus. And I think that is part of this debate. Cost
benefit analysis, again, we welcome EPA to justify the loss of
jobs for negligible toxic emittent benefits. Negligible, zero.
Now, we could talk with Mr. Walke on particulate matter, but we
are using particulate matter to address toxicity. EPA is not
addressing toxicity. All this debate is on PM.
Mr. Walke, I don't want to go down this route, but you
raised it in your opening statement. You are concerned about
mercury contamination in the unborn child, is that correct?
That is part of your opening statement?
Mr. Walke. That was.
Mr. Shimkus. Does the NRDC have a position on abortion?
Mr. Walke. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Shimkus. And you know that is the destruction of--I
will use the pro-choice vocabulary--that is a fetus, right? An
unborn child is a fetus. You are concerned about the fetus and
mercury poisoning, but NRDC doesn't have a position on the
protection of a fetus on abortion? Is there a conflict here
between life and health?
Mr. Walke. I don't think there is a conflict, but----
Mr. Shimkus. I think there is a huge conflict, and I
would----
Mr. Walke. Fetus--neurotoxicity by mercury poisoning----
Mr. Shimkus. I would say that if NRDC is concerned about
mercury poisoning, then they ought to be concerned about the
destruction of human life in the process of abortion.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. Mr. Gonzalez, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have 5
minutes, and we have so many witnesses so I am going to employ
the John Dingell method, and that is just a yes or no answer.
We will start with Mr. Fanning. Do you believe that the Clean
Air Act should be repealed? I mean, let us just forget about
it. Let us just go straight to it. Is it relevant? Do we need
it? Should it be repealed? Yes or no.
Mr. Fanning. No.
Mr. Earley. No.
Mr. Bradley. No.
Mr. Kempf. No.
Mr. Walke. No.
Mr. Krouskop. No.
Mr. Papadopoulos. If repeal means upgrading it, yes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Are you for repealing it, just repealing it?
Mr. Papadopoulos. The Act is functional.
Mr. Gonzalez. See, you are an interested witness and I am
leading you, so it is a yes or no answer.
Mr. Papadopoulos. I am sure going to, thank you.
Mr. Gonzalez. Are you for repealing the Clean Air Act?
Mr. Papadopoulos. I am for replacing it with something
more----
Mr. Gonzalez. OK, you are for repealing, then you--that is
good. That is an honest answer. You are for repealing the Clean
Air Act. Now I am assuming that you said that--those that
answered no, is that it is still relevant and that EPA has the
responsibility to protect the public's health, and this is one
way of doing it. Should we disregard a rule that is promulgated
by EPA, simply based on the fact that it does add some cost to
protect the public's health? Yes or no, and we will start with
Mr. Fanning.
Mr. Fanning. You can't disregard it, but it needs to be
modified. The rule as proposed doesn't work from a timing
standpoint, first to understand what is in the rule, and
secondly to comply.
Mr. Gonzalez. I am actually going to get into that. I just
want general propositions so that we can maybe agree on some
things here.
Mr. Earley. I think as a general proposition as in cost
alone wouldn't justify, but there has to be benefits that are
consistent with the costs.
Mr. Gonzalez. Mr. Bradley?
Mr. Bradley. I agree with my colleague.
Mr. Kempf. I would agree that, you know, that we should be
expecting costs, and that is acceptable.
Mr. Gonzalez. Mr. Walke?
Mr. Walke. My answer is no, it is worth spending money to
protect children and to save lives.
Mr. Krouskop. Rules have to be achievable and affordable.
Mr. Papadopoulos. Cost is essential.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes or no, does the EPA have the expertise
presently to be able to promulgate rules that get the science
right, the technology right, and the cost right? Yes or no?
Mr. Fanning. I think they need to involve history--I mean,
industry. They can't do it by themselves.
Mr. Earley. Alone they don't have all the expertise.
Mr. Bradley. Yes, they have the expertise.
Mr. Kempf. Not in a vacuum.
Mr. Walke. Yes.
Mr. Krouskop. Alone they don't have the expertise.
Mr. Papadopoulos. A very strong no.
Mr. Gonzalez. All right. You expect us as Members of
Congress to basically listen to one side or the other's
experts. It has been my experience it just depends who the
expert is basically representing at that point, because they
are defending their opinions. Should we just be listening to
industry's experts or just EPA's experts? How do we determine
which is a legitimate source of good, solid information?
Because I am going to tell you right now, we will argue up here
over whether there is climate change taking place and we will
even argue over evolution. So good luck. Who do we listen to,
industry or EPA? Whose experts? Should we have some other
referee other than Congress? And I am not trying to shirk our
duty, I am just telling you the stuff that you present to us is
really many times incomprehensible because we are not experts,
and we expect that experts from industry and experts from EPA
are going to give us an honest opinion, but you guys don't
agree, so who do we listen to? I only have 30 seconds. Tell me
who should we have as the disinterested third-party expert?
Mr. Fanning. Congressman, I think you are making a great
point that--for the need to review this rule and debate with
EPA its ramifications in a reasonable timeframe. I think that
is why we need more than 60 days in order to really understand
1,000 pages of a proposed rule and 1,000 pages of documentation
underlying it.
Mr. Gonzalez. Mr. Fanning, my time is up, and to the other
witnesses, if you could supply that answer. You tell me who
that referee, that disinterested third-party expert--I am not
adverse to extensions of time to get people that are impacted
time to comply and understand and evaluate, but when we do
that, I also want to know that you just won't be asking for
more time.
Thank you very much, and I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman from Oregon is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Chairman, first of all thank you for
holding these hearings on these rules. I was kind of amazed the
other day when we had one of these hearings to hear I believe
it was a witness from the EPA talking about the job creation
that is going to come from all of these regulations. Having
been a small business owner for over 20 years, I am always
astounded when the government puts on a rule that is very
expensive and calls that job creation. They don't look at the
other side of the equation. In my district, Mr. Papadopoulos,
we have a cement plant that Ashgrove, I believe, owns. They
have invested $20 million installing and activating a carbon
injection system. They have optimized their ACI to achieve 95
percent reductions in emissions, and EPA wants them to go to
98.5 percent, and the rule requires them to sustain those
reductions over a 30-day average. So even if you have a little
blip, you are out of compliance. There are 116 jobs on the
line, most of them union. This is Baker County's largest single
taxpayer and employer, and puts $9 million into the economy.
Now I know some of my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle say oh, that doesn't matter because they are not really
for jobs in the private sector anyway, some days, I believe.
This is going to devastate the economy and the economy of the
rural eastern Oregon county I represent. The difference between
95 percent and 98.5 percent is the equivalent of less than a
teaspoon of mercury a day. Over that, we probably are going to
lose this plant and those manufacturing jobs, and will end up
importing more cement from China.
So Mr. Papadopoulos, do you believe the EPA should exercise
its authority to use the flexibility provided in the Clean Air
Act amendments of 1990, flexibility that issued sub-categories?
Mr. Papadopoulos. I think this is a very important
question----
Mr. Walden. Please turn on your mic there, sir.
Mr. Papadopoulos [continuing]. For our industry, because we
are different from power generation and other industries in
that we depend on the raw materials that exist there on the
site, what Mother Nature has provided the cement plants. These
raw materials come in perfect, and therefore there is a whole
wide range of outcomes when you use those raw materials. It
would make absolute sense for the EPA to say let us look at the
specific environment in which categories the plants are, and
let us work with industry.
I think to answer some of the questions, we need a win/win
collaboration with government----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Papadopoulos [continuing]. Not a win/lose litigation,
fighting heavy-handed, you know----
Mr. Walden. Job killing. Can I throw in job killing in that
process?
Mr. Papadopoulos. Job killing. Germany has done that. The
reason--because I worked internationally, the reason Germany
today is the global powerhouse along with China is because
Germany has a win/win attitude working between government and
industry. We need to bring that process back here to the U.S.
This is a prime example of a company actually doing the right
thing and in the end, getting penalized.
Mr. Walden. And by the way, they met the requirements, I am
led to understand, that the State of Oregon had put in place
prior to these new requirements coming out from the EPA. And
then the State wouldn't even back them up with the EPA. It was
really, really quite frustrating and remains so.
I got to tell you, I represent a district where I have got
counties that have been averaging 15 and 16 percent
unemployment for way too long. We have 55 percent of the land
out there is owned by the Federal Government and mismanaged or
not managed at all. There are groups, some of them represented
at this table, who could care less about the livelihood of the
men and women who live out in these forested communities who
are fighting us on biomass, turning wooded biomass into
productive, renewable energy. They would rather let the forest
get overstocked, bug infested, rot and die, and then catch fire
and burn. They wouldn't let us go in. They go in and sue us to
go in and cut the burn dead trees while they still have value.
These are not environmentalists. I don't know what they are,
but they are sure destroying my part of the world and the
economy there.
We can find good partnerships. My State has led the way in
environmental activism in a positive way, in most cases. I am
going to tell you, these new federal rules are shutting down
everything that matters out there in my part of the world. The
new particulate rules on dust--how about in eastern Oregon? I
mean, we grow they'd probably have to drag a mister behind
their machinery in order to hold the dust down. We wouldn't
call it dry land farming if we had that much water. This
administration is killing more jobs in rural communities than
prior administrations combined. This President doesn't
understand what his own folks are doing. I have about had it,
and so have the people I represent.
So we are going to go after this agency. We are going to
bring some damn common sense to the process and these groups
that are killing the folks out there, they need to have some
skin in the game and not just use these things as big
fundraising efforts, which is what generally happens. There is
common sense here. We can get America working again. We can get
back on our feet out there, if you will just let us.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Walden. At this time, the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Fanning, Mr. Bradley testified that the installation of
control technology can occur in 26 months. Southern has found
that scrubbers average 54 months to install. Can you explain
the apparent discrepancy?
Mr. Fanning. I would be glad to, thank you. In fact, it is
interesting to look at the actual permit application for the
constellation scrubber that they refer to. When they made the
application, they sought approval for the scrubber and cited a
41- to 46-month installation schedule. I think the confusion
probably arises from the fact that when you consider adding new
equipment, you have got to go through the whole process of
design, permit, and then build. I think the confusion in the
26-month reference only relates to when you start to break down
and actually build the plant. When you put in new facilities,
you need to take into account the design characteristics of the
unit in question, the permits that need to be applied for and
received, and then ultimately specific site engineering and
construction.
Mr. Green. What is the lag time on the permits? Once you
get the permit in there, how long does it take to get a permit?
Mr. Fanning. Well, that is certainly, you know, matters on
State to State, because these are generally State issues at
that point.
Mr. Green. Do you have an average?
Mr. Fanning. Round numbers, I don't know, 12 to 18 months.
Mr. Green. OK, so anywhere from a year to a year and a
half?
Mr. Earley. We think 18 months is probably a working
number.
Mr. Green. Thank you. This is a question for Mr. Fanning,
Mr. Earley, and Mr. Bradley.
EPA estimates that 10 gigawatts of coal-fired power will
retire rather than install controls. Can each of you state
whether you agree with that conclusion?
Mr. Earley. We disagree with that conclusion. We think it
is going to be a much larger number.
Mr. Green. Do you have any idea? I mean, I know we are just
guessing, but----
Mr. Earley. Yes, I think it is going to be more in the
range of 50 to 75.
Mr. Fanning. Yes, we think it is--70,000 to 80,000 is what
we think, and the answer is really pretty simple. They believe
dry sorbent injection is going to solve one problem, and it
actually creates another. It creates a particulate matter
problem that would need to be dealt with. It will not be a
widespread solution.
Mr. Green. OK, Mr. Bradley?
Mr. Bradley. Yes, I think 10 gigawatts is on the low side.
I think EPA targeted that specifically to the Utility Toxics
Rule. I think they have acknowledged that more retirements will
happen through just market pressures.
I think it is also important to go back and reassess the
retirement issue based on the proposal itself and the
flexibility that is included. The--certainly NERC is more on
the ballpark with EPA, but I think it is going to be hard to
project exactly what is driving retirements. Is it singly the
Utility MACT rule or is it low natural gas prices, depression
of demand, the inefficiency of some of these old plants?
Mr. Green. OK. This question, Mr. Fanning, in your
testimony you say that ``EPA goes to set limits separately for
individual pollutants using different sets of best performing
plants. EPA's resulting suite of emission limits does not
reflect the performance of any existing plant, but instead
reflects the performance of so-called 'Frankenplant,' one
consisting of mixed-suite performance characteristics that do
not represent the technology applications across all pollutants
for that individual facility.'' Mr. Earley, do you agree with
Mr. Fanning's statement?
Mr. Earley. I agree with that.
Mr. Green. OK. Mr. Bradley, you argue that the EPA proposal
is based on standards performance that is already achieved by
existing plants, so how do you respond to Mr. Fanning's
statement about the ``Frankenplant''?
Mr. Bradley. I would be happy to submit for the record a
list of plants that are documented in EPA's database that are
based on data that companies submitted, and there are 27 units
and 16 plants in that database that--preliminary analysis of
ours that represent both sub-bituminous, bituminous, and even
one lignite plant that currently meet the standards.
Mr. Green. I would appreciate that. In my 26 seconds, Mr.
Fanning, you talked about the delay--and I know there are other
questions from other Members--can you specifically talk about
how long do you think it would take to need to implement the
rule? I know 30 days is too short, 60, what is the time? I know
Congressman Gonzalez mentioned that.
Mr. Fanning. Yes, I would be glad to. We think there needs
to be a thorough review process. Remember, this is the most
expensive proposal put forth in a MACT form that EPA has ever
done, 1,000 pages, 1,000 documentation. We need to go through
this and really understand the science first, number one. So my
view is we need some extension on evaluating what is being
proposed, and I think one of the issues that we get to on all
of this dry sorbent injection, all these other things, is the
combined effect of the controls of all these plants. Further,
we need to have a reasonable way to implement this requirement.
Our company is already transitioning our coal fleet. We have
examples of that I could tell you about, but in order to
account for an orderly way to run your generation portfolio for
the benefit of customers to ensure that you have reliability in
a reasonable economic impact, and to assure that you have
reasonable participation by vendors and required craft workers
to undertake these billions of dollars of capital, my sense is
you are going to need somewhere in the 6-year timeframe to get
this done reasonably.
Mr. Green. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Pompeo, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
coming here today.
You know, I have been here only 100 days, and when I look
at something like this, it is staggering because we are talking
about one set of rules today that you all are trying to deal
with and create jobs and create energy. So manufacturing guys,
like I was 101 days ago, I find it surprising that so many of
you are still here working, banging away in the United States
trying to create jobs. I admire you for continuing to do that
and continuing to fight the fight to help us understand what it
is that will allow you to do those things. I come here today,
you all come here today, but the EPA chose not to. We have this
constitutional oversight duty, and yet they don't come so we
can hear the things that they want to tell us and present their
side and their set of facts. It is incomprehensible to me that
they are not here.
I heard the ranking Member say today that EPA had very few
experts. I don't know about all that. What I can tell you when
you look at something like this and they got too few people
with common sense, I am confident of that.
Mr. Krouskop, you gave me the chart so I want to ask you
just a couple questions. There was a piece in your testimony
about the secondary materials rule and how that impacts your
business. Can you tell me a little bit more about that?
Mr. Krouskop. Yes, the secondary materials rule is
basically--Boiler MACT is actually four separate rulemakings,
and one of them deals with the definition of solid waste. One
of the areas that, of course, products industry is very
interested, and quite frankly, I think from an energy
perspective we are interested in creating renewable energy, and
it certainly is questionable as to the way the rule is written
is whether or not things like biomass would not be classified
ultimately as a waste, which would then require even more
expensive control systems to be put on those boilers.
Mr. Pompeo. I appreciate that. I want to come back to
something, too, and I will ask everyone on the panel.
So there was this notion that there has been this delay, a
decade, 12 years, 13 years, and that you all should have been
doing something in that time. The notion was hey, you have had
15 years to get ready for this, but the truth is, if you would
have taken action, much like your university did during this
15-year timeframe, I would like to ask you if you think you
would all be looking at something that was going to cost you
even more money? That is, you would have been trying to guess
what EPA was going to do. I want to ask you if that is
something that when you present to your employees and your
regulated--the folks that regulate your utilities or your
shareholders, if that is something that they would say hey,
that is exciting, we want to go invest some money trying to
guess what EPA is going to do. We can start down here with Mr.
Fanning.
Mr. Fanning. I am proud to say we have already invested--
committed to invest more than $10 billion on improving the
climate. We are the leader in the industry in that respect, and
we are going to invest more.
Mr. Pompeo. I hope you guessed right.
Mr. Fanning. Well, the other issue that is just very
important that you are hitting on here is we are in the
Southeast, which is largely an integrated regulated electric
system. We have a constructive relationship with our regulators
and we go through very disciplined processes to evaluate
ultimately the impacts for our customers on reliability, price
and environmental impact.
These are policies that have should be followed through and
have served us well in the past, and will require more time
than what is permitted in this proposal.
Mr. Earley. Congressman, we have done the same thing. We
have invested well over $2 billion, but what this rule shows is
we will have to invest even more, and as I say in my testimony,
we have slashed emissions over the last 30 years, and it is a
lot of great success stories. I think we have to use some
common sense going forward. At some point enough is enough, and
you just can't afford to spend the next dollar for another
piece of equipment just because the equipment is available,
because these costs are borne by our customers, your
constituents.
Mr. Pompeo. Thanks to those who responded. You know, Kansas
we have got a utility plant that has been trying to be built to
retire some older, less clean technology, and our former
governor, now the Secretary of HHS, didn't let them do it. So
this was a company that was trying to invest, trying to create
jobs, trying to create affordable energy, and was prevented by
doing so by the Kansas Department of Health and Environment,
and ultimately by EPA, too.
I have just got 20 seconds. Mr. Bradley, you think these
make sense. I am trying to understand what is different about
the businesses that are part of your group as opposed to the
folks sitting to your right. Why is it that you think they make
sense and they don't?
Mr. Bradley. These have been clearly on the books and on
the horizon for more than 10 years. The companies I represent
have a responsibility to their shareholders, to their
customers, to their employees to plan ahead, to do risk
assessment, and manage their investments, and they have made
those investments in a way they are in a pretty good position--
--
Mr. Pompeo. You just--frankly, the folks you represent just
have a lot different mix of energy. You have got a lot less
coal involved in the folks that you represent than some of the
other folks sitting on the panel.
Mr. Bradley. That is correct.
Mr. Pompeo. So this would be--these rules would be good for
your folks because they would cause your profits to increase
and the others----
Mr. Bradley. Yes, but let me emphasize that the number of
my companies that I represent have invested the hundreds of
millions of dollars to clean up their coal facilities as well.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman Mr. Inslee is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Inslee. Thank you.
Mr. Fanning, I was interested in your technology, reading
your written statement, you said ``Second, we need a national
robust research and development effort to create new energy
technologies for the future,'' and I very much agree with that.
Apparently so does President Obama. He said yesterday ``I will
not sacrifice the core investments we need to grow and create
jobs. We will invest in medical research and clean energy
technology.''
Now, there are efforts here to reduce--not increase, but
actually reduce our national investments in clean energy
research. I think that is a huge mistake. It is like eating
your seed corn. Would you urge us on a bipartisan basis to
increase our federal investment in clean energy research across
the board in all CO2, non-CO2, and low-CO2 emitting
technologies?
Mr. Fanning. Absolutely. I am on record as saying that this
should be a national imperative.
Mr. Inslee. Well, I would hope you might spend some time
with some of my Republican colleagues, talking to them about
the importance of this investment and the potential job
creation technology. I am serious about this. We have deficit
challenges here that are very, very important, but as we make
priority decisions, if you have a chance to talk to some of my
colleagues about the job creation potential of that research, I
think it could be beneficial. Thank you.
Mr. Walke, I have--I want to ask you to comment on
something that I found fascinating. Mr. Earley talked about
yearning for the good old days of a proposal to have something
like a cap and trade system where we gave flexibility to
industries to try to figure out what actions and what
investments to take to clean up our skies. I am not liking this
what you might call a command and control system that sets up
regulatory systems about specific behavior. Now it seems to me
a little bit ironic that one side of this aisle here rejected
Congress doing something that would have given industry
flexibility on how to decide where to make investments. Then
when we take the alternative approach, which is a regulatory
approach, rejecting that approach. Now that to me seems a
little bit ironic. What do you think?
Mr. Walke. Well, what they share in common is a desire to
avoid reducing pollution in both cases, so there is that
consistency, that failure to support carbon cap and trade
legislation and failure to support the command and control
programs. But EPA has flexibility, including averaging in this
toxics rule, and there is a deep commitment to carrying out a
law that was adopted by 401 Members of the House in 1990.
Mr. Inslee. Thank you. Mr. Krouskop, if I can ask you a
question. If you had in your broadly industry--three industries
kind of associated with this rule, if these industries were
taking some action that resulted in the premature deaths of
26,000 people a year in America, not China, in America, 26,000
Americans a year, and if your industry could make an investment
that would return to the national economy at a minimum five
times more benefits by eliminating those premature deaths for
every dollar of investment, would you make that investment?
Would you suggest that we as a community make that investment?
Mr. Krouskop. I think the real question here is how fast
you make the investment and to what degree do you compare some
of the benefits and the costs to those investments. I think
that is what we are saying.
Mr. Inslee. So let us start at the beginning of my
question. If you could make an investment of $1 that could
result in 26,000 deaths--premature deaths in the United States,
and would return economic benefits of a minimum of $5 to the
Nation, let us just start with that presumption. Would you
suggest that the industry make that investment?
Mr. Krouskop. If you buy the premise of the dollars and
there has been lots of discussions about, A, truly are those
numbers correct, and are the estimates of health effects
associated with these things, the answer, of course, is yes.
Mr. Inslee. Well, I don't think it is of course, because I
have heard at least five witnesses say and we say to ignore
this cost benefit analysis. This is very problematic to me, and
let me tell you why. The only comprehensive assessment of the
cost benefit analysis is the one presented by the EPA. I don't
see anything coming from industry that is really presented a
contrary opinion. Now, that is problematic to us as a
policymaker. Mr. Papadopoulos wants to say something. Go ahead.
Mr. Papadopoulos. I want to say that, you know, statistics
that have come out of computer models are one thing. Proof in
the field, empirical proof is another thing. If I knew that
even one person was----
Mr. Inslee. Let me stop you just for--I only got 13
seconds.
Mr. Papadopoulos. I would have gotten it tomorrow. I would
wait for EPA to come.
Mr. Inslee. I am waiting for something from you guys. I
would like to see it.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired. Recognize
the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If we could put up a
map showing the percentage of mercury deposits from outside the
United States, I believe the committee has that. Oh, there it
is.
Mr. Papadopoulos, thank you for having a facility--I guess
I should ask before I get to the map, when you talked about
closing down older plants, I hope that doesn't include Roanoke
Cement just outside of my district in Botetourt County.
Mr. Papadopoulos. We are trying very hard.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate that. When you look at this map,
it appears that a significant amount of mercury in the U.S.
comes from outside the country. Now so you will know, the chart
indicates the percentage of mercury deposits that are from
outside the country, so the red would be 100 percent and down,
and purple would mean that most of it is coming from this
country. So it appears that a lot of the mercury is coming from
outside the country. Can these foreign mercury emissions be
reached by EPA regulations?
Mr. Papadopoulos. None at all. They will worsen, in fact.
Mr. Griffith. And isn't it accurate to think that if these
mercury emissions--and I heard you say something about this in
your opening statement, too, or at least get close to it, but
isn't it a fact that if they are coming from outside the United
States and we drive manufacturing--all kinds, but particularly
in your case, the production of cement, to other countries like
China, India, or Mexico, aren't we, in fact, increasing the
likelihood or increasing the amount of mercury that may
actually come into these United States?
Mr. Papadopoulos. Exactly. The EPA has all these studies,
but it refuses to communicate them, and you know, I heard a
statistic from Mr. Waxman that I wanted to correct. He said
that the cement industry is the number three producer of
mercury in the U.S. That is incorrect. In fact, we rank number
nine. The U.S., in fact, is one of the smallest mercury
producers in the world. Compared to our energy footprint, our
mercury production globally is only 7 percent, and 80 percent
plus of the mercury that comes into the U.S. originates
offshore. So unless we are planning to build a big glass globe
around the country, we could shut everything down and still
this won't change. It will get worse.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you. I do want to shift over to my
friends from MeadWestvaco. I asked staff when I saw the witness
list today, I said did you all set up this hearing for me? My
understanding is that Eastman was also invited, and they are on
the other end of the district, just outside of the district.
But if I could ask you a few questions, I do appreciate your
facility there, and I am going to mispronounce your name. Help
me with it.
Mr. Krouskop. Krouskop.
Mr. Griffith. Krouskop. I do appreciate your facility there
in Covington. Obviously you employ a lot of people, as does Mr.
Papadopoulos, in the 9th Congressional District of Virginia,
and both of you all have great companies.
But let me ask you, looking at Boiler MACT as well as other
current EPA air regulations that are looming over the next
several years, can you explain in general terms the investment
and technology control issues that a mill like yours is facing
with these regulations?
Mr. Krouskop. Yes, the investment, for example, for
Covington Mill associated with these regulations certainly are
in the tens of millions of dollars. I think the fundamental
question here is as much about how do we effectively accomplish
the goals of the Clean Air Act and the MACT rulemaking and
control toxics and not have to spend so much money. We would
submit that there is, in fact, technology to do that.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Your testimony basically says the
EPA and the Boiler MACT rule in its current form has
essentially failed to capture what is the essence of what real
world industrial boilers actually achieve. Can you elaborate on
that?
Mr. Krouskop. Yes, one of the most difficult parts of the
Boiler MACT rulemaking was, even though EPA did go to a sub-
categorization system, in effect what they did rather than
saying here is boiler X and it can achieve these things and we
will look at the best 12 percent performing of all boilers,
they literally cherry-picked pollutant by pollutant. So when
you look at the true number of boilers that could achieve these
rules today, they are much less than 10, based on our analysis,
of about over 3,000 boilers nationwide.
Mr. Griffith. All right. My time is just about up, but I
just again want to say thank you to all of you. Anybody else
who wants to bring jobs to the 9th District of Virginia, you
are more than welcome. We understand that there has got to be a
balance that you want to have clean air and you want to have
clean water. The EPA has a role, but we have to make sure that
it makes sense and doesn't eliminate jobs and increase
pollution inadvertently.
Thank you, I yield back my time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Ms. Capps, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you very much, and thank you for
testimony of each of you. I am going to be brief and concise
because I know my colleague, Mr. Markey, has some questions
too. These will be focused at you, Mr. Walke.
Yesterday Subcommittee Chairman Whitfield confirmed that
legislation to delay air toxic standards will be introduced
after the congressional recess. We have heard from some in the
energy industry that a delay is needed because of ``importance
of a smooth transition and more deliberate schedule'' to ease
the strain on industry and reduce risks to consumers with the
proposed rules for utilities. If the proposed standards to
reduce air toxics from power plants were delayed by even a
year, a single year, what would it mean for public health? Give
us a couple of examples.
Mr. Walke. I would be happy to, Congresswoman Capps.
What we have found from EPA's own data is that the delay of
these three rules by even a single year would result in up to
26,000 premature deaths, 17,000 non-fatal heart attacks, about
180,000 asthma attacks, and approximately 330,000 cases of
upper and lower respiratory systems. These would be one of the
most profound retreats from the Clean Air Act protections ever
to be considered by this body.
Mrs. Capps. Mr. Walke, we also hear from the industry and
increasingly from my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
that EPA is overreaching with its air toxics standards. I
myself disagree with that statement. I have maintained that
these standards reflect EPA doing its job. Do you believe EPA
is overreaching with its proposed air toxic standards for power
plants?
Mr. Walke. I do not. The agency is following well-
established law that unfortunately it was created by the courts
in the last decade when they overturned far greater
overreaching by the Bush administration that----
Mrs. Capps. That is what I wanted to turn to next. As EPA
has moved to implement the law and issue standards to control
air toxics from power plants, go further to illustrate--I
wanted to find has there ever been an action that can be
characterized as an EPA overreach, and finish that description
that you were giving.
Mr. Walke. Yes, absolutely. EPA under the Bush
administration violated the toxics provision of the Clean Air
Act at least in 11 or 12 cases, all of which are represented
before us today. One of them EPA even realized it couldn't
defend, so it took back the cement rule. In several of those
cases, the courts found themselves resorting to quoting two
different works of Lewis Carroll, including Alice in Wonderland
in the power plant case, because they were so profoundly
disgusted by the end of the second term as to how many times
the law had been broken. It really has never been seen in the
Clean Air Act case law in quite the way it played out under
that administration.
Mrs. Capps. And finally, Mr. Walke, some folks today have
said that the EPA standards for boilers and cement factories
are just too hard to achieve, and that the industry will not
have enough time to meet the long-awaited standards. You
disagree. Now just to use a few seconds and maybe a minute to
comment on these claims that they have made so we can get this
on the record.
Mr. Walke. Sure. The Clean Air Act gives up to 4 years,
that includes a 1-year extension if it is necessary, to install
the controls. We have had over 100 of these standards issued in
the past 20 years, covering 400 to 500 industries. It is really
these laggards who have benefited from lawbreaking by the last
administration that are now complying with these rules for the
first time, some 15 years overdue. The law gives them the
flexibility. The boilers rule came in far more flexibly and
cost effectively than anyone anticipated. Mr. Bradley has
testified that the power plant rule is the same. The cement
final rule is weaker than the proposed rule. EPA does not agree
with the Portland Cement Association's claims about closures
and job losses. These are hotly disputed topics, and I just
want you to be aware that it is very important to have EPA
appear as a witness, as Chairman Whitfield has invited at a
future hearing.
Mrs. Capps. I thank you and I will yield back now the
balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
Mrs. Capps. I will yield to, if it is OK, to Mr. Markey.
Mr. Markey. I thank the gentlelady very much.
Mr. Bradley, in 2004 Governor Mitt Romney of Massachusetts
adopted regulations to control mercury from coal-fired power
plants in Massachusetts that require 85 percent of mercury
emissions to be captured by 2008. Were utilities able to keep
the lights on while this standard was being met?
Mr. Bradley. Absolutely.
Mr. Markey. Did the geniuses at MIT have to invent some new
alloy or exotic technology so the coal-fired power plants in
Massachusetts can meet this standard?
Mr. Bradley. Not that I am aware of.
Mr. Markey. Is this standard now being met by 12 other
States in the union?
Mr. Bradley. Comparable requirements are in place in 12
States.
Mr. Markey. Are the technologies that were installed in
Massachusetts available and economically viable for use in
coal-fired power plants in other States?
Mr. Bradley. Absolutely.
Mr. Markey. The Southern Company says they can build two
new nuclear power plants and guarantee the safety of people,
but they can't really figure out how to install these
technologies that already exist that would protect against the
poisoning of the children in our country. Do you think that
Southern Company should be able to figure that out if they can
build two new nuclear power plants in our country?
Mr. Bradley. I think they have a tremendous track record--
--
Mr. Markey. I do, too.
Mr. Bradley [continuing]. And in the end, they will figure
it out.
Mr. Markey. I just--I think this can't-do attitude that is
not like President Kennedy's can-do attitude to put a man on
the Moon with alloys that had not yet been invented, but here
the technology has already been invented and are already
installed. We are not asking them to invent anything, but yet,
it is kind of disconcerting to me to hear the Southern Company
and others here saying they can't figure out how to install
something while guaranteeing us they can make nuclear power
plants safe, after Fukushima, without even waiting until they
really install all the lessons from Fukushima. So that is a
great concern to me, and I would hope that this can't-do
Republican majority can turn into a can-do majority and take
existing technologies and mandate that we can install them, but
I am afraid that those public health lessons are going to be
lost upon them.
I thank the gentlelady and I thank the chairman for his----
Mr. Whitfield. I am glad the gentleman from Massachusetts
is so intimately involved with Southern Company and knows their
facts.
Mr. Markey. I love the Southern Company. It is my favorite
utility to talk to.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Scalise, I am going to recognize you. We
have votes on the floor and I am trying to accommodate everyone
so that--we are going to have three series of votes, and I am
sure these people don't want to wait another 2 hours. So I will
recognize Mr. Scalise for----
Mr. Scalise. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
that. I will try to go rapid fire. I hope the gentleman from
Massachusetts will join with us in supporting a comprehensive
all-of-the-above energy strategy, because I think we know we
have got resources in our country for wind, solar, nuclear, a
whole lot more oil and gas, billions and billions of barrels
that are still out there that can explored for in a safe way.
That can generate thousands of jobs, generate billions of
dollars to our economy so that we can reduce our deficit while
not shipping more jobs to other countries and while not making
our country more dependent on foreign oil.
I want to ask Mr. Fanning, in your testimony you talked
about the impacts on the economy of some of these EPA proposals
and regulations coming down. Can you expand a little bit upon
the true impacts to the economy that would be imposed if this
were to go forward?
Mr. Fanning. Yes, thank you. I would be delighted. The far-
reaching impacts here are pretty significant. We have already
talked about the direct impact; that is, we think as a result
of this proposed rule as it stands, at least for the Southeast,
25 percent increase in prices, but that really doesn't even
begin to speak to the total impact. When we think about jobs
and the economy, it is pretty clear that a conservative
estimate of the loss of jobs when you move from coal to gas is
about a six-to-one ratio, just to flesh that out a bit. For a
500 megawatt coal plant, it employs about 300 people. A 500
megawatt gas plant employs about 50 people. So you would move
from 300 jobs to about 50 jobs. You lose net 250. If you extend
that to the notion that we may lose 70,000 megawatts across the
United States, that is the direct loss of 35,000 high-paying
jobs. That doesn't even begin to address the issue of the
first-, second-, third-tier suppliers, railroads, mines,
equipment vendors, et cetera. It doesn't even begin to address
the amount of jobs lost as a result of a less competitive
global economy.
Mr. Scalise. And that is what I wanted to ask as my final
question before my time expires. We talk about international
competitiveness, and of course, our American companies, we want
them to be successful not only here in America, but for those
who do operate in other countries, we want them to be able to
play on a level playing field. Right now, they are being pushed
further and further out in their ability to compete globally
because of some of the things happening by this administration,
EPA, and others that are actually making it harder for American
companies to survive. So if you have regulations like this that
basically say if you are an American company, you can't even
manufacture, your electricity costs would be so high if you do
business in America, what does that mean to us internationally
as other countries would love to take our jobs? Unfortunately,
other countries are already taking too many of those jobs. It
seems like an EPA regulation like this would push even more
tens of thousands of jobs from America out of our country.
Mr. Fanning. I think you make an excellent point, and I
would just use this notion, that as we don't consume coal in
America and we export it, we will export jobs along with it.
Mr. Scalise. And obviously, they don't have the same
environmental protections that we enjoy today, so the things
that EPA seems to be concerned about would actually be
exponentially increased if those jobs here in America would go
to those foreign countries like China and India.
Mr. Fanning. If I could just add one more quick social
impact. As we close down these plants, we will visit economic
damage on local communities. I just got a letter yesterday from
Putnam County, Georgia, that if we close down Branch Units 1
through 4 in that county, we will reduce their tax base by
about 19 percent.
Mr. Scalise. Mr. Chairman, if I can maybe move unanimous
consent to have that letter introduced into the record? Thank
you and I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, that concludes today's hearing. As I
said, we have a number of votes on the floor relating to the
budget, but I want to thank all of you for coming. I look
forward to working with our friends on the--our Democratic
friends to craft legislation that can accommodate some of the
concerns we have heard today. And with that, the hearing is
concluded and the record will remain open for 10 days for
additional material or questions. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:30 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]


