- THE FISCAL YEAR 2013 DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY BUDGET

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FISCAL YEAR 2013 DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY BUDGET

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 8, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-125

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
76-890                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               JAY INSLEE, Washington
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  KATHY CASTOR, Florida
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             GENE GREEN, Texas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   LOIS CAPPS, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio)
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     5
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................    10
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    10

Witnesses

Steven Chu, Secretary, Department of Energy......................    12
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Answers to submitted questions...............................    91

Submitted Material

Letter, dated March 6, 2012, from Lorinda Wichman, Chairman, Nye
County, Nevada, Board of County Commissioners, to Steven Chu,
Secretary, Department of Energy, submitted by Mr. Shimkus......    37
Findings from Nevada Statewide Survey conducted by Public Opinion
Strategies February 21-23, 2012, submitted by Mr. Whitfield....    86

THE FISCAL YEAR 2013 DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY BUDGET

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 8, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:07 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed
Whitfield (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Sullivan,
Shimkus, Walden, Terry, Burgess, Bilbray, Scalise, Olson,
McKinley, Gardner, Pompeo, Griffith, Barton, Upton (ex
officio), Rush, Inslee, Dingell, Markey, Engel, Green, Doyle,
and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Anita Bradley, Senior Policy Advisor to the
Chairman Emeritus; Maryam Brown, Chief Counsel, Energy and
Power; Allison Busbee, Legislative Clerk; Patrick Currier,
Counsel, Energy and Power; Garrett Golding, Professional Staff
Member, Energy and Power; Mike Gruber, Senior Policy Advisor;
Cory Hicks, Policy Coordinator, Energy and Power; Heidi King,
Chief Economist; Ben Lieberman, Counsel, Energy and Power; Dave
McCarthy, Chief Counsel, Environment/Economy; Mary Neumayr,
Senior Energy Counsel; Jeff Baran, Democratic Senior Counsel;
Phil Barnett, Democratic Staff Director; Greg Dotson,
Democratic Energy and Environment Staff Director; Caitlin
Haberman, Democratic Policy Analyst; and Angela Kordyak, DOE
Detailee.
Mr. Whitfield. I will call this hearing to order, and the
subject of today's hearing is ``The Fiscal Year 2013 DOE
Budget.'' And we only have one witness today, and that is
Secretary Chu. And we appreciate very much your being here with
us this morning, Mr. Secretary. We certainly have a lot of
questions, and we look forward to your comments as well.
And at this time I would recognize myself for an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

I would start off by simply saying that I think just about
everyone agrees that America's air quality is among the best in
the world, and there is no question that the Obama
administration is totally focused on transforming the energy
delivery system in America. And the reasons given for that are,
number one, to make the air quality even cleaner; and number
two, Ms. Jackson and others frequently talk about regulations
create more jobs. And I might also say that I have never, ever
seen an administration go after one industry the way this
administration is going after the coal industry.
President Obama, when he was campaigning, was in San
Francisco and he said they can build coal plants but they will
go bankrupt. And even you have made comments about how bad coal
is and many other people in the administration and, you know,
that is fine. That is you all's views and many of us disagree
with that.
And from looking at the budget that you have proposed, you
are asking for an increase I guess of about $856 million, and
in the scheme of things that is not that much money. But we
have a $16 trillion Federal debt and any kind of increases are
significant in today's atmosphere. And when I look at that
budget, when I read that budget, it appears to me that America
is moving as fast as it can to adopt the European model for
energy production. And I recently have read a number of
articles about the things that are going on in Europe. We know
that in Spain they place great emphasis on wind energy. They
have an unemployment rate of 22 percent. There was the study
from Juan Carlos University that talked about for every green
job created there was a loss of two jobs in traditional
industries.
And one of the things that I find most disturbing about
this is it looks like EPA is setting the energy policy for
America. Now, the most comprehensive regulation coming out of
EPA relates to Utility MACT. And Mrs. Jackson has never been
able to give us a total cost. In fact, no one has been able to
give us a total cost outside experts who have testified that it
would be up to $90 billion. But EPA said that they could expect
to close maybe 14 gigawatts of coal plants and even NERC is
saying that it will be more like 36 or 59 gigawatts. And NERC
also, in a November report, indicated reliability was going to
be a serious issue.
And yet, whether it is in transportation or it is in
electricity production, this administration is totally moving
to, on the transportation side, provide all sorts of grants and
loan guarantees to technologies, many of which have not proven
to be able to deliver. Solyndra. We have got Fisker not going
to open up the Delaware plant. We have got A123 Battery Systems
that is reducing their employment.
And my time is running out here, but I was just reading
some of the headlines in Europe. ``EU Faces 20 Years of Rising
Energy Bills,'' ``Wind and Solar Subsidies Drying Up in
Europe,'' ``Wind Turbines in Europe do Nothing for Emission
Reduction Goals,'' ``Germany's Rising Cost of Going Green,''
``Czech Electricity Grid Company Ready to Block German Wind
Power.'' And so my whole point is that this administration is
moving so fast and is so determined to transform the energy
sector in America that I don't think they are giving adequate
consideration to the consequences of that.
So that is what I, as one individual representing 700,000
people, am most concerned about.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.002

And my time has expired, so at this time I would like to
recognize Mr. Rush for his 5-minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here. Mr.
Secretary, it is always a pleasure to have you appear before
this subcommittee. And I want to take a moment just to commend
you for your knowledge, your expertise, and your leadership in
directing this important agency at such a critical time in our
Nation's history.
As you know, high gasoline prices are on the minds of every
American, my constituents and others. I am concerned about
these high gas prices. And although we all understand that fuel
prices are influenced by a variety of geopolitical factors, to
hear my Republican colleagues tell it, it is the President and
his energy policies that are contributing enormously to these
sky-high prices. And of course, Mr. Secretary, you and I will
agree that does not explain--the definition does not explain
why gas prices skyrocketed from just over $1.50 a gallon in
2001 when President Bush took office to just under $4.00 a
gallon in spring of '08 before the Bush recession took our
economy over the cliff. But that is an argument for another
time. I don't want to belabor that at this moment.
Mr. Secretary, as the person who heads the Energy
Department, I would like to hear your thoughts on how the Obama
administration's policies have helped the American consumers
through fuel efficiency measures to promotional renewable
sources of energy and other forward-thinking policies that are
necessary to move America forward and to wean us off of
imported oil. I would like also to get your comments on the
record regarding the levels of fuel consumption, importation of
foreign oil, and oil and gas production during the Obama
administration. The research I have seen show that under
President Obama we are importing less oil now than any other
time in the last 13 years. Research also shows that we are
producing more oil now domestically than we were at any time in
the last 8 years. In fact, since President Obama opened up
millions of new acres for oil and gas exploration, the U.S. now
has more working oil and gas rigs than the rest of the world
combined.
Additionally, your agency recently reported that the
average fuel demand has actually dropped 6.7 percent as
compared to the same time last year. Yet, despite all of these
effects, gas prices have continued to climb much faster and far
earlier than in previous years. And of course, my friends on
the other side, those who want to blame the President and those
who have got a keen eye, a sharp eye toward these November 2012
elections are using this as a way to make political hail
against the administration's policies. As you will hear
repeated time and time and time again, the constant refrain of
those on the other side will be pointing the finger at the
President and solely at the president.
Mr. Secretary, again, I want to welcome you today and I
look forward to your testimony. I look forward to you setting
the record straight, finally I hope setting the record straight
but I am not too confident that even though you are setting the
record straight that it will remain set. Your comments in the
past as they have been will be distorted, taken out of context,
and used for political violence and political verbiage and used
for political gain. But please inform the American people of
the true benefits of having an energy policy that is forward-
looking, that will help us plan ahead for the future so the
Congress will not have this same finger-pointing debate 10, 20,
or 30 years down the road.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. And I yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
At this time, I recognize the chairman of the full
committee, Mr. Upton of Michigan, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Secretary, welcome. Today's hearing on the
Department of Energy's fiscal year 2013 budget comes at a very
critical time for energy policy in the country for sure.
Gasoline prices continue their march toward and probably
past $4.00 per gallon. We remain dependent on unstable foreign
sources of oil despite abundant untapped domestic supplies, as
well as Canadian supplies that this administration so far has
blocked from coming into the U.S. And at the same time,
residential electricity prices have been increasing every year
over the last decade.
Mr. Secretary, you have raised some eyebrows with your
comments on gas prices early on and about the administration's
overall energy policy. Many of us were stunned by your past
suggestion sometime ago that, ``somehow we have to figure out
how to boost the price of gasoline to the levels in Europe.''
And more recently, last week you were asked whether your
overall goal was to lower gasoline prices, and your answer was,
``no.'' You said the goal was to decrease dependency on oil--a
long-term goal for sure--which means we are not necessarily
focused on reducing prices for families and small businesses
that are struggling today.
Increased energy prices mean that energy households are
spending a greater percentage of their income on energy costs,
leaving them with less money for food, healthcare, education,
other basic necessities. So what has the President done to help
us? Well, he twice rejected the Keystone Pipeline project and
the job creation and secure energy supplies that it would
deliver. His solution to higher gas prices appears to certainly
threaten our emergency oil supplies by tapping SPR rather than
opening more Federal lands to domestic energy development.
Instead of eliminating regulatory red tape, he has imposed
costly new regs on our power sector that certainly are going to
drive up the electricity prices. He recently did begin to brag
about--that he supports an ``all-of-the-above'' energy policy,
but these actions look more like a policy of ``nothing from
below.'' Oil production opportunities remain blocked, layers of
new Federal regs contemplated for natural gas development,
costly rules designed to squeeze out coal, and the sad saga of
Yucca Mountain, halting development of a long-term repository
and raising questions about our long-term nuclear prospects.
So the President's proposed fiscal year 2013 budget for the
DOE is not ``all-of-the-above.'' Rather, it seeks to transform
the energy portfolio based on unproven and more expensive
alternatives. Certainly, his budget proposes to slash funding
for proven energy resources such as coal, nuclear, hydro, while
significantly increasing funding for high-cost, high-risk
energy alternatives. And although many of us do support
alternative energy sources--they are laudable goals--there is a
place for research, for sure, but questions are placed as to
whether or not they really produce a healthy overall economy
So we welcome your testimony today. We look forward to your
answers.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.004

And I yield the balance of my time to Mr. Barton.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Secretary, it is always good to see you. We love to
have you come before us and give us your views on the state of
the Department of Energy.
Today, we are going to talk about DOE's budget. We saw that
the total budget request by the President was a little over $27
billion and just coincidentally is saw that overall the Obama
administration last year spent over $24 billion on alternative
energy projects. It is obvious that some of that money hasn't
been too well spent. I continue to be concerned about Solyndra.
I continue to believe that that project has been mismanaged by
your department. I am going to ask you some questions when I am
allowed to what changes if any have been made in the management
of the Loan Guarantee Program. It is obvious that mistakes have
been made and I think some laws have been violated with regards
to the subordination situation. But I would hope that you would
be able to tell me that things are being corrected and those
practices of the past won't happen again.
But we are always glad to see you, sir, and we look forward
to your answers. I would yield to whoever I am supposed to. If
not, I yield back to the Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time, I would like to recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. Waxman, for a 5-minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Secretary Chu, we are pleased to see you again at our
committee.
There are a lot of energy challenges that we are facing,
and you are going to be asked about them by members of our
committee. But the American people are concerned about high
gasoline prices, and I think, because of our dependence on oil,
oil itself, that is leading us to our higher prices in
gasoline.
Oil is priced in a world market, and so even if we produce
more oil in the United States, that is not going to lower the
price of gasoline here because we have oil priced based on what
the world price is. Canada, for example, should be the utopia
the Republicans pray for. In Canada, they produce more oil than
they consume, and yet their prices are just as high as ours.
And their people are complaining about the high price of
gasoline as well.
So when we hear Republicans saying, ``Produce more oil,''
they are doing what the oil companies want, but it is not going
to reduce the price of gasoline.
Energy economists tell us the Republican plan is not even
``remotely possible'' to reduce the price of gasoline. It will
have zero effect on gasoline prices, so we need to face
reality. And the reality is that oil prices are determined on a
global market. And no matter how much we drill here, our
gasoline prices are going to rise if there is a crisis in the
Middle East, if there is a fear about disruption from Iran, if
there is a labor unrest in Nigeria, if OPEC sees that there is
too much oil and they decide to reduce the supply and the
demand is increased in China and in India.
So there is only one way we can protect ourselves from the
impacts of rising oil prices, and that is if we reduce our
demand for oil.
That brings us to another energy challenge that we face. We
have to invest in clean energy to diversify and reduce our
energy use. We are locked in a competition with China and other
countries in the future of clean energy. And if clean energy is
our future and we are not investing in that as House
Republicans call on us to strike those investments, we are
going to lose out on jobs and the future.
We have to also confront the enormous challenge of climate
change, which threatens our economic strength, our national
security, and the health of our citizens. Yet rather than
confront this challenge, the Republicans deny the science and
they vote to block all action on climate change.
Democrats and Republicans in Congress seem to have two
completely different visions of our future. The President says
we need to listen to scientists and energy experts and become
the world leaders in clean energy economy of the future. House
Republicans deny the science, and they seem to want to obstruct
the President every step of the way.
In spite of these constant obstructions and attacks on
commonsense policy, the administration has made significant
advances. The President has acted to cut the emissions of cars
and trucks, doubling the fuel efficiency of our fleet. As a
result, our energy dependence on oil has declined.
The Department of Energy has made significant investments
in renewable energy and we are seeing the results. Even while
our economy has struggled during the last 3 years, the solar
industry doubled the number of American solar jobs from 46,000
to more than 100,000. U.S. wind industry has added more than 35
percent of all new generating capacity over the past 4 years,
second only to natural gas. The percentage of those wind
components manufactured in the U.S. has more than doubled.
The Department of Energy is looking at a weatherization
program to improve energy efficiency of more than 750,000 homes
across the Nation. That is a savings for low-income families on
average of $437 a year in heating and cooling costs alone.
You won't hear much about these accomplishments from the
Republicans. They are going to talk about Solyndra and
Keystone. We will hear the President's budget didn't include
enough money for fossil fuels or nuclear power. We are not
going to hear about real solutions from the Republicans. They
are playing politics with this issue. We need to get on with
the job of making sure America is less dependent on oil, that
we have a future in the clean energy sector, that our consumers
can face lower gasoline prices as we move away from our
dependence on oil.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Waxman.
That concludes the opening statements. And as I said
earlier, we only have one witness today, and that is the
Honorable Steven Chu, Secretary of Energy.
And so, Mr. Secretary, you are recognized for 5 minutes for
an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN CHU, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Mr. Chu. Thank you. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member
Rush, Chairman Upton, Ranking Member Waxman, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
Department of Energy's fiscal year 2013 budget request.
To promote economic growth and strengthen security,
President Obama has called for an ``all-of-the-above strategy''
that develops every source of American energy. The President
wants to fuel our economy with domestic energy resources while
increasing our ability compete in the clean energy race. The
Department's fiscal year 2013 budget request of $27.2 billion
is guided by the President's----
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Secretary, excuse me for interrupting
just a minute. Mr. Rush said that he cannot hear you. Is your
microphone on?
Mr. Chu. I am wondering actually--I have been having
difficulty hearing you as well. If the person in charge of the
audio-visual can crank it up a little bit? That seems to be
better.
Mr. Whitfield. All right, thank you.
Mr. Chu. To promote economic growth and strengthen
security, President Obama has called for an ``all-of-the-above
strategy'' that develops every source of American energy. The
President wants to fuel our economy with domestic energy
resources while increasing our ability compete in the clean
energy race.
The Department's fiscal year 2013 budget request of $27.2
billion is guided by the President's vision, our 2011 Strategic
Plan and our inaugural Quadrennial Technology review. It
supports leadership in clean energy technologies, science, and
innovation, and nuclear security and environmental cleanup.
Decades ago, the Energy Department's support helped to
develop the technologies that have allowed us to tap into
America's abundant shale gas--and I might add--oil resources.
Today, our investments can help advance technologies that will
unlock the promise of renewable energy and energy efficiency.
The budget request invests approximately $4 billion in our
energy programs. It advances progress in areas from solar to
offshore wind to carbon-capture utilization and storage to
smart grid technologies, and it helps develop next-generation
biofuels, advanced batteries, and fuel efficient vehicle
technologies to reduce our dependence on foreign oil, which
every day places a crushing burden on families and on our
economy.
As the President and I have said, there is no silver
bullet, but we can and must pursue a serious, long-term, all-
of-the-above approach that diversifies our transportation
sector, protects consumers from the high gas prices, harnesses
American resources, and creates jobs here and at home. That is
exactly what this budget does.
The budget request also invests $770 million in the Nuclear
Energy Program to help develop the next generation of nuclear
power technologies, including small modular reactors. It
includes funding for continued nuclear waste R&D, which aligns
with the recommendations of the Blue Ribbon Commission on
America's Nuclear Future. As we move to a sustainable energy
future, America's fossil fuel energy resources will continue to
play an important role in our energy mix.
The budget request includes $14 million as part of a $45
million priority R&D initiative by the Departments of Energy,
Interior, and EPA to understand and minimize potential
environmental, health, and safety impacts of natural gas
development through hydraulic fracking. The budget also
promotes energy efficiency to help American's save money by
saving energy and it sponsors R&D on industrial materials and
processes to help U.S. manufacturers cut costs.
To maximize our energy technology efforts in areas such as
batteries, biofuels, electric grid technologies, we are
coordinating research and development across our basic and
applied research programs and ARPA-E. And to encourage the
manufacturing and deployment of clean energy technologies, the
President has called for extending proven tax incentives,
including the Production Tax Credit, the 1603 program, and
Advanced Energy Manufacturing Tax Credit.
Competing in the new energy economy requires our country to
harness all our resources, including American ingenuity. The
budget request includes $5 billion for the Office of Science to
support basic research that could lead to new discoveries and
help solve energy challenges. It continues to support Energy
Frontier Research Centers, which aim to solve specific
scientific problems to unlock new clean energy development. It
also supports the five existing Energy Innovation Hubs and
proposes a new hub in electricity systems. Through the hubs, we
are bringing together our Nation's top scientists and engineers
to achieve game-changing energy goals.
Additionally, the budget request includes $350 million for
ARPA-E to support research projects that could fundamentally
transform the ways we use and produce energy. Taken together,
our research initiatives will help rev up America's great
innovation machine to accelerate energy breakthroughs.
In addition to strengthening our economy, the budget
request also strengthens our security by providing $11.5
billion for the National Nuclear Security Administration.
Finally, the budget requests include $5.7 billion for the
Office of Environmental Management to protect public health and
the environment by cleaning up radioactive legacy waste from
the Manhattan Project and the Cold War.
This budget request builds on progress that has been made
by the EM program. By the end of 2011, the program had reduced
its geographic footprint by 66 percent, far exceeding its goal
of 40 percent. The budget request makes strategic investments
to promote our prosperity and security. At the same time, we
recognize the country's fiscal challenges and are cutting back
where we can. We are committed to performing our work
efficiently and effectively.
Countries around the world recognize the clean energy
opportunity and are moving aggressively to lead. This is a race
we can win but we must act with fierce urgency.
Thank you, and I will be pleased to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Chu follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.012

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Secretary Chu. And I recognize
myself for 5 minutes of questions.
I had mentioned in my opening statement about the Utility
MACT, which is indeed one of the big regulations coming out of
EPA. And the thing that bothers me the most about it is that it
was basically explained that the reason we had to do this was
primarily for mercury reductions and some acid gas reductions.
And whenever Lisa Jackson talked about it or anyone else, they
talked about this is the reason, because we are going to save x
thousands of people, premature death and whatever and whatever
and whatever. And yet, in their own documentation, it was very
clear that mercury reduction had no significant benefit from
Utility MACT; that any of the benefits came from double
counting reductions of particulate matter. And I would just
like to know, were you involved at all in formulating Utility
MACT or discussing the implications of Utility MACT or the
benefits of Utility MACT?
Mr. Chu. We were involved to the extent that when asked to
provide technical information on, for example, potential
impacts having to do with the reliability of transmission
distribution of energy, we provided that technical information
to the EPA. I remember especially that was some of the concerns
of the EPA, what power generating stations--was there any
threat to the delivery system for the continued reliability for
the system.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, are you concerned that EPA had
estimated that there would be a 14 gigawatt reduction in coal
production of electricity and NERC is saying it would be more
in the neighborhood of 36 to 58 gigawatt reduction? And NERC
has also raised issues on reliability. As Secretary of Energy
and responsible for reliability in a lot of these issues, does
that concern you?
Mr. Chu. Again, in discussions with NERC and EPA we looked
at the mechanisms and felt that there were procedures and
mechanisms in place so that the American public--that, you
know, should something occur because it is not taking the
average--the aggregate--for each particular sector that
receives electricity, would the companies be able to supply
electricity in a reliable manner? And so we certainly worked
with those agencies to say that there were mechanisms in place
to respond should something occur.
Mr. Whitfield. So you don't----
Mr. Chu. In the planning----
Mr. Whitfield [continuing]. Have any concerns about the
reliability issue from the information that you have?
Mr. Chu. No. Of course we have concern about the
reliability. That is one of the very important duties of the
Department of Energy.
Mr. Whitfield. I am disturbed that I think EPA misled the
American people on Utility MACT because all they ever talked
about--and even many of our friends on this side of the aisle,
not all of them, but every time there is a public statement
they talk about what the reduction of mercury emissions is
going to be. And all of the analysis, all of the data indicates
that there is insignificant benefit from mercury reduction. So
if EPA is selling it based upon that benefit and that benefit
is not there, then why would you be moving forward with such an
expensive regulation that will potentially affect reliability,
as well as increase electricity prices?
Mr. Chu. Well, Mr. Chairman, I can't speak directly to the
mercury standards that the EPA is talking about, and mainly
because that is in the purview of the EPA to protect the air,
to protect Americans' health. And our role is in determining
power distribution reliability, our role is in developing
technologies to make coal--so we can help industry reduce the
price to continue to use coal but in a much cleaner way.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, you know, I mean I just have a
philosophical difference, I guess, with you also because we
have this $16 trillion debt. ARPA-E, you are asking for a plus-
up of 27 percent on that. Basically, that is used for very
speculative technology. You have asked for a 30 percent
increase on energy efficiency and renewable energy grants. And
I was reading a biography of Henry Ford, and when he started
Ford Motor Company, he did it all with private investment. And
just like on Fisker, you had Kleiner Perkins putting up venture
capital there and I am just questioning, why should the Federal
Government be putting up these millions of dollars when we are
in the financial situation that we are in and it is very
speculative? So what is your view?
Mr. Chu. Well, I am very supportive of ARPA-E. There was a
very recent ARPA-E third summit. It was at the end of February.
There was great excitement and enthusiasm, leaders in American
industry including Fred Smith of FedEx. I am going to
paraphrase what he said when he gave a talk there and he said,
you know, pound for pound, dollar for dollar, he felt that
ARPA-E was the most effective use of government resources he
has seen in a long time. That is a paraphrase that we can get
you the exact quote, but strongly supportive of ARPA-E. Lee
Scott similarly strongly supportive of ARPA-E. Many, many
people thought that it was very important to help America get a
leg up and increase our competitiveness and help our
prosperity.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Secretary Chu.
Mr. Rush, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, as I stated in my opening statements, I am
eager for you to set the record straight in regards to the
levels of oil and gas production importation and consumption
during the time that President Obama has been in office. While
my Republican colleagues may engage in a scorched-earth
strategy and an endless and senseless blame game gamut and
point to the administration's policies as the singular cause
for rising gas prices, I believe that in fact it is your
agency's programs and policies that will help America move past
our dependence on foreign oil and fossil fuels in general so
that we will not continue to have this debate every year as gas
prices inevitably rise.
So Mr. Secretary, can you talk about the levels of oil and
gas reduction under President Obama's administration. Has
production increased or decreased? And have new lands been
opened up for drilling under this administration?
Mr. Chu. Well, Mr. Rush, as you yourself pointed out,
during the Obama administration, the production of petroleum
liquids in the United States have increased. Now, I believe it
is the highest it has been in over 8 years. Also, as you
pointed out, the fraction of the oil we import has declined
from 60 percent as a high. Now, it is down below 50 percent--48
percent--and they are showing signs of further decline. This is
very good because this means we are exporting fewer dollars
abroad. And as we produce more oil here domestically, that is
jobs in America, wealth creation in America. And so the
administration is very supportive of this increase in gas and
oil.
Mr. Rush. Well, as it relates to the importation of oil,
can you discuss the amount of oil that is being imported today
as compared to before President Obama took office? Are we
importing more or less oil from foreign countries under this
administration?
Mr. Chu. We are importing less. Again, roughly I believe
less in the last 16 years as my memory serves to be correct.
Mr. Rush. For the record, to straighten out the record, has
American consumption of gas increased or decreased over the
past year and if it has changed, what do you attribute to that
change? Can you discuss some of the policies that have gone
into effect under President Obama that are impacting consumer
habits and lowering U.S. consumption of gas?
Mr. Chu. Are you speaking of gas as in gasoline or as in
natural gas?
Mr. Rush. Gasoline. I am sorry.
Mr. Chu. Well, our consumption of gasoline has decreased in
part due to two reasons. First, there was a dramatic decrease,
unfortunately, due to a very severe recession that we are very
slowly climbing out of. But there is another very important
part, and that is we want to climb out of this recession as
quickly as we can. There is another important part and that is
the efficiency. The use of gasoline is improving. And this goes
directly to help every American family in reducing the amount
they spend on gasoline every week. And so again, the Obama
administration has been very supportive and helpful and leading
the way in improving the efficiency of automobiles, trucks, and
other vehicles.
Mr. Rush. A part of your responsibility and a part of your
concern I am sure is the weaning of the American consumer off
of fossil fuel and our heavy dependence on fossil fuel and also
foreign sources of energy. What policies do you have in place
and give us a recipe for how you view these polices as being a
top priority for the American people and for this Congress?
Mr. Chu. Well, the policies the President has taken in
terms of increasing our production of oil and natural gas
include the making available for lease an increase in the
Federal lands being made available for lease for oil and
natural gas. And so that has continued to increase and will
continue so that the American oil and gas companies have more
access to Federal lands.
Mr. Rush. My time is up.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Rush.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Upton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, again, welcome. I learned literally in the
last few minutes that apparently President Obama is personally
weighing in on Members of the Senate to vote no on the Keystone
Pipeline amendment, which is going to be an amendment as part
of the highway bill. And I am not happy about that at all. I
will say that for the record we passed that bill out of this
committee a couple of times with bipartisan support. We saw the
same thing on the House Floor. Are you weighing in at all with
any Senators on this amendment vote today?
Mr. Chu. No, I am not.
Mr. Upton. I know it has been reported that oil production
on Federal lands has dropped 14 percent since 2010. And in
reading from the Greenwire last week--let me just read a couple
things to you here--``domestic oil production may be at an all
time high nationwide, but the increase is primarily occurring
on State and private lands rather than on Federal land and
waters where production appears to have dropped significantly
in 2011. According to the most recent government data,
production of natural gas on public lands and waters in fiscal
year 2011 dropped 11 percent from the previous year,''
according to the Interior Department. Oil production dipped
nearly 14 percent. The reduction in oil production was most
significant in the Gulf of Mexico where it declined nearly 17
percent to 514 million barrels from 618 million barrels the
previous year. And in a chart on oil and gas production on
Federal lands and waters, it appears it has declined in oil by
100 million barrels from 2010 to 2011.
Now, we agree that sadly, because of--our decline in our
economy is the main reason why I think consumption has gone
down. We didn't get the growth; we didn't have the jobs. I know
in my State we had 38 consecutive months of double-digit
unemployment. But as I look at your own EIA, if you look out
the next couple of decades, your department says that we will
be using the same amount of gasoline in 2030 as we are now. I
presume that in large part that is because we are going to have
more energy efficient vehicles, a whole number of different
things that are there that of course we want. But demand can't
be the only answer.
And I guess my question is that with this oil production
decline on Federal lands, people understanding supply and
demand report that you all put out just 2 or 3 weeks ago,
predicted that oil prices would hit $4.25 by Memorial Day. We
are one penny away in my district from $4 gas, at least this
last weekend, and some predict that we are going to hit $5 gas
as early as perhaps the 4th of July. In large part it is
because of declining production primarily on Federal land.
Would you not disagree?
Mr. Chu. Well, Chairman Upton, I first want to say that
both I and the President and everyone in the administration
wants very much to do what we can to lower the price of
gasoline because it has a severe effect on the pocketbooks of
Americans. It affects American businesses. In terms of the
Federal lands production, what the government does, as you well
know, is we lease land to oil companies and it is up to them to
produce the oil. Currently, they----
Mr. Upton. But right now, just to interrupt for a second,
it is proposing a 5-year leasing plan that would delay sales in
the Atlantic or Pacific through at least 2017. So it is looking
for yet another moratorium for 5 more years. How does that help
us?
Mr. Chu. Well, it is not my understanding. My understanding
is a bit different. This is a plan that will be, for example,
in the Gulf of Mexico, the Federal jurisdiction being made
available is 75 percent of the area in the Gulf of Mexico that
is under Federal jurisdiction. And so it is a plan to increase
the leasing. Now----
Mr. Upton. I was in the Gulf last summer and I went out on
a rig that was 120 miles off the coast of Louisiana. That day
they pumped 110,000 barrels. And looking out a couple miles
away there was another drilling ship that was there and they
were waiting for the permits, just waiting. This was a Chevron
rig. They were literally waiting for weeks and weeks paying
millions of dollars every day so that that ship wouldn't un-
anchor and go off to Brazil where they would never see it
again, in essence trying to tap the same vein that Tahiti drill
rig was drilling that particular day.
And the frustration from so many folks there is that the
permits are not being approved, this new moratorium is there
knowing that a third of our oil comes from that region. You
have got Keystone literally could be a million barrels a day
that otherwise will go to China. It just seems that we are
turning our back on independence from the rest of the world
that would clearly help our consumers as it relates to their
own pocketbook.
And I know my time is expired. I will yield back.
Mr. Whitefield. Thank you, Mr. Upton.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Dingell, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy.
Welcome, Mr. Secretary, delighted to see you here. I have a
number of questions which I will ask that you respond to by yes
or no.
It has been a year since your Loan Program Office approved
the loan from the Advanced Technology Vehicles Manufacturing
Program. As you know, that program was created to provide the
auto industry with incentives to build or expand manufacturing
facilities here in the United States instead of taking those
jobs overseas. Loan recipients such as Ford and Nissan have
successfully built and expanded facilities in Michigan,
Tennessee, Illinois, Kentucky, and other States. Question: Is
the Loan Program Office working to streamline the approval
process so that applicants can be assured they will not be
waiting for years to find out if their application will be
approved? Yes or no?
Mr. Chu. The Loan Program is working to improve their
processing in all aspects.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Secretary, I will ask that you submit
something on this for the record. And I ask unanimous consent
that my letter with those questions and your responses be
inserted in the record.
Next question: Has the Loan Program Office implemented any
of the recommendations of the Allison Report to protect
taxpayer dollars and to provide a uniform system for evaluating
loan applications? Yes or no?
Mr. Chu. We have actually begun to change over the past
year and a half many of the things that the Allison Report
discusses. So we internally have been doing that and we are
reviewing all the things that the committee did. It is very
valuable concentration and we continue to improve our loan
program.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Mr. Secretary, I am very much concerned
about this. The lack of funding for the Facility for Rare
Isotope Beams, or FRIB, within the Nuclear Physics Program, I
am told that the funds allocated for that program in fiscal
year 2013 budget are not enough for them to start construction
in this year. As of now, the program and the project is on time
and under budget. Furthermore, the facility will generate 5,000
construction jobs, 400 permanent scientific positions and have
a $1 billion economic impact.
I noticed that in other programs within the Office of
Science, the President is proposing to increase funding for
scientific projects overseas. I believe that we should first
ensure that we are meeting our project obligations here at home
before sending our money and scientists abroad. Do you agree
with that?
Mr. Chu. We are very supportive of FRIB. We have asked for
$22 million to continue this project going forward and we hope
that Congress votes and appropriates that money. And so we want
this project to continue going forward.
With regard to this other project you spoke about, it is a
different part of this--but the thing I do want to point out is
it is an international collaboration, but 80 percent of the
funds will be spent in the United States, both in national
laboratories, universities, and in industries in the U.S.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Mr. Secretary, your department has
already invested $50 million in FRIB. I am concerned about the
progress at FRIB. What is the commitment that the Department
makes with regard to FRIB? Are we going to let it sort of
strangle on the vine or are we going to see to it that it
continues to be funded even though this year we have not given
them enough to commence the construction?
Mr. Chu. Well, sir, as I said, we think that FRIB is a
worthy project. We have asked for continued funding and we hope
that Congress allows us to have that funding that we can keep
this project going forward.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Mr. Secretary, you know I have great
affection and respect for you, but you can't lay this one off
on Congress. I am talking about what the budget does and not
what the Congress might do.
Now, Mr. Secretary, FRIB will have national security
implications and applications such as studying the detection of
a nuclear weapon or dirty bomb detonation. I do not believe
that we can pursue these types of national security
opportunities and applications at facilities overseas. Doesn't
that tell us that we should put our money here locally rather
than giving it to other countries to do this kind of critical
research in programs that will have such a significant impact
upon our national security?
Mr. Chu. The funds, as I said, the lion's share of the
funds for ITER, this International Fusion project, will be
spent in the United States. But the Department of Energy agrees
with the other ITER partners that this is a very important
experiment that could perhaps unlock fusion energy for the
future.
Mr. Dingell. Again, Mr. Secretary, with great affection and
respect, we are going to spend some money in the United States,
we are going to build a facility abroad, and the work and the
benefits that will be achieved from this will be spent abroad
and will strengthen foreign scientific applications as opposed
to Americans'. I find this distressing.
I thank you for being here. I will follow this up with a
letter indicating further distress to you, Mr. Secretary. Thank
you for your presence.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Barton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again, thank you, Mr. Secretary for being here.
In my opening statement I referenced the alternative energy
budget and specifically said concerns about the Loan Guarantee
Program. As you know, we continue to have an ongoing
investigation with regards to Solyndra. At the last hearing
that you attended I believe where the focus was on Solyndra,
you were very supportive of the way the Loan Guarantee Program
had been managed, but I think you did indicate that there might
be some changes forthcoming. Have there been changes in the way
you and your department have managed the Loan Guarantee Program
for alternative energy, and if so, could you tell us what those
are?
Mr. Chu. Yes, sir. There were changes. Let me give you a
few examples. We know that sometimes the economics of a
particular industry--for example, in the case of Solyndra solar
photovoltaics--can change very rapidly. A 40 percent decline in
the price of solar modules, essentially a commodity, in one
year; 75, 80 percent decline in 3 years. And one of the things
we now do on a weekly basis is we look very, very closely at
changing market conditions. We established a Risk Committee
that includes people both within in the Loan Program and
outside the Loan Program, subject matter experts in the
Department of Energy.
Also, I now have a special advisor on financial matters
that looks very closely at this, as, again, an independent set
of eyes to make sure we monitor closely before future
disbursements all the things that could affect the loan,
including things outside the control of an individual company
like this very rapid decline in prices.
Mr. Barton. Concerning this independent advisor you just
referenced, has he prepared--and if so, could you present to
the committee for our review--a list of the additional loan
guarantees and the status of those? And what if any of those
might be in danger of following Solyndra in defaulting and
going into bankruptcy?
Mr. Chu. Well----
Mr. Barton. I know at least one other has, since Solyndra,
and I am told that there are a number of others that are on the
problem list.
Mr. Chu. Well, there are companies, again, as I said which
we watch very closely because of a wide range of issues. We
also have to respect the confidentiality of any of the people
that we have made loans to or commitments to make loans to.
So----
Mr. Barton. How about how many loans are on the what I
think you call the ``watch list?'' That shouldn't be
proprietary.
Mr. Chu. Well, I don't have the exact number but the----
Mr. Barton. Is it a double-digit number? You know, is it
between 1 and 10, 10 and 20?
Mr. Chu. Well, I don't again recall the exact number. I am
going to be briefed by my senior advisor, Richard Kauffman, on
this matter, but again any company that we think has a chance
of being subject to market change or market conditions, or
other issues internal within the company, we do watch very
closely.
Mr. Barton. Well, do you think that the American taxpayer
should have a reasonable expectation that all of these loans
should be repaid as opposed to any loan that is made is just
money down the tubes and it is not going to be repaid. I mean
you have to admit that the history so far of the initial
projects has not been good.
Mr. Chu. First, I do say that the American taxpayer has
every right to expect that there is a reasonable chance for
repayment of the loans we give out. I would also say that many
of the loans we have given out have been very good successes.
It has already been mentioned, loans, for example, to Ford
Motor Company, to Nissan----
Mr. Barton. That wasn't an alternative energy loan.
Mr. Chu. We have other loans that were----
Mr. Barton. I don't think they came through your department
either, Mr. Secretary, but----
Mr. Chu. Sir, actually, the ATVM loans do. But in regard to
alternative energies, there are a number of loans that we feel
and the Allison Report also recognizes that are low-risk, have
a very high probability of being paid back.
Mr. Barton. Well, my time is expired but we will follow up
in writing and we will ask that these problem loans on the
watch list be provided to the committee so that our people can
review them and hopefully work with your agency to take steps
to protect the taxpayer money.
Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I recognize the gentleman from
Massachusetts, Mr. Markey, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, there are only two tools the President has
to bring down gas prices right now--deploy the strategic
petroleum reserve and get other countries in the world to use
their Strategic Petroleum Reserves to help to put pressure on
the marketplace; and two, curbing excess speculation in oil
futures markets through the Commodities Futures Trading
Commission. The SPR has proven effective in helping to bring
down prices and we have plenty of oil in the SPR right now, 700
million barrels. You have said, Mr. Secretary, deploying SPR is
on the table as an option. Senator Geithner, Secretary Salazar
have said the same thing, that you have got it on the table.
Now, the oil companies and the Republicans, they oppose
deploying the SPR but their oil-above-all policy doesn't help
drivers right now. None of this oil they are talking about is
coming online this year. And people are looking for relief at
the pump right now. So Mr. Secretary, Senators Vitter, Hoeven,
Lugar, Crapo, and Thune have introduced legislation that would
prevent the President from deploying any oil from the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve until he approves the Keystone XL Pipeline
permit. Do you believe, Mr. Secretary, that the authority of
the President to deploy the Strategic Petroleum Reserve should
depend on the permitting of the Keystone Pipeline even if Iran
cuts off the Strait of Hormuz and blocks 20 percent of the
world's oil supply?
Mr. Chu. No, I don't.
Mr. Markey. Do you believe that it makes any sense to say
to our young men and women that we export into the Middle East
to protect this supply of oil that we are not going to use the
weapon we have here in the United States--the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve--in order to keep the price of oil low and
not allow Iran to threaten us unnecessarily?
Mr. Chu. Well, as you noted, the administration has said
repeatedly that the Strategic Petroleum Reserve is on the table
but it is a very complex issue.
Mr. Markey. Right, but it would be a bad idea, would it
not----
Mr. Chu. Pardon?
Mr. Markey [continuing]. To strip the President of his
authority to use it unless it approved the Keystone Pipeline?
Mr. Chu. I agree.
Mr. Markey. Thank you. Now, on the CFTC, the Republicans
have a bill that has come out of Agriculture Committee and come
out of the Financial Services Committee that would stop all
rulemakings to give the CFTC the authority on speculation, on
margins, on position limits, on gauging, on protecting the
public in the futures oil market where so much of this is just
speculation being driven up, driving up the price of oil. Do
you think it is a bad idea to strip the CFTC legislatively of
their authority to be able to protect against gauging in the
marketplace?
Mr. Chu. Well, no one would be in favor of gauging.
Mr. Markey. The Republicans believe you don't need the
rulemakings at the CFTC. Are they right or wrong, Mr.
Secretary?
Mr. Chu. Everyone is very concerned----
Mr. Markey. No, everyone is not concerned, Mr. Secretary.
The Republicans want to strip out the authority of the CFTC to
go against manipulation, to deal with these margin issues, to
deal with the position limits. Is that a bad idea?
Mr. Chu. Well, as I said, if you please let me finish,
everyone is concerned about speculation unnecessarily driving
the price of oil up. This is why the administration and one of
the things that can counter speculation is more transparent
information, and this is why the administration is very focused
on that.
Mr. Markey. So we need the SPR and we need the
administration to have the authority to be able to crack down
on the speculation, make sure there is more transparency and no
game-playing.
And I will also say that there is a proposal out there to
create an international natural gas market. Right now, you
know, Mr. Secretary, there is no natural gas market. The price
of natural gas in China is six to seven times higher than in
the United States. It is three times higher in Europe than it
is in the United States. That is leading to a boom in
manufacturing in our country. It is really leading to all new
planning on natural gas vehicles because the price is so low
and many utilities are really contemplating how fast to switch
over from coal over to natural gas. There is an application for
eight new licenses that are before you to export this natural
gas, which your own agency says could raise the price upwards
of 54 percent. I urge you to call a time-out, Mr. Secretary, to
make sure that we get this right.
You had an Assistant Secretary that made a statement last
week that really disturbed me. I would urge you not to approve
these licenses until we put together a plan for the United
States on liquefied natural gas exported from our country.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman's time is expired.
At this time, I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Dr.
Burgess, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the chairman for the recognition.
Yes, Secretary, way back here. Let me ask you because Mr.
Barton was asking you some questions about the loan guarantees
at Solyndra. When you came to us in November of last year it
seemed to be news to you that there were postponement of
layoffs that occurred at the company, those postponements to
take the layoffs past election day before they were announced.
And you seem to be surprised that that had in fact occurred.
And I think if I recall correctly you said you were going to
look into that, so can you share with us the results of your
investigation, what information you have uncovered as to why
those layoffs were postponed past the election day?
Mr. Chu. We turned the matter over to the IG, the
Department of Energy IG, and they are looking into the matter,
and when they tell us what they find, we could share that with
you.
Mr. Burgess. And I pray that you do. But so far have you
identified any of your staff, Department of Energy, that were
involved in making that decision?
Mr. Chu. No. As I said, we turned the matter over to the IG
and so that is an independent look at what happened.
Mr. Burgess. Have you yourself been interviewed by the
Inspector General on this issue?
Mr. Chu. No, I have not.
Mr. Burgess. Have you been informed that that is likely to
happen?
Mr. Chu. No, I have not.
Mr. Burgess. Are you willing to talk to the Inspector
General about this?
Mr. Chu. I have always cooperated with the IG.
Mr. Burgess. Let me ask you a question about the Allison
Report and Congressman Barton was asking about the watch list.
Can I just ask you--and I respect the fact that you are
concerned about some proprietary issues--but would you provide
to the committee or committee staff this watch list, provide
the copy of the list to the committee?
Mr. Chu. Well, actually, I was slipped a note and I misread
it. It appears as though this committee's staff will be getting
a briefing from Richard Kauffman, my special advisor, next week
on this, on the Loan Program and the Allison.
Mr. Burgess. Is that the full committee staff or just the
Democratic staff?
Mr. Chu. I think it is the full committee staff.
Mr. Burgess. May I ask as a member of the committee, then,
that you would have your guys bring that list to that briefing?
Mr. Chu. Well, we will do what we can but again we are
going to give you a briefing----
Mr. Burgess. We need your commitment, sir, that we will be
able to see that list because it is important as far as
congressional oversight on this process going forward.
Mr. Chu. Well, as I said----
Mr. Burgess. We can all be criticized about the way things
have been handled so far. I would like to be able to stop the
bleeding at some point. So let me just ask you for your
commitment to make that list available to the staff.
Mr. Chu. We have to look at--again, we don't want to
violate the company confidentialities. The dynamics of what
happens to these companies changes very rapidly and so it is,
again, part of our loan----
Mr. Burgess. If I may, sir, the taxpayer has taken a pretty
bad hit on this, and while I want the companies to do well, I
think at some point we may have to put the taxpayers' needs and
wants ahead of those of the companies'. Again, I cannot see a
reason why you could not bring that list and I for one as a
committee member am going to be expecting you to bring that
list.
Let me ask you a question. You have had the chief financial
officer of your department, the Department of Energy, had
produced a report on uncosted balances in 2010 and just in the
purpose and the background notes at the beginning of this
report it said your approach was developed in '96. As a
response to the GAO criticism, the Department did not have a
standard effective approach for identifying excess carryover
balances that might be available to reduce future budget
requests to address this concern. You establish percentages
thresholds. So where are we with that? Are you prepared to
produce for this committee those numbers that met that
percentage threshold that might be available to offset the
numbers you are requesting in your budget?
Mr. Chu. Yes. We have been working very aggressively at
reducing these uncosted balances in the last several years.
Mr. Burgess. Well, the GAO estimated that this current
fiscal year it is in excess of $680 million from carryover
programs. What is your justification for asking for funding
increases in programs with significant carryover balances?
Mr. Chu. I believe the lion's share of that amount has to
do with a program, carbon-capture and sequestration, which
means that, according to the statute, we need significant
private sector investment matching funds of over half. And some
of that has not materialized. We have an uncosted balance
because if the private sector doesn't want to co-invest, there
is not much we can do about that.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
Waxman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, people are complaining about the high price
of gasoline, understandably so, and we want to help. But do you
see any short-term way to lower gasoline prices?
Mr. Chu. As you said, everybody is concerned about the high
price of gasoline and diesel fuel and we do want to help in any
way we can. But as the President said, as I have said, there is
no single magic bullet that can instantaneously do this. And so
we work very hard and all the tools at our disposal--the most
effective tool is that we want to improve the efficiency and to
diversify the energy we use in transportation. The boon in
natural gas we think is wonderful because we now see and are
very supportive and are helping offload some of the demand for
petroleum onto natural gas used in transportation. We see great
movement in heavy trucking and in delivery trucks, things of
that nature.
Mr. Waxman. Well, the Republicans have said over and over
again we just need more oil. If we had more oil, we wouldn't
have this problem. And then, of course, they go on to say it is
the President's fault we don't have more oil. Well, the reality
is we are producing more oil in the United States than ever
before and we are using less because of the greater efficiency
in the automobiles. So if we had more oil and the oil is priced
at the world price, would that lower the world price?
Mr. Chu. Well, the price of oil is very, very complex. It
is certainly driven by supply and demand. It is also affected
by uncertainty in the Middle East and several----
Mr. Waxman. Well, if we produced more oil and OPEC decides
to produce less, that won't help us; that will hurt us. If we
produce more oil and more oil is being demanded by China and
India, the world is going to divert oil there as well. I
mentioned in my comments earlier that Canada produces more oil
than they use and yet they are paying the same price for
gasoline that we are paying. So it seems to me--and you made
this point--that we have got to look beyond just producing more
oil. We have got to look at using less oil. And the way to use
less oil would be to invest in clean energy to diversify and
reduce our energy use. It is a tough challenge.
The Congress should be helping you and the President
accomplish that goal. Instead, Republicans in Congress attack
every proposal you and the President make, every idea you
offer, every initiative you take. For example, battery
manufacturing is an industry that has been dominated by
Southeast Asia for decades. The United States has essentially
no capacity so the administration changed all that. And the way
I understand you changed it is to use the Recovery Act to
incentivize the development of a manufacturing supply chain for
vehicle batteries.
And here in the United States we have a domestic production
of the Chevy Volt, innovative, award-winning, plug-in hybrid
electric vehicles. But the Republicans seem to be rooting for
failure. They are attacking GM on this groundbreaking product.
Does it make sense for us to be rooting against American
manufacturing at a time like this?
Mr. Chu. No, of course not. We should all be rooting for
very innovative products that could be sold worldwide. It would
show industrial leadership and great wealth.
Mr. Waxman. It makes just common sense. But this isn't the
only example. The President proposed a clean energy standard to
increase the amount of energy we get from renewable sources of
energy, as well as from nuclear and advanced natural gas
plants, similar to what Mr. Barton proposed from the last
Congress. And it is really an all-of-the-above strategy. But
the Republicans don't even want to discuss this idea.
The President proposes to eliminate unnecessary subsidies
for the oil industry. Last year, the top five oil companies
made $137 billion in profits. The price of oil is over $100 a
barrel. With oil at such a high price, do we need to be giving
out $4 billion in tax breaks for oil companies each year to
have an incentive for them to drill more oil? Can you explain
that to me?
Mr. Chu. I believe the oil industry is doing very well
financially and they have a lot of incentive.
Mr. Waxman. They have a lot of incentive now so we would be
better off repealing those subsidies and using that money to
develop sources of clean energy that reduce our dependence on
oil and move us forward to a clean energy economy, and yet the
Republicans oppose that as well. I think the President is on
the right track. I appreciate what he has been doing. Even
though Congress tries to frustrate him and I applaud his
statements about how we need to move forward at this time.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Secretary Chu. I love following my friend, Mr.
Waxman, because for us to move in the clean energy world, we
have to pay for that. Isn't it true, Secretary Chu, that you
espouse European gas prices for the United States? I mean
briefly. Yes or no? Have you been quoted saying that it would
be good for us to have European gas prices?
Mr. Chu. At no time when I was Secretary of Energy have I
ever said----
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Prior to?
Mr. Chu. Prior to that I was----
Mr. Shimkus. We all know the answer is yes. And obviously
that is to move to a clean energy future based upon Americans
paying more at the pump, which is the desire and the goal of
this administration. I didn't want to go in that direction but
my friend from California empowered me to go.
Let me move to----
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Shimkus----
Mr. Shimkus. No, reclaiming my time. I have got to go to--
--
Mr. Waxman [continuing]. Are you going to give him time to
answer it?
Mr. Shimkus. I would like to reclaim my time.
Mr. Secretary, if the D.C. Circuit rules against the DOE in
pending Yucca Mountain litigation, will the Department abide by
that ruling?
Mr. Chu. Yes, it will.
Mr. Shimkus. If the Federal court orders you to pursue the
Yucca application at NRC, do you have the staff to pursue it?
Mr. Chu. If the Federal court orders us to do so, we will
do so.
Mr. Shimkus. Describe the funds that could be made
available from the prior years to pursue the application.
Mr. Chu. That I would have----
Mr. Shimkus. This would include any carryover funds that
were made available until expended, any unobligated balances
from prior years' funds that may have been obligated but not
spent and therefore subject to redirection.
Mr. Chu. I would have to get back to you on the details.
Mr. Shimkus. Would you do that for me, please? Thank you.
As you hopefully know, this past Tuesday, the Board of
County of Commissioners from Nye County, Nevada, unanimously
sent you a letter notifying you of their consent to host a
proposed repository at Yucca Mountain and requesting that you
initiate the cooperative negotiations process recommended by
the President's Blue Ribbon Commission. And I would like to
submit that, Mr. Chairman, for the record.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.041

Mr. Shimkus. And will you meet with Nye County to initiate
a cooperative negotiated process?
Mr. Chu. Well, first, we are in the process now of
reviewing the recommendations of the Blue Ribbon Commission. We
would also like to work with Members of Congress in order to
see because the Blue Ribbon Commission has said very clearly
that they would like to see Congress look at a revision of the
Nuclear Waste Act. And so----
Mr. Shimkus. Well, yes----
Mr. Chu [continuing]. These are very important steps----
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. We have got the Blue Ribbon
Commission--we had great testimony here with the commissioners.
On page 48 it says, ``the importance of the local
communities,'' and so we have Nye County saying we are ready to
go into direct negotiation with you and looking at what you can
able afford to bring to the arena.
On page 48 it says, ``this unwavering local support helped
to sustain the project during periods when Federal and State
agencies had to work through disagreements over the issue.'' So
the Blue Ribbon Commission really highlights the importance of
local communities in saying we will accept this nuclear waste.
Let us get involved in negotiations. That is what your
commission suggested. We have a local county that is taking you
up on the offer of the Blue Ribbon Commission. I hope that you
would then talk to the good folks of Nye County and get into
negotiations as the Blue Ribbon Commission had suggested, which
is the commission that you asked for.
Mr. Chu. Well, we have to set up a process that can do
this. Certainly, the Blue Ribbon Commission says that you need
local support. I would also add I think the Blue Ribbon
Commission said this as well--you also need State support.
And----
Mr. Shimkus. Well, let me quote from this. On page 48 it
says, ``this unwavering local support helped to sustain the
project during periods when Federal and State agencies had to
work through disagreements over the issue.'' So the Blue Ribbon
Commission said, you know, Norway, Finland, Spain, local
communities very helpful in working through the disagreements
from the States or the national government. I think that we
have a local community that is fulfilling the intent as
identified by the Blue Ribbon Commission. I would think that
the Department of Energy would welcome that because the Blue
Ribbon Commission said two things, right? It said that we are
not disregarding Yucca. We have so much nuclear waste we need a
second long-term geological repository.
Mr. Chu. Right.
Mr. Shimkus. That is what it said.
Mr. Chu. They did say that and we welcome a local
community's support.
Mr. Shimkus. So you will welcome Nye County when they come
visit with you?
Mr. Chu. You are looking for a very big answer. Again, I
think we need to set up a procedure so that we can deal with
this thing as rapidly as possible.
Mr. Shimkus. I would hope you would consider Nye County.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I regret our
ranking member from California on our side is not here because
I know this is not Ways and Means Committee but, you know, I
know California benefits from the high-tech industry and motion
picture industry and they have been pretty financially
successful. And I don't know if we are going to take away their
incentives for producing their products in our country like I
hear all the time on oil and gas. I would like to have those
incentives continue.
But let me ask you one specific question. For many years,
the Texas Center of Superconductivity at the University of
Houston has been doing great work in a field that shows
promise. From 1993 to 2011, the Federal Government financially
supported the need for continuing science and development
demonstrations in this field to keep the technology leadership
in the U.S. and laid the foundation for the growth of well
paying research and manufacturing jobs. Unfortunately, the line
item for superconductivity technology funding was eliminated 2
years ago. What is the U.S. Government and the DOE doing to
maintain that U.S. competitive advantage on superconductor
technology that will have a major impact on energy generation,
transmission, storage in light of the substantial overseas
government investment to push technology in the commercial
products? What is DOE doing with----
Mr. Chu. In the Department of Energy we support research in
superconducting technology primarily in the Office of Science.
We continue to do this. Many of the discoveries made in
superconductivity and the understanding is developed in the
United States. We think this has great promise and we will
continue to support that research.
Mr. Green. OK. I will probably get a letter to you and ask
you about that because having watched what happened with
another Dr. Chu at University of Houston for many years and the
success they have done both with State funding and with Federal
funding. I appreciate it.
The President's fiscal year 2013 budget includes an inner-
agency study that the DOE, EPA, and U.S. Geological Service are
partnering on to examine environmental and health effects of
hydraulic fracturing. Can you explain the purpose behind this
study and how is different than what the EPA has been already
doing? And then what is your Energy Advisory Board has already
addressed, that combination of the inner agencies compared to
what EPA has done and what Department of Energy has already
done with their Energy Advisory Board?
Mr. Chu. Well, the Subcommittee of the Secretary of Energy
Advisory Board felt that the Department of Energy, in
collaboration with other agencies--notably USGS--would be in a
good position to help industry develop the natural gas and oil
resources safely. We want to see those resources developed but
we want to see them developed in an environmentally safe way.
So we are requesting funding to help the companies extract
those resources in an environmentally responsible way.
Mr. Green. And believe me, in Texas we want to extract it
safely. I know there are some things that we need to work on.
The State law actually changed in Texas requiring posting of
the ingredients. You know, I know companies already published
them or had them available through OSHA requirements. But will
there be peer review and stakeholder input incorporated into
this study?
Mr. Chu. Absolutely. We feel that this is using science to
help develop new methodologies again so we can continue to
extract natural gas, but as we both agree in an environmentally
safe way. And so it is these very rapidly improving
technologies that I think you and I both agree can be done.
Mr. Green. Carbon capture and sequestration is constantly
discussed in a context that can possibly be used as carbon
control technology under the EPA rules for utilities and
refiners. The problem is it is still too expensive to
commercially be used. Can you describe current DOE carbon
capture and sequestration activities?
Mr. Chu. Yes, I can. But unfortunately there is 47 seconds.
I could do it in probably 4 hours. But let me just briefly say
that we are very committed and focused to reducing those costs,
reducing them greatly so that one can continue using our fossil
fuel resources.
Mr. Green. OK. Mr. Chairman, I know I am out of time but
CCS still is not commercially viable but hopefully we can get
to that point sometime before you get mandates there that at
least the technology needs to be there.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
Bilbray, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilbray. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary, I am still very happy that you are where you are
not just because you are a Californian but you have been brave
enough to stand up on energy issues that were politically
incorrect, pointing out the great shortfalls with ethanol and
the great opportunity of nuclear power. And I am glad to hear
you talk about the small reactors. Hopefully, the initiative
with the United States Navy and Navy bases will look at that
opportunity. In San Diego, we have 20 nuclear reactors within a
mile of downtown San Diego being run by 20-something-year-old
kids. But we can't power our streetlights with it yet.
But let me just say this. I think there are a lot of
partisan cheap shots always go back and forth across here, so
let me try to bridge the gap and find a place where Democrats,
Republicans, independents and Americans across the board can
agree, and most importantly you. You agree that the crisis with
finding a replacement for gasoline is a supply, how clean it
is, and the infrastructure to be able to distribute it, major
problem. I am a big ethanol guy, opposed to it, and the
environmental issues and the supply issues and the
infrastructure issues I have a real problem with. But algae,
which I have supported strongly, is very clean but we don't
have supply and won't have supply in a long time, and it is
compatible with the infrastructure. But we have natural gas,
which we have massive sources of, it is super clean--it is even
cleaner than propane, which is permissible under Federal law to
be used in interior spaces--and the thing we miss out is that
85 percent of the urban homes in America are plumbed with
natural gas. The infrastructure is there. The trouble is you
have a 3-foot barrier between the water heater and the car
parked in the garage and we have not bridged that gap.
And all of the money we have spent and we are proposing to
spend, are you looking at what we are doing for research and
development of home dispensing to allow the American consumer
not 20, 30 years from now but 10 years from now to be able to
say I don't want to fill up with gasoline; I am going to plug
in my car and fill up with natural gas over the night. What in
your budget is committed to bridging that 3-foot gap between
the automobile and energy independence in the next decade and
the water heater that 85 percent of city dwellers use today?
Mr. Chu. I am very glad you asked that question. The
programs we have in our budget are in energy efficiency,
renewable energy, and also in ARPA-E. Specifically, what we are
doing about that--and I share your excitement that our abundant
natural gas in the United States, which looks to remain at low
prices for at least another decade or two--has a great
opportunity to help with transportation costs, to reduce the
transportation costs. And so what we are specifically doing in
terms of the home use is that right now the barrier, beyond
that wall, it is the cost of the natural gas tank. Honda sells
a Honda Civic, natural gas, but that carbon tank is very
expensive. So we are----
Mr. Bilbray. You are talking about the tank in the vehicle.
Mr. Chu. In the vehicle.
Mr. Bilbray. I am not talking about the tank in the
vehicle. I drove a natural gas with that tank in 1992. This
isn't brain surgery. I am talking about the home dispensing
pump that will be able within the nighttime, 6 hours, bring the
pressure up from the home into the tank of the car. Is there
anything in your budget that specifically is addressing an
aggressive attitude towards that home dispensing pump so----
Mr. Chu. Yes.
Mr. Bilbray [continuing]. They can get it at their house
every night?
Mr. Chu. Yes, there is but I was taking too long to explain
it. So the short answer is the commercially available pump has
to be able to pump to 3,500 pounds per square inch, 4,000
pounds per square inch. It is very, very expensive and after
3,000 equivalent gasoline miles it has to be refurbished for
another couple thousand dollars. So it is like $6,000 for the
dispenser and then after a while you have got to send it back
to the factory. The tank we are trying to develop is something
that can allow compression at not 3,500 pounds per square inch
but maybe several hundred pounds per square inch. We know that
when you decrease the pressure to that and still have the
range, then things become very inexpensive and accessible. And
so that is what I was trying to get at.
Mr. Bilbray. Isn't it true that if we had home dispensing
the big advantage with this is flex fuel? You do not have to
have twin systems in the car. The same system that would burn
natural gas has the ability to burn regular gasoline with a
flip of the switch?
Mr. Chu. That is true. You just need two tanks, one for the
natural gas----
Mr. Bilbray. Right.
Mr. Chu [continuing]. And one for the----
Mr. Bilbray. But you don't have to have separate motors?
Mr. Chu. Correct.
Mr. Bilbray. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Doyle, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Chu, thank you and thank you for being with us
today.
Mr. Secretary, the National Energy Technology lab in
Pittsburgh is funded by your department's Office of Fossil
Energy, and unfortunately, the President's fiscal year 2013
budget request continues the very troubling trend of decreasing
the Department's fossil energy budget. A large portion of the
research at the NETL is in advanced coal technologies. In
fiscal year 2010 the coal portion of the fossil energy budget
was $404 million but the fiscal year 2013 request is only 240
million, representing a 41 percent reduction in funding for
advanced clean coal and R&D. Specifically, the President's
fiscal year 2013 request zeroes out critical research in fuel
cells and fuels programs and significantly reduces funding for
carbon capture, carbon storage, and advanced energy systems and
cross-cutting research. Some of these cuts appear to be
especially poorly timed.
Mr. Secretary, are you aware that the EPA is preparing to
issue a proposed rule any day now setting emission limits for
greenhouse gases from coal-fired power plants?
Mr. Chu. I am not sure of the exact timing of the EPA's
schedule.
Mr. Doyle. But it is imminent? And to the best of your
knowledge, Mr. Secretary, that rule will require coal-fired
power plants to either capture their carbon emissions or
utilize pre-combustion technology that allows them to emit less
carbon to begin with. Yes or no?
Mr. Chu. I think it is mostly--I would have to get back to
you on the exact ruling that the EPA is contemplating and see.
Mr. Doyle. Well, I guess what I am trying to say is we
can't have it both ways here. I support EPA's effort to reduce
greenhouse gases but if the administration is going to issue a
regulation requiring carbon capture and sequestration from
power plants this year, can you explain to us why the budget
request for carbon capture and sequestration is the lowest this
administration has ever requested?
Mr. Chu. Well, we are very supportive and I am personally
very supportive of carbon capture and sequestration, as you
probably know. And we think this is still a very important part
of what we do in the Department of Energy. We remain committed
to developing the technologies to lower the cost so we can
continue using our abundant fossil fuel.
Mr. Doyle. Well, it just seems to me that if we are going
to ask our power sector to reduce their greenhouse gas
emissions, which I support, but at the same time we are nearly
eliminating the research funding for the technologies that do
this, I just think it is not fair or there is a lack of
coordination going on between EPA and the Department of Energy.
Mr. Secretary, let me ask you another question. This
administration has championed regulations to reduce pollution
for power plants and from idling trucks. One way to do this is
using solid oxide fuel cell technology, which is being
developed through the Solid State Energy Conversion Alliance in
the Office of Fossil Energy. This program is developing and
commercializing technology to produce highly efficient power
from natural gas and eliminate idling emissions with auxiliary
power units. Seeing as this technology could be used to meet
regulations coming from the administration, can you explain to
us why the funding for this program was eliminated in the
President's fiscal year 2013 budget?
Mr. Chu. Well, solid oxide fuel cells have made tremendous
progress. We are very excited about this. There are both major
and smaller companies that are heavily investing in this and we
think it is evolving to the point where the private sector is
taking this over rather well. And so we actually applaud the
development. Most of the applications, by the way, of solid
oxide fuel cells will be stationary applications, auxiliary
power, other things. But we do like that.
Mr. Doyle. Well, Mr. Secretary, you probably know South
Korea has made solid oxide fuel cells a major part of their
clean energy plan and we have just completed--not with my
vote--a free trade agreement with South Korea resulting in
lower tariffs and quotas and easing trade relations. Are you
concerned that eliminating support for this technology here in
the United States will drive that industry overseas to South
Korea?
Mr. Chu. I certainly hope not. But if I look to the United
States and the manufacturers in the United States--for example,
United Technologies, Rolls-Royce America, others--some very
significant players in the development of this solid oxide fuel
cell technology. And so we are very hopeful that the United
States can manufacture these fuel cells and sell them not only
in the United States but abroad as well.
Mr. Doyle. I hope that is right. Mr. Secretary, thank you
for your time. I appreciate you being here.
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I recognize the gentleman from
West Virginia, Mr. McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And with due respect
for time I am a little concerned.
When the Department of Energy was formed in 1977 under the
Organizational Act of 1977, there were three paragraphs I found
interesting with it. The first was it was set up because the
increasing dependence on foreign energy supplies presents a
serious threat to the national security of the United States,
health, safety, and welfare of its citizens. It was also
charged to provide for a mechanism to deal with short-, mid-,
and long-term energy problems, OK, of the Nation. And I think
we can see long-term we are going with renewable. Short-term I
think we should be worried about coal. The third is to foster
the continued good health of the Nation's small business firms,
public utility districts, municipal utilities, private
corporations, private cooperatives involved in energy
production.
Mr. Secretary, I think you have gone away from those
principles. I think you have allowed what we heard earlier with
some of the testimony about the use of the EPA, their
predictions of their greenhouse gas closures of plants that
were talked about here that were said that the EPA says only
this level. So based on this level compared to all the other
national organizations, EPA has been emboldened to continue to
drive for greenhouse gas emissions when all the others are
saying if you do that, you are going to see the closures that
are occurring like this all across America, that this
questioning--they are challenging the reliability of our energy
across America based on that information. I am concerned that
whether or not you have in fact a real interest in reining in a
rogue agency that is allowing this kind of activity without
based on science and agreeable comprehensive knowledge of how
all the other people are looking at it across America.
I go back to your remark that you made at the NETL in
Pittsburgh and you said, ``I want all of the above.'' I applaud
that. I just wish it were backed with action because I want to
go back to your statement that you made back in '07 when you
said, ``coal is my worst nightmare.'' ``Coal is my worst
nightmare.'' And we have the comment here from Harry Reid.
``Coal makes us sick; oil makes us sick. It is ruining our
country. It is ruining our world.'' Coal and oil? Is that the
mindset of why on the short-term goal you have abandoned that
and cutting the research money as Mr. Doyle just said 41
percent reduction in spending on R&D in coal? I am awed. I just
can't comprehend where this administration and you and your
leadership are with it, with all due respect.
With all due respect, Mr. Secretary, I think the DOE and
the EPA have become the worst nightmare for the working men and
women in our coal fields across America. What you are doing is
challenging them, causing them to not know whether tomorrow
they are going to have a job. I really do hope you go back to
the requirements of the DOE and look at the short-term
requirements. And those short-term requirements looked at coal
and taking care of the families for the life, safety, and
welfare of the American public and our national security.
Mr. Chu. Let me try to explain what I said. That was taken
out of context, the quote. And what I said is that coal, as it
is being used today, as it is being used today in China and
India and everywhere around the world in terms of its
pollutants, is a big worry of mine. And so that is why--even
before I became Secretary but certainly after I became
Secretary--I remain very committed to developing those
technologies to bring the prices down so that we can continue
to use resources----
Mr. McKinley. OK. I just hope, Mr. Secretary, you will be
able to get back to Mr. Doyle and others and be able to explain
how we have a 41 percent reduction with National Energy
Technology.
Let me just in the 36 seconds, will you be able to get back
to us as to what--we hear a lot of the folks on the other side
talk about how fossil fuel, particularly coal, is subsidized.
Will you be able to tell us how American coal companies are
being subsidized?
Mr. Chu. I will be glad to get back to you on that.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you very much.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
At this time, I recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Engel, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Engel. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, let me first say that I am one person who
has followed you and I think you are doing a fine job and I
think your agency is doing a fine job and I think there have
been a lot of political cheap shots at you, unfortunately, and
the administration from the other side of the aisle and I just
don't think that is reflective of the job that you are doing.
So I wanted just to say that.
I want to also spend the next minute talking to you about
an issue that you and I have spoken about in the past and that
is open fuel standard for cars. I believe--and I am doing a
bill with Mr. Shimkus--that every car produced in America
should be a flex fuel car. I believe if a car can run on
ethanol, methanol, gasoline, natural gas, whatever, competition
helps bring down prices and it would bring down prices. I have
seen that happen in Brazil and I think it could happen here.
And it would cost $100 or less per car to manufacture a car
with flex fuel features. I know the President has issued an
executive order to have the Federal fleet be flex fuel cars,
and I would hope we can continue to move in that direction. So
I would just like you to briefly comment on that if you could.
Mr. Chu. Certainly. The ability to own a flex fuel vehicle,
especially if the cost of the new car would be something--as
you indicated, $100 or less, gives the American consumer more
options. It makes them more in control of what they can do just
in case the world oil price does increase. As we said, we are
very concerned about the price of gasoline and one of the
options that we have to bring relief to the American public is
to allow them to have a diverse source of energy for
transportation. And a flex fuel vehicle allows that.
Natural gas, also very enthusiastic about. And so the
ability to have this conversion, you can fill up with natural
gas or fill it up with higher blends of ethanol is something
that will help American businesses and consumers.
Mr. Engel. Thank you very much. I couldn't agree more.
Let me ask you about renewable energy investment. A survey
of global climate policies by Deutsche Bank included that clean
tech innovations are more likely to emerge and succeed in
Brazil, China, India, Germany, and the U.K. than they are in
the U.S. These countries have used a combination of investments
and national energy standards, feed-in tariffs, efficiency
standards, and a price on carbon. According to Ernst & Young,
China now leads the world as both the largest source of and
destination for clean energy investment. China attracted 54
billion clean energy financing in 2010, which is a 39 percent
increase over '09 and such financing in the U.S. stagnated last
year at 34 billion, approximately equal to 2007 levels.
Your budget proposes to invest in energy efficiency,
renewable energy technologies, science, and clean energy
research development and deployment and it eliminates 40
billion over 10 years in tax subsidies to Big Oil, with which I
agree. Big Oil is making record profits and they don't need the
tax subsidies. However, some people have argued that if you
eliminate subsidies for Big Oil it means the government is
wrongly in the business of picking winners or losers. They
say--I don't agree--but they say that if we remove these
subsidies for Big Oil, then out of fairness, we should remove
subsidies from every other specific industry or business, green
technologies or whatever. How do you respond to this?
Mr. Chu. Well, I think the government over the past
decade--really over the past century--has always looked at
subsidies and it is a part of Congress and the President to try
to decide what will be appropriate subsidies, but also how
long. The subsidies have been used in the past to encourage new
industries to get started. And so the oil subsidies began
roughly 100 years ago and for the express intent of actually
helping this industry get started. But as you pointed out, they
are doing very well on their own.
Mr. Engel. Yes, they did make 137 billion last year.
Mr. Chu. Right.
Mr. Engel. I mean God bless them, but I don't think they
need any help from the government anymore.
Let me ask you this. About 2/3 of the Department of
Energy's budget is directed at nuclear weapons or nuclear
cleanup activities, and there are some who argue that those
activities would be better handled by the Department of
Defense, by DOD. How do you respond to that?
Mr. Chu. Well, I respectfully don't agree with that. I
think the nuclear weapons and the nuclear cleanup needs a very
science-based approach to this, that we have felt since the
Manhattan Project, a lot of expertise. I think that we should
continue to have it within the NNSA and also within the
Department of Energy, Environmental Management.
Mr. Engel. Again, thank you. Thank you very much, Mr.
Secretary, and again thank you for the good job that you are--
--
Mr. Whitfield. Recognize the gentleman from Colorado, Mr.
Gardner, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gardner. I thank the Chairman for his time. And thank
you, Secretary Chu, for your time and testimony today.
A couple of questions. We heard our colleague from
Massachusetts refer to the impact the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve had on the price of oil. When that was released, it
reduced the price of gas at the pump?
Mr. Chu. You are talking about the last----
Mr. Gardner. Yes, in June of 2011 the price did drop.
Mr. Chu. Yes.
Mr. Gardner. OK, thank you. And is the President
considering releasing--you said it before--he is considering
releasing the SPR right now to respond to gas prices?
Mr. Chu. As we said, that option remains on the table.
Mr. Gardner. Is the SPR intended to be used only during
times of severe supply disruptions and real emergencies?
Mr. Chu. It is a little more complicated than that but that
is the primary use. There also are----
Mr. Gardner. Do those circumstances exist now?
Mr. Chu. Let me just finish. Certainly, the primary use is
for supply disruption. There are also issues for severe
economic disruptions----
Mr. Gardner. Due to a severe energy disruption, correct?
Mr. Chu. Not--well, for example, we released SPR before
when there was----
Mr. Gardner. For Hurricane Katrina?
Mr. Chu. Yes.
Mr. Gardner. Do we have a hurricane that is taking
refineries out now?
Mr. Chu. No, we don't.
Mr. Gardner. OK, thank you. The President said yesterday
that the only solution to high gas prices is decreased demand.
Last year, though, together with our allies, 60 million barrels
of the world's strategic reserve was released. The price of oil
dropped by $4 from $95, and even though it returned to $95 6
days later, supply made a difference. Don't you agree?
Mr. Chu. I think the supply did make a difference but----
Mr. Gardner. On July 14, 2008, when President Bush lifted
the moratorium, the price of oil dropped $9, more than two
times the drop from the SPR release last year and it kept going
down even though people knew that the increased supplies would
not come online for years. The anticipation of supply made a
difference, didn't it?
Mr. Chu. That is true.
Mr. Gardner. If long-term decreased demand has an effect on
price, then don't the basic laws of supply and demand dictate
that so will long-term increased supplies?
Mr. Chu. I absolutely agree. Long-term----
Mr. Gardner. So if you are going to pursue short-term
policies such as using the SPR for market manipulation,
shouldn't you at a minimum couple that with long-term supply
solutions such as increased production?
Mr. Chu. Well, as you yourself are pointing out, the
primary uses of the SPR are to deal with supply interruptions
and other economic emergencies.
Mr. Gardner. So we would need a long-term supply solution
because you have said that supply matters?
Mr. Chu. We need a long-term supply solution----
Mr. Gardner. And we need to increase supply at that point--
--
Mr. Chu. The world----
Mr. Gardner [continuing]. Is that correct?
Mr. Chu [continuing]. Needs a long-term demand solution as
well to----
Mr. Gardner. If you----
Mr. Chu [continuing]. Moderate our demand.
Mr. Gardner [continuing]. Increase supply, it will decrease
cost. That is what you have admitted to; that is what the SPR
did. Is that correct?
Mr. Chu. I agree that both supply and demand matter.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you. And last year, when you drew down
from the SPR, oil prices were $95. You haven't replaced those
30 million barrels, have you?
Mr. Chu. No, we didn't.
Mr. Gardner. How do you plan to replace those barrels now
that the price of oil is even higher?
Mr. Chu. There is a plan put forward in our fiscal year
2013 budget over a period of years to begin to buy back that
oil.
Mr. Gardner. So you are buying back that oil but not
increasing production. What about the Royalty-In-Kind program
Secretary Salazar's office was in charge of?
Mr. Chu. I am not intimately aware of that.
Mr. Gardner. You are not familiar with it? Will you meet
with Secretary Salazar to reinstate the Royalty-In-Kind program
so that these barrels of oil can be replaced before you draw
down again?
Mr. Chu. I will certainly get informed of the situation.
Mr. Gardner. Would you please report to us about your
conversation----
Mr. Chu. Sure.
Mr. Gardner [continuing]. With the Department of Interior?
Based on what the President said yesterday and this morning at
a press conference he called it phony to try to get down to $2
in gasoline. Is it phony to want to reduce the price of
gasoline?
Mr. Chu. I think the President is very clear as I have been
very clear. We do want the price of gasoline to go down.
Mr. Gardner. And we need to do that by increasing supply,
as you have said, by releasing the SPR or perhaps increasing
domestic production?
Mr. Chu. Well, as the President is pointing out, as many
people in this session have pointed out, the United States'
supply by itself is not going to--it will affect the world's
demand----
Mr. Gardner. Like the release of SPR?
Mr. Chu. But it in itself doesn't control it. We
certainly----
Mr. Gardner. But you said that increased supply decreases
price as exemplified by the SPR?
Mr. Chu. But as you well know, the production of U.S.
petroleum products, petroleum has increased over the last 8
years and yet the price has----
Mr. Gardner. So the SPR didn't then cause gas prices to go
down like you just said it did. We know it did and you have
said that supply causes prices to go down.
Mr. Chu. SPR release caused a--there was a short-term--if
you look at the historical record----
Mr. Gardner. Because of a supply infusion into the market?
Mr. Chu. No, I think it----
Mr. Gardner. So it wasn't supply?
Mr. Chu. If you would let me finish. So what happened----
Mr. Whitfield. Sorry, the gentleman's time is expired.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Washington
State, Mr. Inslee, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Inslee. Mr. Secretary, if you would like to finish your
answer. You weren't given an opportunity go ahead, if you would
like to do that.
Mr. Chu. Yes. Very quickly, during that release and an
international, coordinated release and the IEA, the SPR was
meant to deal with the temporary disruption in supply with
Libya. And now Libya is coming back in petroleum reserves and
the SPR release served its intended purpose.
Mr. Inslee. And Mr. Secretary, I appreciate the work you
are doing on advanced forms of energy. Bill Gates was at our
Advanced Energy Research Consortium last week talking about the
need for greater national investment. And I certainly echo
that, and I appreciate you to the extent possible advancing
that cause.
I want to ask you specifically about biofuels. There is a
potential bioreactor. We are looking at various bioreactors
either commercial or pre-commercial. We are ready to go out
into the Northwest. Could you comment? And obviously, I would
like you to come out and take a look at our State opportunities
in that regard. What should be in the near term for
bioreactors?
Mr. Chu. Sure. We think the idea of making transportation
liquid fuel using biological sources has great promise. And the
Department of Energy over the years has been supporting this.
And we think that these technologies do have--you know, from
algae, from grasses, from using residual agricultural waste,
all these things have the potential again of having alternative
supply of transportation fuel that would go further to our
lesser dependency on oil and especially less dependency on
foreign oil, because these things can be made in the United
States.
Mr. Inslee. So we like the idea of bio-refineries, a
product designed by Targeted Growth, a company in Seattle was
the first bio-fueler to partially fuel a jet, Boeing 747 flew
across the Atlantic Ocean last summer, first ever in human
history.
So Washington State University and others are leading a
consortium of Boeing and Alaska Airlines to work for a bio-
refinery out in the Northwest. What could you advise us to try
to make sure the Department of Energy looks at the State of
Washington as far as an opportunity there?
Mr. Chu. We will certainly look at that particular project,
but we will look at all the projects. And I have a real avid
interest in this because I think it does have great potential
for decreasing our dependency on oil. And we will need liquid
transportation fuel in the coming decades, I would say in this
century.
Mr. Inslee. I think you will find out in Washington State
probably about as an advanced consortium from the genetic
designer to the grower to the aeronautics company ready to
accept delivery. You are going to find a very welcome network
that is pre-prepared for this adventure and I hope you will
take a good look at Washington State.
One more question about Washington State. We have some very
good success out at the Hanford site. We are freeing some land
now to be ready for development, and your agency is moving
forward to allow about 1,600 acres to be allowed for commercial
development. Very excited about that because we need to
transition from the cleanup to new industries in the Tri-
Cities. We are told it could be a year and a half before we
actually get that done. We hope that you can do anything you
can to expedite that transfer because we have got some
companies looking at good things in the old Hanford site. I
hope you could take a look at that.
Mr. Chu. I would.
Mr. Inslee. Last, I just want to thank you. I haven't
agreed with everything you are doing there. We have a
disagreement on our Yucca issue. I won't bring that up today.
But I just want to thank you. I have got a 1-month-old
granddaughter and I want to thank you for your efforts giving
her a shot to enjoy a world when she is my age of 61 that looks
something like the one we have got here today. My friends
across the aisle talked about something ruining the world and
you are doing some work to make sure it is not ruined by the
time she is 60.
The work you are doing on solar energy is spectacular. You
look at the ALTEC Company, the world's most durable solar cell
made in Marysville, Washington, the silicon energy company;
REC; Nanosys doing advanced nanotechnology for lithium ion
battery storage; EnerG2 Company doing ultracapacitors. These
are spectacular things you are doing. And because of your
success, which I believe we are going to have, my granddaughter
is going to have a shot of having a world that looks like the
one we have got. And I know you are going to be catching a lot
of arrows in your back for those who are naysayers and believe
that a negative voice is the American one. I believe a positive
voice is the American one and we are going to grow this economy
and we are going to give my granddaughter a shot and everybody
else's at a world that looks like ours.
So I just want to thank you and keep it up.
Mr. Chu. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
At this time, I recognize the gentleman from Kansas, Mr.
Pompeo, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary Chu, for being here today. I want the
world to look great for my son as well, and to do that, I think
we have to do things that work. And so I am going to ask you
about some projects, places that your budget is intending to
spend money and talk about whether they are working or not.
In the President's budget--I assume your handiwork--it says
that the goal is to have 1 million electric vehicles on the
road by 2015. Is that correct?
Mr. Chu. That is correct.
Mr. Pompeo. How are we doing?
Mr. Chu. Pardon?
Mr. Pompeo. How are we doing? Are we on track to make that
goal?
Mr. Chu. Well, we are going to wait until 2015 but in terms
of what is happening both technically I think things are
developing and I remain hopeful.
Mr. Pompeo. Are we going to make it? How many do we have
today? How many electric vehicles on the road today?
Mr. Chu. I don't know the exact number. I can get back to
you.
Mr. Pompeo. Less than a million by multiple orders of
magnitude, is that right?
Mr. Chu. It is certainly significantly less than a million.
Mr. Pompeo. Would the administration support higher gas
prices to achieve this goal of 1 million electric vehicles on
the road by 2015?
Mr. Chu. The administration wants lower gas prices.
Mr. Pompeo. Your actions belie those words in my judgment,
but I appreciate that you state that as your objective. The
President said he would buy Chevy Volt. He said he would buy
one 5 years from now when he is not the President anymore. I am
not sure about the timeline but in any event, last week, Chevy
announced that the Volt would be suspended from production
because of demand, temporary layoff workers. How many taxpayer
dollars have gone in support of the Chevy Volt?
Mr. Chu. You know, I don't know. I know that the Chevy Volt
is a great car. I think that there is, you know, a huge
investment of GM and the leadership of GM to invest in this,
and right now, I am still very hopeful that the Chevy Volt will
be adopted.
Mr. Pompeo. Well, I appreciate it if you would get back to
us, let this committee know how much money has been extended so
far on the Chevy Volt. Do you drive one?
Mr. Chu. No. I don't own a car at the moment.
Mr. Pompeo. Fair enough. Fisker Automotive received over
$500 million in DOE loans in 2010. You cut off the funding last
May because it had not met its sales target. At least that was
one of the stated reasons for the cutoff of the loans if I
understand it correctly. Do you think we are looking at another
Solyndra?
Mr. Chu. Well, it is much more complicated than what you
said. We have milestones within our Loan Program, and as we
disperse funds of any of our people that we give loans to, we
work with the companies and do that. And so, you know, we are
hoping Fisker can work through the things, temporary blips, and
continue.
Mr. Pompeo. I hope so, too. How much exposure does the
United States taxpayer have to Fisker today?
Mr. Chu. I can get back to you on the exact number.
Mr. Pompeo. Great. I appreciate that.
Just so you know, it was sometime before I was here, but we
heard these same reassurances about Solyndra up and through
times the DOE was still making loans and advancing money
against those credits. We heard that you were monitoring,
watching, taking good care that that money be repaid to the
Treasury and that is not going to happen. So I hope that you
are right about Fisker and that the taxpayer doesn't end up
another $500 million short.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I appreciate your time today.
Mr. Chu. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Secretary, we appreciate your time.
Unfortunately, we have four votes on the floor and we do have
about four members that wanted to come back to finish asking
questions. And I was wondering, would you be able to be back
here at 15 to 1:00 for a little while or not?
Mr. Chu. I have just heard from my staff that we have
agreed to do it. I was worried of another appointment.
Mr. Whitfield. No, I understand. And we appreciate it. And
as you know, we have some of the finest restaurants here in the
Rayburn Building, so if you want to get something to eat. But
we will be back just as quickly as we possibly can. And we do
thank you for your time. And there may or may not be four
coming back, but thank you very much.
Mr. Chu. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[Recess.]
Mr. Whitfield. I am not even going to wait for our friends
on the other side of the aisle. I am going to recognize Mr.
Griffith of Virginia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for coming back, Secretary Chu. Those of us at
the end of the list appreciate it very much.
As you know, the United States is blessed with huge coal
reserves and I note with some interest that as technology has
become available that coal to gas, coal liquification I think
is becoming more affordable in the world marketplace. And in
fact South Africa gets just about a third of its gasoline from
coal to oil processes. And in fact the President, when he was a
Senator, on two different occasions introduced legislation to
do just that. So I guess my question is what do you see the
Department of Energy doing to help get coal to liquids to play
a vital and additional role in the supply of gasoline in the
United States?
Mr. Chu. Well, first, we agree that the United States is
blessed with great fossil fuel resources, and we are looking at
the potential for both coal-to-liquid and gas-to-liquid. And we
want to support research that would enable--the issue is high
capital cost. The plants are very, very complex, and when I
talk to the oil companies, you know, Shell, ExxonMobil, they
uniformly say that the very high capital cost is a problem.
Now, having said that, we also of course want to do this in a
way that not only--even without capturing the carbon, it is
less than marginal and we would actually like to capture the
carbon and helping enhance our recovery and other utilization,
but ultimately, we also need to capture the carbon.
Mr. Griffith. Absolutely. And in that regard, these bills
that the President put in, particularly one in 2006 was
actually a loan guarantee program and I am just wondering if
any of the loan guarantees that you all did as part of the
stimulus helped to defray any of the capital costs for any
companies that might be looking to take coal and turn it into
gas?
Mr. Chu. I think the one I know of--there are a few still
going forward. There are gasification and the use of the carbon
dioxide enhanced oil recovery. I think Southern has a project
that is going forward on that.
Mr. Griffith. All right. And of course that brings me to
Solyndra. And, you know, you all have indicated that what was
happening in the Chinese market, both your administration and
you have indicated what was happening in the Chinese market was
not anticipated in 2009 when the loan guarantee was done. One
of the questions I have always had, Secretary Chu, is that was
known based on the way I heard your testimony over the course
of the last year. That was actually known, though, by late 2010
and certainly by February of 2011, and so that calls into
question if you knew what was happening in the Chinese market
and that the price was so low that Solyndra couldn't
manufacture its product for the price that the Chinese were
selling their product for, why the subordination?
Mr. Chu. You are absolutely right. Certainly by 2011, late
2010 we did know that Solyndra was in deep trouble, that there
was--by then the price was----
Mr. Griffith. But you also knew that the Chinese market had
basically made them--you may not agree but it had made their
products cheaper than Solyndra could produce their product. The
Chinese could sell their product for less than Solyndra could
produce their product for, isn't that correct?
Mr. Chu. It is correct that we knew that Solyndra was in
deep, deep trouble and there was a chance of bankruptcy. And
when it came time to decide how to do this, it was a judgment
call on whether the fact--the loan was for a----
Mr. Griffith. And I know that you have said that before and
I respect you, but that being said, isn't it a fact that in
late 2010 and certainly by February of 2011 when the
subordination was signed off on, when you look at the price of
what the Chinese were able to sell their product at and the
price of what Solyndra was able to produce their product at,
the Chinese could sell cheaper than Solyndra could produce.
Isn't that a fact?
Mr. Chu. That is correct.
Mr. Griffith. OK. Thank you. I appreciate that very much.
And I would also ask you in that same vein, different aisle
maybe of the church, but Chairman Upton and Stearns recently
sent you a letter on the loan program for Prologis? I hope I am
saying that right. And Solyndra was to be the supplier for the
first phase of that project but then Solyndra went bankrupt.
Knowing what they knew, why did DOE feel comfortable including
Solyndra as the first-phase supplier for Prologis at a time
when you knew they were about to fold or knew that they were in
serious danger of folding even with the first subordination?
But I know you were hoping that there would be the second
August subordination from outside money coming in, but why did
you go forward with Prologis and say, look, this ought to be
your supplier?
Mr. Chu. Well, first, we were uncomfortable with Solyndra
being the supplier, quite frankly. And Prologis had a very
small--the initial one was Solyndra but I was saying I believed
the Prologis business model was a very good one. I was very
supportive of that loan, but I was nervous if Solyndra went
there that Prologis should line up a plan B.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I thank you.
And I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Secretary Chu.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired.
At this time, I recognize Mr. Olson of Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair.
And Dr. Chu, I would like to thank you for your testimony
today and especially for waiting for us to come back after
votes. It is appreciated.
I would like to ask you a few questions related to the
electric grid because, as you are surely aware, the potential
for conflict between grid reliability needs and environmental
rules is greater now than ever. And in the interest of time, I
would appreciate it if you could simply answer yes or no to the
following questions.
Question number one, are you aware that under Section 202
of the Federal Power Act, DOE can issue emergency orders to
require a generator to run. Yes or no?
Mr. Chu. Yes, I am aware of that.
Mr. Olson. That is what I thought, sir. Thank you.
Question number two, are you aware that a generator's
compliance with an emergency order could result in a violation
of environmental laws and subject generators to citizen
lawsuits? Yes or no?
Mr. Chu. I am aware of that.
Mr. Olson. That is what I thought as well. Thank you.
Question number three, do you believe it is fair to make
generators choose between complying with a DOE emergency order
or complying with environmental laws and regulations? Is that
fair?
Mr. Chu. In most instances, we believe that it doesn't have
to be an either/or. And so as I said before, the Department of
Energy's job is to help the private sector ensure that we have
a reliable source of electricity for our businesses and for our
citizens.
Mr. Olson. I will count that as a leaning not fair.
But question number four--not to put words in your mouth--
are you aware that this situation has arisen twice in recent
years where a generator was forced to pay environmental fines
and settle a citizen lawsuit because they complied with an
emergency order from your department. Are you aware of that?
Yes or no?
Mr. Chu. I am not sure, candidly, but it may have occurred.
Mr. Olson. It has occurred with a company called Mirant--
which is now GenOn--and two issues in particular with them, one
out of San Francisco, California. I could get you some details
but I am sure staff can do that as well.
And my final question for you is would you be supportive of
efforts to remedy this potential conflict between the Federal
laws?
Mr. Chu. I am very supportive that we don't want to order
that a generator continue to be online to produce emergency
backup power and face Federal fines from another branch. And we
are very eager to work through those issues.
Mr. Olson. That is fantastic because I look forward to your
support when I introduce legislation to address this issue in
upcoming weeks.
Thank you again for your patience for coming back. I yield
back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Olson.
Mr. Scalise, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
having the hearing.
Secretary Chu, thank you for coming with us and for staying
through the vote series. I appreciate that.
I want to get into, you know, I guess the different
definition of an all-of-the-above energy strategy because I
think while we have been talking about and actually passing
legislation out of the House to implement an all-of-the-above
energy strategy so that we can not only create millions of
American jobs but also lower prices of gas at the pump and
eliminate our dependence on Middle Eastern oil, the President
has recently started talking about an all-of-the-above energy
strategy. But if you look at the actual things that he has
done, his policies have actually hurt energy production in this
country. And I want to start by asking you, you know, the
President is out there boasting that, you know, energy
production, oil production has never been higher as if he
supports that, yet when you actually look at the facts from
what we have seen, numbers we have seen show that actual
production on Federal lands, which the President has control
over through his Department of Interior, is down 11 percent.
And in fact in the Gulf of Mexico it is down 17 percent. Have
you seen any numbers similar to that to indicate just what is
happening in areas where the Federal Government does have a
jurisdiction?
Mr. Chu. I have seen numbers that I glean from a recent
Senate speech that were gleaned from what----
Mr. Scalise. Well, the numbers that you have seen
validating what I have seen, that there is an actual decline in
production on Federal lands.
Mr. Chu. If you start the clock when President Obama became
President, the numbers I have seen show an increase in----
Mr. Scalise. We have seen just from 2010 to 2011 an 11
percent reduction in oil production on Federal lands. In the
Gulf of Mexico exclusively we have seen a 17 percent reduction
in oil production. Where the increase has come is on private
lands, you know, North Dakota and the shale plays, which, by
the way, the President is trying to shut down through the EPA.
So it is a little bit disingenuous for the President to go out
there and say he is for all of the above and oil production has
never been higher when on Federal lands where he has got an
influence, he has actually used his influence to reduce
production. And on private lands where he doesn't directly have
an influence, he is trying through the EPA to shut down the
fracking process, which would mean there would be a reduction
there, too, making us more dependent.
And so, you know, I will go back to the comments that you
have made in the past and the President have made in support of
higher gas prices. And, you know, back in 2008, right after the
President was elected you said--and let me make sure--``somehow
we have to figure out how to boost the price of gasoline to the
levels in Europe.'' Did you say that?
Mr. Chu. I am not sure--as I said before----
Mr. Scalise. You said it or you didn't. It has been
attributed--I mean it is not the first time you have heard this
because many people have asked you----
Mr. Chu. Right.
Mr. Scalise [continuing]. About it and I have heard you----
Mr. Chu. No.
Mr. Scalise [continuing]. Confirm that you said it.
Mr. Chu. I said something very similar to that. I am not
sure when the date----
Mr. Scalise. OK. So the prices in Europe are what right
now? I have seen over $8 a gallon.
Mr. Chu. I am not sure when the date was but everything I
have done when I became Secretary of Energy and was named
Secretary of Energy was to help control, bring down the prices
of gasoline.
Mr. Scalise. That hasn't happened but if you look at
President Obama's actual quote, President Obama said he would
prefer a gradual adjustment to near-$4-a-gallon gasoline.
President Obama said that. And unfortunately, the President has
put policies in place that have gotten us now to $4 a gallon
almost in gasoline prices. We have seen it. It was $1.83 when
he started as President. It is over $3.70 now. So the President
has gotten his wish and people are furious about it. It is
killing the economy; it is killing jobs. And now that people
are furious, the President is trying to blame somebody else.
But let's look at the record. You know, if you look at what
is happening in the Gulf of Mexico alone, we have lost about a
dozen deepwater rigs, billion-dollar-plus assets that have left
the Gulf of Mexico because they can't get permits because of
the President's own policies. Now, they haven't left to go to
other places in America; they have left the country. They have
gone to places like Egypt. You know, imagine it is better to do
business in Egypt than in America because of the President's
policies. We saw what the President did on the Keystone XL
Pipeline, saying no to that. You know, the President has
implemented a policy that has actually reduced American energy
production and supply.
Now, of course, the President has been to Saudi Arabia. He
has bowed down to their prince and, you know, he has begged
them for more oil. I understand you have been to Saudi Arabia
as well and had similar meetings. Is that accurate? Have you
been to Saudi Arabia?
Mr. Chu. I have been to Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Scalise. Asking them to produce more oil? What did
you----
Mr. Chu. Well, certainly Saudi Arabia is one of the few
countries----
Mr. Scalise. But have you asked them to produce more oil?
Mr. Chu. Well, it is----
Mr. Scalise. Yes or no. I am almost out of time.
Mr. Chu. Allow me to continue.
Mr. Scalise. I don't have the time. It is a yes-or-no
question. Did you ask them to increase production?
Mr. Chu. We would like Saudi Arabia----
Mr. Scalise. Mr. Secretary--and I am almost out of time; I
apologize. I am sure you will have an opportunity to answer
later but, you know, rather than going to Saudi Arabia, I have
mapped out, it is only about a 5-minute walk from your office
to the White House. I would suggest instead of going to Saudi
Arabia and asking them to increase production, go to 1600
Pennsylvania Avenue and ask the President to reverse his
policies that have reduced production in America and made gas
prices higher with the permitorium in the Gulf where there is
still no consistent policy to get permits and it is killing
production. We have lost a dozen rigs. They have left America.
We have lost thousands of jobs because of that. Keystone
Pipeline, we lost a million barrels from Canada that we now
have to get from Middle Eastern countries who don't like us;
this EPA attack on fracking, which is killing innovation. We
talked to a company recently, an American energy company who
left $3 billion on the table----
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I am going to insist on regular
order.
Mr. Scalise. So I would just ask that you go and pursue the
administration policies that are killing energy production and
causing higher gas prices instead of going to Saudi Arabia.
Yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Scalise. Yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, Mr. Secretary, if you want to try to
respond, feel free to do so.
Mr. Chu. Very, very quickly. We are talking about immediate
spare production, and Saudi Arabia is one of the few countries
that has immediate spare production. To develop an oil field in
the Gulf takes years, at least typically 5 years to actually
explore, find, develop this. And so for immediate spare
production we think that would have a way of moderating price
spikes in the world oil market.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, that concludes today's hearing. And
once again, I want to thank you and your staff for your
patience. And I do want to ask unanimous consent to enter into
the record a recent survey made in Nevada regarding the
public's views on Yucca Mountain. Without objection, that will
be entered into the record.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.045

Mr. Whitfield. And then we will keep the record open for 10
days for any additional materials that may be submitted.
And once again, Mr. Secretary, thank you and we look
forward to working with you as we move forward.
Mr. Chu. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:08 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76890.136


