- THE FUTURE OF AUDIO

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FUTURE OF AUDIO

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 6, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-148

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

80-145 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2014

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JIM MATHESON, Utah
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JOHN BARROW, Georgia
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

______

Subcommittee on Communications and Technology

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MARY BONO MACK, California           DORIS O. MATSUI, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                JOHN BARROW, Georgia
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California             Islands
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan (ex
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois                 officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)        officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Cliff Stearns, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Florida, opening statement..................................     4
Hon. Lee Terry, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Nebraska, opening statement....................................     4
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     4
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     8
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     8
Hon. Michael F. Doyle, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     9

Witnesses

Ben Allison, Bassist, Composer, and Governor, New York Chapter,
The Recording Academy..........................................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Answers to submitted questions...............................   171
David M. Israelite, President and Chief Executive Officer,
National Music Publishers' Association.........................    18
Prepared statement...........................................    20
Answers to submitted questions...............................   172
Cary Sherman, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Recording
Industry Association of America................................    26
Prepared statement...........................................    28
Answers to submitted questions...............................   173
Jeff Smulyan, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer,
Emmis Communications...........................................    58
Prepared statement...........................................    60
Answers to submitted questions...............................   174
Steven Newberry, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Commonwealth Broadcasting Corp., on Behalf of the National
Association of Broadcasters....................................    71
Prepared statement...........................................    73
Answers to submitted questions...............................   175
Tim Westergren, Chief Strategy Officer and Founder, Pandora......    88
Prepared statement...........................................    90
Answers to submitted questions...............................   177
Christopher Guttman-McCabe, Vice President, Regulatory Affairs,
CTIA-The Wireless Association..................................    94
Prepared statement...........................................    96
Answers to submitted questions...............................   178
Gary Shapiro, President and Chief Executive Officer, Consumer
Electronics Association........................................   101
Prepared statement...........................................   104
Answers to submitted questions...............................   180

Submitted Material

Statement, dated February 3, 2012, of National Association of
Broadcasters, ``NAB Statement on Voluntary Inclusion of FM
Chips in Cellphones,'' submitted by Mr. Walden.................   112
Report, undated, of McLaughlin & Associates and Penn Schoen
Berland, ``MyWireless.org 2012 Annual Consumer Survey Data,''
submitted by Ms. Eshoo.........................................   115
Report, dated July 8, 2011, of Gigom, ``Mobile broadband usage by
activity,''submitted by Ms. Eshoo..............................   117
Statement, dated June 6, 2012, of David Lowery, submitted by Mrs.
Blackburn......................................................   127

THE FUTURE OF AUDIO

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 6, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:23 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Greg Walden
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Walden, Terry, Stearns,
Shimkus, Bono Mack, Blackburn, Bilbray, Gingrey, Scalise,
Latta, Guthrie, Kinzinger, Upton (ex officio), Eshoo, Markey,
Doyle, Matsui, Barrow, Christensen, and Waxman (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Green.
Staff present: Nick Abraham, Staff Assistant; Gary Andres,
Staff Director; Ray Baum, Senior Policy Advisor/Director of
Coalitions; Michael Beckerman, Deputy Staff Director; Patrick
Currier, Counsel, Energy and Power; Nicholas Degani, FCC
Detailee; Andy Duberstein, Deputy Press Secretary; Neil Fried,
Chief Counsel, Communications and Technology; Katie Novaria,
Legislative Clerk; David Redl, Counsel, Communications and
Technology; Charlotte Savercool, Executive Assistant; Tim
Torres, Deputy IT Director; Lyn Walker, Coordinator, Admin/
Human Resources; Tom Wilbur, Staff Assistant; Phil Barnett,
Democratic Staff Director; Shawn Chang, Democratic Senior
Counsel; Elizabeth Letter, Democratic Assistant Press
Secretary; Margaret McCarthy, Democratic Professional Staff
Member; Roger Sherman, Democratic Chief Counsel; David
Strickland, Democratic FCC Detailee; and Kara Van Stralen,
Democratic Special Assistant.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Good morning everyone, and welcome to the
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology and the hearing
on ``The Future of Audio.''
I was telling our counsel I am really tempted to start out
by saying the old radio thing I did in college: Arctic First
Federal Savings and Loan time in 30 seconds will be 10:25. The
temperature in downtown Fairbanks 30 below zero. CBS News is
next on the mighty nighty KFRB Fairbanks.
That goes back to 1974, and I still remember.
There is a saying, allegedly from the Chinese, that says,
``May you live in interesting times.'' It is supposedly a
curse, but the alternative is living in boring times. And I
think you all at this panel are going to convince us we are not
living in boring times.
Today's audio market is certainly not boring. As I
mentioned, I was a radio broadcaster for more than two decades
and, my, how the industry has changed.
The number of full power broadcast radio stations has
jumped by 23.7 percent since 1996 to more than 15,000. More
than 2,000 local broadcast radio stations have gone HD, each
offering as many as four channels and the benefits of digital
technology. Many broadcasters now also simulcast their stations
over the Internet as well as offer dedicated Internet content.
Satellite radio offers more than 150 digital channels to more
than 20 million subscribers. Internet radio garners more than
89 million listeners each month. The number of subscribers
worldwide to mobile music streaming services is expected to
reach 160 million by 2016. Anyone with a Web page can transmit
his or her songs to the world. The majority of Americans over
the age of 12 possess a portable music player that lets them
take their music wherever they go. And the growth of the Cloud
now enables consumers to have their music everywhere they go
without even taking it.
On the one hand, this means today's song writers and
performers have a wealth of options for reaching music lovers.
On the other, it means securing a critical mass of listeners
may be harder as audiences fracture. Are artists liberated by
the digital age or finding it harder to cut through the
cacophony? Is it, ironically, easier to start a career but
harder to make a living in the music business today? Is the pie
getting larger or is everyone nibbling at each other's slice?
One thing is certain, experimentation will be critical as
new technologies challenge existing business models. That is
why I was intrigued by the announcement yesterday that Clear
Channel and record label Big Machine will share over-the-air
revenue while trying to grow the online market. This deal shows
that radio broadcast stations and record labels can get to
``yes'' on issues that have vexed the industry for years.
I for one encourage the private sector to negotiate deals
without government involvement. It is much better for
stakeholders to solve their own business matters than for
Congress and Washington to try and solve them for them. I will
be interested to hear if other broadcasters and record labels
are willing to enter into similar deals with Clear Channel and
Big Machine and with each other.
We have an amazing panel today that spans almost the entire
distribution chain, from songwriter to performer to service
provider to device manufacturers. I will be curious to hear
from our witnesses how changes in communication services and
consumer electronics equipment is affecting the way audio
content is distributed and consumed.
So we certainly live in interesting times, and I think that
is a good thing.
I would now yield to the former chairman of the full
committee, Mr. Stearns.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CLIFF STEARNS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think you have echoed pretty much what I was going to
say. Consumers are listening to music that can be chosen from
terrestrial radio, HD radio, Sirius XM, satellite radio, cable,
Pandora, live radio, YouTube, iTunes, Vevo, Muve Music,
Rhapsody, and the list goes on. So I think we have competition.
As one of our witnesses, Gary Shapiro, states in his
testimony, we have rapidly shifted to a growing set of choices
with a phenomenal array of devices, products, sources and
services; and I had the opportunity to see this recently at the
consumer electronics show. And our witnesses today represent an
important competition in the music space, offering consumers an
array of choices and musicians new opportunities to gain new
audiences.
Gone are the days when consumers were limited to radio and
just television; and gone, too, should be the archaic policies
of the old era of prohibiting free market decisions. In today's
struggling economy, we are looking at a market that is working,
and let's keep it that way.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. I would now yield to the vice chair of the
subcommittee, Mr. Terry.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LEE TERRY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEBRASKA

Mr. Terry. I appreciate that, as well.
I appreciate your college experience. I also DJ'd, just not
on radio but parties, weddings, and I will tell you what. In my
time, when I had to go to Homer's Music to buy vinyl, it was
really hard to find the Flying Dutchman in Homer's Records back
in the '70s and early '80s, but on today's digital world it is
a lot easier.
My how things have changed since then. And in fact my three
sons, two of them teenagers, only the oldest even cares what a
CD is. The other two don't care. It is all about the digital
world. It is about organizing their music as they want it and
see it, having the devices necessary to play it. And where it
goes, I don't know. But I like it, like the Rolling Stones say.
Now I will say that I am intrigued as well with the
contract or agreement between Big Machine and Clear Channel.
But I need to work through this a little bit more before I have
a level of enthusiasm. Because I also remember private
contracts between radio stations and record labels, that was
called payola, and so I don't know where we are going with
this. But it is intriguing.
And I will yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee from
California, Ms. Eshoo.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning and
welcome to all of the witnesses.
More than 90 years ago, Pittsburgh's KDKA launched the
Nation's first commercial radio broadcast. For decades, AM and
FM radio served as the primary source for local news,
information, and music for millions of Americans.
While I continue to believe that broadcast radio plays an
important role in local communities around our country, the
Internet has opened up a world of innovation that is driving
new business models like on-demand streaming, providing new
opportunities for independent musicians and even expanding the
reach of traditional AM and FM stations to audiences not only
around the country but around the world.
Many of these innovations are being developed in my
congressional district in Silicon Valley. Last year, I had an
opportunity to visit a Palo Alto startup known as TuneIn. It is
headquartered in an old plumbing supply store which I remember
going to when my children were small. They had 40 employees
when I was there last year. TuneIn has developed a mobile app
featuring over 60,000 AM, FM, HD, and Internet radio stations
and an active monthly listener base of more than 30 million
people. That is stunning, just in and of itself.
And TuneIn is just one example. Over the past decade, we
have seen the emergence of Spotify, Pandora, iHeartRadio, Apple
iTunes, Amazon Music Store, Google Music, and Slacker Radio.
The significance of these services is, in fact, quite stunning.
Last year, within the United States, 52 percent of record
company revenues came from digital sources. So we need to
embrace these innovative technologies and not hinder their
growth. The future of audio is about enhancing, in my view,
consumer choice, whether at home or on the go, using smart
phones, tablets, or other portable devices.
I have always opposed technology specific mandates--
always--because technology moves at the speed of lightning.
Before our ink is even dry, the technology has changed. And for
that reason I have always opposed technology specific mandates,
which is why last year a joined with Representative Issa to
introduce the Creativity and Innovation Resolution. The
resolution asserts that Congress should not mandate specific
technology that limits the way consumers listen to local news,
information, and music. The resolution has the rare distinction
of being endorsed by CEA, CTIA, and RIAA; and I hope my
colleagues will join me in supporting this bipartisan
resolution.
As consumers increasingly stream audio through their mobile
devices, I am also interested in learning whether data caps
impact user behavior. While more often discussed in the context
of data-intensive video, users who stream just 1 hour per day
of high fidelity audio through a typical online music
subscription service can easily exceed the monthly data package
offered by many wireless carriers. This is an issue that rests
squarely with our subcommittee's jurisdiction, and I think it
is important for us to examine this closely.
Mr. Chairman, the future of audio looks bright, as
consumers have a growing array of options, including online
music stores, subscription-based services, satellite radio, and
HD radio. So thank you for holding this morning's hearing. We
have a great panel, and I am anxious to hear what they have to
instruct us, and I welcome the witnesses again and thank you
for holding the hearing.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. The gentlelady yields back the balance of her
time.
The chair recognizes the chairman of the full committee,
the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Upton.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
From the radio dramas and fireside chats of the '30s to
talk radio and to online streaming of today, audio content has
been an integral part of American society for the last century.
Twenty years ago, the world of audio choices was pretty simple,
AM, FM, cassette, CD.
The world of audio in 2012 offers so much more.
Broadcasters are using digital services to deliver HD radio,
satellites 22,000 miles above the Earth provide subscription
radio service to millions of Americans, technological advances
make it possible to carry an entire music library in your
pocket, and an increasing number of Americans are streaming
music over the Internet to their computers and wireless
devices.
Not only has the ability to access the world of
professional audio content gotten so much easier and more
universal, the ability for people around the world to produce
and distribute their own works over the Internet has changed
major industries, music, journalism, entertainment, just to
name a few.
So today we are going to hear from the broadcasters that
are innovating, mobile wireless providers that are making
access to media ubiquitous, Internet pioneers that are
leveraging the Internet to bring users personalized content
channels, and professional artists at the center of it all on
how this new media frontier is changing their industries and
the way that we listen.
I will be particularly curious to hear, as would Chairman
Walden, to hear their reaction to yesterday's announcement by
Clear Channel and the Big Machine. It looks to me like an
agreement that might break the logjam that has plagued this
space and help advance online radio. Best of all, it doesn't
require legislation or regulation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. So I thank the witnesses, and I don't know if
any other members on my side----
Mr. Walden. Mrs. Blackburn.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to say welcome to all of our witnesses. I enjoy
working with each of you on this issue. I think it is vitally
important.
Audio distribution systems can't be successful without
compelling content, and in Nashville we think that is a really
important thing. Likewise, the music won't enjoy wide
distribution without innovative technologies, and Mr. Shapiro
and I continue to have this ongoing discussion.
The audio marketplace is constantly evolving, but the music
and the technology industries need each other in order to
thrive. I believe we can be both pro intellectual property and
pro innovation. I am determined that we are going to find a way
to do that. And we must be both if we want to grow and be
successful. And for our Nation's economy, Tennessee's economy,
and for our exports, we need to figure this one out.
Big Machine records, which is a national Tennessee company
and a major broadcaster, as Chairman Upton said, did enter into
a voluntary agreement yesterday on the performance rights
issue. We are pleased to see that. We are looking forward to
more good things so that the industry does continue to grow in
Nashville. We like to say it all starts with the song. We
believe it does, and we want to make certain that we figure
this one out.
Thank you so much. I yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentlelady yields back to the chairman.
Mr. Chairman, do you have anyone else you want to yield to?
Anyone else on our side?
Apparently not. The chairman yields back the balance of his
time.
I now recognize the former chairman of the committee, the
gentleman from California, Mr. Waxman.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Chairman Walden, for holding this
hearing to examine the future of audio.
We live in an era of rapidly changing technologies and
consumer behavior. Innovation over the past decade has led to a
proliferation of choices in the way consumers access audio
content, whether it is news-subscription-based streaming
services, Web casting, or HD radio offered by traditional over-
the-air broadcasters. But the dynamic audio marketplace has
brought consumers more choices, greater accessibility, and
lower prices.
As technology advances, it is important that we do not lose
sight of the artists, musicians, and songwriters whose work
compels consumers to seek out these innovative new services.
Thanks to these new technologies, barriers to entering the
music market have never been lower, but, paradoxically, the
number of people who identify themselves as musicians has
declined over the last decade. We need to understand why this
is happening. Congress has an important role to play in
ensuring that singers, songwriters, and other musicians are
compensated fairly both through combating online piracy and
ensuring an equitable licensing and royalty system.
I am proud to have co-sponsored the Performance Rights Act
during the last Congress. This bill would ensure that musicians
are compensated by over-the-air broadcasters for the right to
publicly perform their music. As we will hear from some of our
witnesses today, the exemption for broadcasters is not only
grossly unfair to performing artists, it also creates an
unlevel playing field that disadvantages innovative audio
services such as Pandora. Whatever their rationale may have
been in the past, there is no reason in today's environment
that over-the-air broadcasters should be allowed to play music
without compensating the artists that perform it.
Although we are still learning the full details of the
agreement between Clear Channel and Big Machine, I am
encouraged that a major broadcasting group has acknowledged
that performing artists should be compensated for their music
on over-the-air radio.
I look forward to hearing from our panel about the impact
of wireless data caps and proposals to require or encourage FM
chips. We also need to ask whether policymakers should
encourage FM chips to be incorporated into mobile handsets.
I would like to now yield the balance of my time to Mr.
Doyle.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL F. DOYLE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Waxman, and thank you to our
witnesses here today.
Mr. Chairman, I am continually amazed by the massive
changes in recent years in how music is created, shared, and
promoted. Changes in the industry have shifted music
consumption away from the mega artists to support more
production and distribution of independent music, and this has
allowed new musical genres and subgenres to thrive.
I am not exactly sure what Nerdcore is, for instance. I
think it is a mix between Star Wars and Vanilla Ice. But as
this subcommittee well knows, I have been a supporter of the
mixtape and the mashup for a long time; and I am fascinated to
see how innovative musical production has not only exploded but
found near endless ways to reach an audience. Web sites like
Kickstarter, for example, have allowed musicians from my home
town of Pittsburgh to make a living selling records and
merchandise entirely from online donations. I think these are
very positive trends.
Increasing the diversity of audio programming and providing
ways for more people to be heard are some of the main reasons
that I have been such a strong supporter of low power FM radio.
LPFM is another platform that can bring greater diversity to
our media landscape, and it is a platform for independent
artists to gain a listenership.
Internet ratio has also been a key driver of this kind of
innovation. The Internet has opened the door for more
terrestrial broadcasters to stream their content live on the
air. So now people around the world can listen to a station
they love. I hope that can expand even more in the future. And
countless online Web casters, one of which has joined our
panel, let us listen to any artist we want whenever we want.
So I am really interested to hear our witnesses share their
thoughts on what audio looks like today and where it is headed
moving forward.
I thank Mr. Waxman for yielding me the time, and I yield
back.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields back the balance of his
time.
We are ready to get on with the panel then. Thank you all
for being here. I think we have a terrific array of witnesses
and a lot of supporting people around you, as well.
So, Mr. Allison, we are going to start with you.
Mr. Ben Allison is a bassist, a composer, and governor of
the New York Chapter of the National Academy of Recording Arts
and Sciences.
Thank you for being here. Pull that microphone pretty
close, make sure the light is on, and it is all yours.

STATEMENTS OF BEN ALLISON, BASSIST, COMPOSER, AND GOVERNOR, NEW
YORK CHAPTER, THE RECORDING ACADEMY; DAVID M. ISRAELITE,
PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, NATIONAL MUSIC
PUBLISHERS' ASSOCIATION; CARY SHERMAN, CHAIRMAN AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, RECORDING INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA;
JEFF SMULYAN, CHAIRMAN, PRESIDENT, AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
EMMIS COMMUNICATIONS; STEVEN NEWBERRY, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, COMMONWEALTH BROADCASTING CORP.; TIM
WESTERGREN, CHIEF STRATEGY OFFICER AND FOUNDER, PANDORA;
CHRISTOPHER GUTTMAN-MCCABE, VICE PRESIDENT, REGULATORY AFFAIRS,
CTIA-THE WIRELESS ASSOCIATION; AND GARY SHAPIRO, PRESIDENT AND
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, CONSUMER ELECTRONICS ASSOCIATION

STATEMENT OF BEN ALLISON

Mr. Allison. Good morning, Chairman Walden, Ranking Member
Eshoo, and members of the subcommittee.
My name is Ben Allison. I am a jazz musician, a composer,
and a producer based in New York. I am also a board member of
the New York Chapter of The Recording Academy. Outside the
Beltway, The Recording Academy is best known for producing the
Grammy Awards. But here in DC the Academy is the trade
association representing more than 20,000 performers,
songwriters, and studio professionals. I want to thank the
members for the privilege of being able to share my perspective
as an artist and to represent the Academy.
In less than 24 hours, I will be traveling to the Bonnaroo
Music Festival in Tennessee to perform. But the music created
at Bonnaroo will not be confined to the 80,000 people attending
the concerts. Bonnaroo will offer live streaming of
performances, while Internet radio services like Pandora will
offer Bonnaroo-themed stations. This is just one example of why
I am excited about the future of audio. The infinite
possibilities of stations on Internet radio and the niche
genres available on satellite have given more artists a chance
to be heard.
As a working musician on the New York music scene, I meet
many young and emerging artists who are using these new
services to connect to fans. And these new platforms don't only
provide promotion. They provide compensation to artists and
songwriters. And the sound quality offered through these
services, while sub par in its early days, is improving. I have
chosen my instrument, which is an 1840 American-made bass, for
its pure and nuanced sound, so I want my listeners to hear a
recording that sounds as close to the original performance as
possible.
The Recording Academy's producers and engineers wing have
been very active on the issue of sound quality, and consumers,
music services, and manufacturers are responding. But, to
creators, compensation from these new services is the most
important aspect of this issue.
Internet and satellite radio services primarily pay
performers through a compulsory license processed by Sound
Exchange, a nonprofit entity that pays 50 percent of the
royalties collected directly to performers. But with
interactive or on-demand services, unlike Internet radio, the
consumer can choose to listen to a particular track whenever
they want.
Streaming services such as Spotify are currently paying a
very low royalty rate, a fraction of a penny per spin. We are
told that we are benefitting from the promotion, but promotion
should never replace compensation. If on demand services
replace downloads and the royalties don't increase, this will
be a great concern for creators.
But, ironically, one of the most pressing issues for
performers is not about the future of audio but its past.
Terrestrial radio broadcasters have an inexplicable free ride
when it comes to performance royalties. They are exempt from
paying performers any royalties when they use our recordings to
fuel their multibillion-dollar industry. This makes corporate
radio the only business in America that can legally use
another's intellectual property without permission or
compensation.
All of the other broadcast platforms pay a performance
royalty for sound recordings. Every other country in the
developed world has such a right. But, in the U.S., over-the-
air broadcasters are required to pay songwriters, as they
should, but not performers.
Previous private negotiations led to an industry agreement
that would have created a terrestrial performance royalty in
exchange for specific rate reductions on simulcasting.
Unfortunately, when the NAB board voted on the deal, they
changed the agreed-upon numbers making it a net loss for the
music side, and the deal collapsed.
To add insult to injury, terrestrial broadcasters are now
asking for another legislative perk, a mandate to include FM
receivers in Smartphones. They already exploit one anomaly in
the law. They do not pay performers, while new audio
technologies do. Now they want a second legislative anomaly, to
have a free ride, quite literally, on the backs of new devices.
Artists believe that Congress should address the first anomaly
before there can be any discussion of the second.
Finally, I would like to close by discussing the lowered
barriers to entry for music creators. I am a professional
musician. I started taking music lessons at the age of 9 and
played my first gig when I was 16. This is my life and my
livelihood. That said, I am delighted that those for whom music
is a part-time pursuit can have access to the digital
marketplace; and while it is fine for the market to welcome
nonprofessional musicians, we must not allow the market to make
music a nonprofession.
Each one of my fellow panelists here have a role in
connecting the music creator to the fan. But they will have no
business if there is no great music. Without the songwriter
putting that first note on paper, without the musicians
performing that song in ways that move us, without the producer
and engineer capturing that performance, there will be no
iPods, no Pandoras, no labels, no publishers. Music must be
respected, content protected on line, and all creators
compensated.
So let me close by stating one constant in the music
industry. In this regard, the future of audio is the same as
the past. It is dependent upon the creator. And we,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, are dependent on you
to protect our rights.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Allison follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Allison. We appreciate your
testimony and your music, and we welcome you here.
Our next witness is Mr. David M. Israelite, President and
CEO of the National Music Publishers' Association.
Mr. Israelite, we are delighted to have you here today.
Thanks for your testimony and please go ahead.

STATEMENT OF DAVID M. ISRAELITE

Mr. Israelite. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairman Walden, Ranking Member Eshoo, and
members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today to talk about the future of audio as it
pertains to music publishers and songwriters.
I serve as President and CEO of the National Music
Publishers' Association, the principal trade association
representing music publishers and songwriters in the United
States. Now in our 95th year, we represent over 2,800 member
companies with the goal of protecting and advancing their
property rights on the legislative, litigation, and regulatory
fronts. Prior to this position, I also had the honor of serving
at the Department of Justice where I chaired the Department's
Task Force on Intellectual Property.
Issues involving the music industry are complicated in part
because there are two separate and distinct copyrights in
music. The first copyright, which we represent, is for the
underlying musical composition created by songwriters and often
owned or represented by a music publisher. I am here
representing that half of the music industry. The second
copyright is for any recording of that song, commonly known as
the sound recording copyright, and represented by Mr. Sherman
and the record labels. It is crucial to understand that these
two different copyrights are controlled and represented by
different interests and are often treated very differently
under the law and in business practices.
If that were not complicated enough, the different uses of
our musical composition copyright are also treated very
differently under the law and through government regulation.
Songwriters and music publishers attempt to earn a living
through three primary means of utilizing their separate
copyrights--mechanical reproductions, public performances, and
audiovisual synchronizations. Depending on the particular
songwriter or publisher, each type of income represents roughly
a third of our income.
First, there is the mechanical reproduction right. An
example is when a consumer downloads a song from iTunes or
streams music through a service like Spotify. For songwriters,
this right is regulated by section 115 of the Copyright Act
which imposes a compulsory license system on the songwriter
community. Songwriters and music publishers do not get to
negotiate the value of our intellectual property in a free
market. For record labels, this is a free market right and not
regulated by law.
Second, there is the public performance right. An example
is when music is performed on the radio, whether it be
broadcast or digital. While this right is inherently
unregulated by law for us, the vast majority of the market is
regulated by consent decrees with the Department of Justice.
Again, under these consent decrees, songwriters and music
publishers do not negotiate the value of their intellectual
property in a free market.
In addition, there are situations where the rights of
songwriters and music publishers are utilized using these
consent decrees, but there is no compensation for vast lengths
of time due to the terms of the consent decrees.
Finally, there is the use of music synchronized with video.
Traditionally, this has included using music in movies,
television, and commercials. For songwriters and music
publishers, this is a free market right not regulated by law.
Newer forms of this right include music videos and the use of
music in user-generated content such as YouTube.
Music publishers and songwriters face three primary
challenges when we look to the future.
First, we must do a better job of protecting music from
theft. While there can be legitimate debate about how to best
deal with new technologies, it can never be right to steal the
intellectual property of songwriters. It also cannot be right
for parties to facilitate or turn a blind eye from such theft
while profiting from that theft.
Second, we must find efficient ways to license our
copyrights and empower new business models. Much of the current
licensing system is outdated and inefficient.
And, finally, we must ensure that future business models
fairly compensate songwriters. Licensing new business models
efficiently does no good if new business models do not allow a
songwriter to earn a living.
The impact of theft on the music world is a familiar
subject to all of you. It is important to consider that it is
significantly more difficult for songwriters to police the
Internet for infringement. Just a few months ago, 25 parties
completed a year-long negotiation over rates for 5 new
categories of music services to allow flexibility in creating
new services that enable consumers to access and use and
purchase music in previously impossible ways. These new
categories allow consumers to enjoy and access their own music
across almost every electronic device; and parties representing
digital services, record labels, and songwriters are currently
involved in discussions on how to work together to improve our
licensing system.
I believe the streaming market is one of the significant
growth areas for music in the future. As this area of the
market grows, we need to ensure that songwriters are fairly
compensated for their work. It is also crucial that new
services like Vevo properly license and compensate songwriters.
In conclusion, songwriters and music publishers will
continue to embrace new delivery models and technology, but as
the future of audio develops, Congress and the music community
must ensure that laws protect intellectual property while
providing fans the music they want and in the manner that they
want.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Israelite follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Mr. Israelite, thank you for your testimony. We
appreciate it.
Now we will turn to Mr. Cary Sherman, who is chairman and
CEO of the Recording Industry Association of America.
Welcome, Mr. Sherman, and please go ahead.

STATEMENT OF CARY SHERMAN

Mr. Sherman. Thank you Chairman Walden, Ranking Member
Eshoo, and members of the subcommittee.
The music industry has a great story to tell. Record
companies have transformed how they do business, and the
evolution will continue, enabling new artists to prosper and
allowing consumers to enjoy music in many different ways.
The music industry is now primarily digital, and if you
look at the slides on the screens, you will see that CDs are no
longer the primary format or the primary source of revenue.
Digital is not just our future. It is our present.
In 2004, the first year we had real digital revenues, the
industry earned only $190 million from digital services. Last
year, we earned nearly $3.5 billion. That is quite a change.
We used to hear that we needed to get a new business model.
Well, our companies have done just that. You want DRM free
downloads? We have got that. You want to pay a small monthly
fee for a subscription to unlimited music on your computer or
Smartphone? We have got that, too. You want free ad-supported
streaming? Got it. You want a music service bundled with your
mobile phone? Got that. You want to store all your music in the
Cloud so that you can access it from anywhere? That is now
here. You want specialized digital radio services? Lots are
available. You want AM/FM radio stations online? That is
available, too. In fact, there are over 500 digital services
authorized by our member companies worldwide, offering 20
million authorized tracks.
And we are not stopping there. One of our highest
priorities is to develop the infrastructure that will make it
faster and easier to offer even more innovative models to fans.
Just last month, as David said, we announced with NMPA and a
large number of music services a groundbreaking licensing
agreement that will make it easier for digital services to
clear rights for new models, and we are also working on new
industry-wide databases and royalty distribution systems to
make royalty payment functions more efficient.
It probably goes without saying that we are embracing these
new offerings under the continuing threat of rampant piracy. In
fact, we are less than half the size we used to be, down to $7
billion in 2011 from nearly $15 billion in 1999.
Even more worrying is that, according to BLS data, the
number of people who identify themselves as musicians has
declined over the last decade by 41 percent since the
industry's high point in 1999. Clearly, piracy affects not just
our economy but our culture.
When it comes to protecting creative rights, strategic
copyright enforcement combined with robust new legal services
can make a difference. For example, LimeWire, which was the
world's most popular illegal peer-to-peer file sharing service,
was finally shut down by a Federal Court in 2010. The very next
month, digital sales of music improved; and they have remained
higher ever since.
Just a couple of months ago, a market research firm
released a survey showing that more than half the people who
had used LimeWire did not go to another illegal music site to
get their music after the shutdown. So one of the most
important anti-piracy strategies remains innovation.
Experimenting and working with our technology and Internet
partners on consumer-friendly new business models, we also need
some enforcement.
So how are we protecting our rights these days? By forging
voluntary marketplace agreements with Internet partners.
Just last year, we announced a voluntary program of ISPs to
address illegal downloads on P-to-P networks. We also helped
craft an agreement with major credit card companies to reduce
sales of counterfeit and pirated goods. And just last month
major advertisers and ad agencies announced a series of
voluntary best practices designed to stop enriching rogue Web
site operators. We hope other intermediaries, like search
engines, will follow suit to do their part in preventing the
theft of U.S. creativity. These voluntary programs are not a
panacea, but collectively we think these collaborative efforts
will make a difference.
Speaking of working together, I would be remiss if I didn't
take this opportunity to, once again, point out a glaring
inequity when it comes to compensating creators. Every platform
that legally plays music pays to do so except for one. AM/FM
radio stations use music just like Internet radio, cable music
channels, and satellite radio services do. The difference is
that all these other radio services compensate artists and
labels for the music they play while promoting artists at the
same time. AM/FM radio does not.
Yesterday, we were glad to hear that Bob Pittman, the CEO
of Clear Channel, the largest radio group, stated that artists
and record companies deserve to be paid and that promotion
alone is not enough. It is time for the NAB to join with us in
working toward an industry-wide solution to ensure that all
artists and record companies are rewarded for their work.
One thing remains abundantly clear. Music matters, now more
than ever. Of the top 10 most followed people on twitter, seven
are music artists. Of the top six videos on YouTube, five are
music. Music remains a centrifugal force in culture and in
commerce, and it is only going to get stronger. It is worth
creating, and it is worth protecting.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sherman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Thank you Mr. Sherman. We appreciate your
testimony.
We will now go to Mr. Jeff Smulyan, Chairman, President and
CEO of Emmis Communications.
Mr. Smulyan, we are delighted to have you here. Please go
ahead with your testimony.

STATEMENT OF JEFF SMULYAN

Mr. Smulyan. Good morning, Chairman Walden, Ranking Member
Eshoo, and members of the subcommittee.
My name is Jeff Smulyan, and I am chairman and CEO of Emmis
Communications based in Indianapolis, Indiana. I am here today
because I believe in the future of radio and cell phones and
what it can mean to all Americans.
I have spent many years working to get local radio signals
accessible on mobile phones. Radio chips, which are just mini
radio receivers installed in a cell phone, are literally the
size of a Tic Tac, cost pennies, and can give you the ability
to listen to your favorite local radio station wherever you may
be.
Now let me start by dispelling a myth that has been
repeated by my friends in the wireless industry. Neither I nor
the NAB is pursuing a legislative mandate that radio chips be
included in phones. We are not asking for a mandate. What I am
committed to pursuing is an education campaign to explain the
enormous benefits that come from installing radio chips in
mobile devices and activating the ones that are already in
phones today.
Radio chips are the definition of consumer friendly. Today,
mobile customers are streaming music through apps they have
down loaded. But, in the process, they are possibly racking up
hefty charges to their data plans. You see, when you stream
music, you are using the Internet, and the wireless carriers
charge you for that access. And, as most of you know, unlimited
data plans are ending for most carriers.
A radio chip, on the other hand, picks up the free over-
the-air broadcast signal. The chip turns your device into a
handheld radio. So a radio chip provides mobile phone consumers
with a way to listen to music and information for free without
meeting and exceeding their growing data caps.
Giving mobile phone users cost-free options is the
definition of consumer-friendly ideas and something we hope
that the cellular industry can certainly embrace.
Something in which this committee should be particularly
interested in are the spectrum efficiencies that can be gained
from integrating radio chips into mobile devices. Pandora alone
said its listeners streamed over 3 billion hours of music in
the last quarter. That doesn't even include the additional
hours for popular sites like iHeart or TuneIn or my own
stations. Music streaming which uses the Internet is part of
the reason we have a very congested broadband system.
A radio chip utilizing the free over-the-air radio signal
can offload traffic from congested broadband markets, helping
relieve what we know are significant and growing spectrum
demands. And now FM chips use less than 20 percent of the
battery life that streaming requires.
Finally and most importantly, there are tremendous public
safety reasons for putting radio chips in cell phones and
activating the chips that are already in there. As we have seen
during times of crisis, radio broadcasters stay on the air with
the use of generators when mobile phone users are often left
with devices that are unable to make calls or send emails due
to an overwhelmed cellular system.
Even more important, when the power grid goes down, the
cell system is off. Since most broadcasters have emergency
generators, we are able to provide lifesaving information at
the times of greatest peril.
I appreciate that the CTIA has embraced the commercial
mobile alert system. But the system limits emergency warnings
to a 90-character text that lacks the kind of detail
desperately needed by citizens during an emergency.
In a life-and-death situation, the importance of redundancy
of information cannot be overstated. If you think a 90-
character text message is sufficient--if it gets through at
all--ask the people in Joplin, Missouri, or New Orleans or the
people in Owensboro or the people in Fargo or the people who
have endured any major crisis in this country.
The real irony here is that, if educated about radio chips,
consumers want them. According to a recent Harris interactive
poll, 81 percent of those polled who own a mobile phone would
consider paying a small, one-time fee to access their local
radio stations. Curiously, many cell phones in the U.S. Already
have the radio chip embedded in the phone. These chips just
haven't been activated.
I am holding here two Samsung Galaxy Notes, the one from
the U.K. And this one from the U.S. They look identical, but
the U.K. version has activated a radio chip. You can listen to
any FM station in Washington right now on it. The U.S. version
actually has a radio chip, but that chip has been deactivated.
We agree with CTIA. We should let the market decide, just
as in the rest of the world where over 1 billion phones have
been sold with radios, but that market has been closed in this
country.
The good news is that the consumer experience is only
getting better. The brand-new, state-of-the-art HD radio chip
was recently unveiled. This low-powered, low-cost, high-
processing chip uses an app which allows a user to tune to
their local stations. The HD chip offers song tagging features
and delivers an interactive radio which benefits the listeners,
the advertisers, the wireless industry, and consumers. It is a
true win-win.
For all of the reasons I have discussed, I believe the time
is now for a reasonable and factual discussion on the merits of
radio-enabled mobile phones. I look forward to working with
this committee on this issue, and I thank you for your
invitation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smulyan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Mr. Smulyan, thank you for your testimony and
for being here today.
We will now go to Mr. Steven W. Newberry, President and CEO
of Commonwealth Broadcasting Corporation.
Mr. Newberry, we are delighted to have you here today as
well. Please go ahead with your testimony.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN NEWBERRY

Mr. Newberry. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Eshoo, and other members of the committee.
My name is Steve Newberry, and I am president and CEO of
Commonwealth Broadcasting Corporation, which operates 24
stations in rural Kentucky.
The Future of Audio is a broad title for a hearing, but as
a radio broadcaster who has been in the business since I was 14
years old, I believe the future of radio broadcasting is
extraordinarily bright.
Not only does radio provide free entertainment, but the
radio industry is for responsible for hundreds of thousands of
jobs, delivers crucial information in times of crises, reaches
deeply into the underserved communities of our country, and
gives facts to its listeners in every local American community.
There are more than 14,000 local radio stations across our
country. With a growing audience, over 270 million Americans
listen to radio every week, one of the most popular
entertainment options anywhere.
What makes broadcast radio so enduring is its local
programming, its connection to its community. Radio works
because it forms relationships with its listeners. That is how
we differentiate ourselves from all the other audio platforms.
We are far more than just music, far more than just news and
information. We are part of the fabric of American culture and
its families.
The future of radio is in maintaining our commitment to
localism. As an industry, we are investing in going digital.
There are now over 2,000 HD stations providing crystal-clear,
static-free audio to listeners with HD radio receivers. We are
leveraging the Internet and streaming our radio content so no
matter where you are you can tune in to your favorite radio
station. We are pushing to get our free signals available on
all mobile devices so in times of emergencies when broadband
and cellular systems may fail, Americans in distress can still
access critical emergency alert and response information.
But as bright as our future is, radio still has our
challenges. A major issue for radio is one we call the
performance tax.
As you may know, the recording industry would like Congress
to require radio stations to pay for every song we play over
the air, songs we provide to our listeners for free. We believe
the value of the promotion the artist and record label receive
from free radio airplay is equal to and exceeds the value of
the music.
In fact, for decades, radio airplay has been and continues
to be the best friend of artists and record labels. Airplay
exposes new music and artists to millions of Americans every
day for free, and it is the engine that drives the sale of
music. That is why the system has worked for over 90 years.
And Congress also believes the current system works. When
this issue was at its height in the 111th Congress, the Local
Radio Freedom Act, which opposed any performance tax on local
radio, had over 260 cosponsors of bipartisan nature in the
House and 26 in the Senate.
In 2010, in the spirit of wanting to work out a fair
compromise, we sat down with our friends in the music industry,
and for months we worked to hammer out a potential agreement.
We believe we made a fair, good-faith offer, but,
unfortunately, the musicFIRST Coalition declined our offer and
never returned to the negotiating table. Since November of
2010, we have been ready to sit down, roll up our sleeves, and
work to find common ground that properly recognizes the
promotional value that broadcasters provide and the value of
the music.
Yesterday, a negotiated royalty deal between Clear Channel
radio and Big Machine records was announced. As I understand
the details, Clear Channel has agreed to pay a percentage of
advertising revenue for Big Machine songs, whether they are
heard digitally or terrestrially. It is a free enterprise
transaction between two willing partners with no government
involvement. From NAB's perspective, nothing about this deal
changes our strong opposition to a congressionally mandated
performance tax.
What this announced deal really does highlight is the major
challenge we face as radio continues to grow on line and into
other new platforms. The current royalty structure for Web
casting is broken. When initially set in 2007 and then built
upon in 2009, the rates set by the Copyright Royalty Board were
universally decried as being ridiculously high, so high radio
stations cannot afford to be successful on line. The more
listeners you attract, the less profitable it becomes.
Believe me, radio broadcasters want to take advantage of
all the possibility that the Internet presents, but these
royalty rates create a financial disincentive to Web cast.
Solving this problem for broadcasters is essential. If we want
music streaming to survive, we need to find a way to strike a
better balance between royalty payments and platform growth,
which at the end of the day will help broadcasters and artists.
In summary, the future of radio is strong. New technologies
like HD, a robust, ubiquitous delivery platform of local, over-
the-air, freely delivered radio stations and new delivery
methods will enable radio to serve our local listeners for
decades to come. I believe local broadcast radio has a very
bright future, and I am very proud to be a part of that
industry.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions, Mr.
Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Newberry follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Mr. Newberry, thank you for your testimony on
this issue.
We will now go to Mr. Westergren, who is the Chief Strategy
Officer and Founder of Pandora.
We are delighted to have you here, sir. Please go ahead
with your comments.

STATEMENT OF TIM WESTERGREN

Mr. Westergren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning.
My name is Tim Westergren. I am the Founder and Chief
Strategy Officer of Pandora.
Twelve years ago, after spending my 20s and early 30s
playing in rock bands and composing film scores, I founded a
music discovery service to help independent musicians like me
find their audiences. I had a vision that by marrying
musicology and technology I could solve the great problem of
music discovery--how to help listeners find new music to love
and how to bring all these talented artists the attention and
careers they deserve.
It took 6 long years before the Music Genome Project
finally found its home in the form of Pandora. We have gone
from a cramped studio apartment in south San Francisco,
financed through salary deferral, credit card debt--and lots of
it--and the extraordinary effort of a talented group of
musicians and engineers, to the country's largest Internet
radio service, with over 150 million registered listeners and
close to 600 employees in offices all across the country. We
stream more hours of music every month on Pandora than YouTube
streams hours of video and refer more music sales to iTunes and
Amazon than virtually any other service in the world.
Today, more than ever, the dream of connecting listeners
and artists seems within our grasp. Thanks to Pandora's Music
Genome Project and its rich understanding of musical
recordings, Pandora now plays the music of over 90,000 artists,
70 percent of them independent, represented by a catalog of
over 1 million songs, and over 95 percent of these songs play
every month.
Let me repeat that. Over 950,000 unique songs play every
month on Pandora, and the music spans hundreds of genres that
are rarely heard in any medium: bluegrass, big band, classic
country, klezmer, New Orleans jazz, you name it. For most of
these artists, Pandora is the only radio they have ever
enjoyed.
It is conceivable that this new promotional vehicle as it
continues to grow may eventually lead to the emergence of a
musicians' middle class.
We have created a democratic and inclusive form of radio
that listeners can access the same way they listen to
terrestrial broadcasting. Seven of the world's largest
automakers now include Pandora in new models. We are embedded
in over 650 consumer electronics devices that enable Pandora to
be enjoyed throughout people's homes. We are the second most
downloaded iPhone app and one of the most popular iPad apps.
Pandora is even built into refrigerators.
Long gone are the days when customers accessed the Internet
radio only through their PCs or laptops. In fact, over 70
percent of our listening now takes place off the computer.
But beneath this exciting transition is a severe and
fundamental problem. While Pandora and other Internet radio
services compete directly with broadcast and satellite radio
for listeners in every place you find music--the home, the car,
the office, and on the go--we are subject to an astonishingly
disproportionate royalty burden compared to these other
formats.
All forms of radio pay songwriters a very similar
percentage of revenue, but there are enormous differences in
how performing artists and labels are compensated.
Last year, on revenues of $274 million, Pandora paid 50
percent of that revenue in performance fees. That same year,
Sirius XM, on revenues of $2.74 billion, paid 7-1/2 percent of
revenue. And broadcast radio, on revenues of roughly $15
billion, paid zero.
Just to be clear, we are fully supportive of fair
compensation for artists. We strongly believe that radio can
and should reward musicians for the use of their work, both
songwriters and performers. But this lack of a level playing
field is fundamentally unfair and indefensible.
So why the disparity in royalties? The inequity arises from
the fact that Congress has made decisions about radio and
copyright law in a piecemeal and isolated manner. As each new
form of radio transmission was invented, new legislation was
passed but only to address the new form. The effect has been to
penalize new media and advantage old media when setting the
rules for music royalties.
To give you a sense of how absurd the current situation is,
consider this example. Drivers of most current Toyota--excuse
me, Ford cars--can receive AM/FM, satellite, and Internet radio
all through the vehicle's sounds system. If a song is delivered
over AM/FM, the associated performance artist and label receive
no compensation. If a song is delivered over a satellite, the
performing artist do receive compensation. But if the song is
delivered using Internet transmission over 3G or 4G, then the
effective percentage of revenue that must be paid by the
company delivering the song goes up sixfold. It is the same
song, same car, and the same sound system.
It is time for Congress to level the playing field and to
approach radio royalties in a technology neutral manner. The
current rate-setting law is unfair to performing artists,
unfair to record labels, and unfair to Internet radio as we
compete every day with broadcast and satellite radio for
listener loyalty and for advertising and for subscription
revenue. What amounts to a subsidy of entrenched radio media
stifles innovation, discriminates against the Internet, and
adversely affects consumers. It is time to unshackle innovation
and allow new technologies and new forms of audio consumption
to compete fairly.
Thank you for your time and consideration. I look forward
to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Westergren follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Thank you very much, Mr. Westergren, both for
your testimony and your creativity.
Mr. Christopher Guttman-McCabe is next, Vice President,
Regulatory Affairs of CTIA.
Good morning. We are delighted to have you here. We look
forward to your testimony, sir.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER GUTTMAN-MCCABE

Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Thank you and good morning, Chairman
Walden, Ranking Member Eshoo, and members of the subcommittee.
Thank you again for the opportunity to participate in this
morning's hearing.
CTIA believes the future of audio is mobile, it is
personal, it is what the consumer wants it to be, and it is
bright. The consumer's desire is a theme that you will hear
from me throughout my testimony. I want to share some of the
reasons we feel this way as well as a few suggestions for how
to ensure that our optimistic projection turns out to be true.
As mobile broadband becomes ubiquitous, the mobile platform
provides a compelling opportunity for artists and entrepreneurs
to deliver all sorts of audio products. No matter where their
interest lie, consumers can and will be able to access content
of their choosing tailored to their preferences at that moment.
This shift from a producer-and-distributor-driven model to
a consumer-driven model will test existing businesses and force
them to adapt. We see this in the way that the music and news-
gathering business, for instance, are being transformed by the
twin forces of digitization and disintermediation. This is a
challenge for some in the old order in much the same way that
telephony was a challenge for the telegraph and wireless is a
challenge for wired.
At the same time, these forces are unleashing a wave of
creativity and innovation that is giving rise to new businesses
like Pandora--thank you, Tim--Spotify, and TuneIn, all of which
are on my phone, none of which yet are on my refrigerator. It
is morphing communications devices into music devices
andenabling services like Cricket's MUVE.
While many of those of us who grew up in the age of the LP
lament the loss of album art and liner notes, this
transformation is one that is good for consumers, and it is
good for America. Consumers gain control as they can choose the
time and the method by which their content is delivered or
accessed. And America wins because it is at the center of this
transformation. America is the epicenter of the development of
these new services, and we are the world's undisputed leader in
wireless broadband.
So what needs to be done to enable continued American
leadership in this area and ensure that the future of audio is,
indeed, bright? The short answer is that we must continue to
have access to spectrum, the highway across which audio traffic
moves, and we need a light regulatory touch that permits
services and applications providers to experiment with new
product offerings and new pricing structures. Policymakers need
to resist calls to use government to protect business models
that find themselves subject to new competitive challenges.
I want to expand a bit on this last point, as I know that
some in the radio industry will use this hearing as an
opportunity to reiterate their call for wireless devices to
include FM chips or some other type of commercial radio
capability. This effort should be rejected.
To be clear, CTIA is not opposed to including FM
capabilities in wireless devices. If you listen to Mr.
Smulyan's testimony, one would think that the capability that
he seeks does not exist. It does. Indeed, at least 59 wireless
devices today have an FM chip included. But the decision to
offer FM capability or not should be driven by consumer
preference, not government fiat. A mandate would be at odds
with the idea that a competitive marketplace does a superior
job of delivering products and services that consumers value.
Our members provide phones with and without radio
capability, just as they provide handsets with or without
keypads, with or without cameras, and devices with or without
Internet access capabilities. This differentiation allows
consumers to find what they want and what they value, rather
than taking any phone, as long as it is black and connected to
the wall, as was once the norm.
If some in the radio business want to encourage consumers
to buy FM-enabled devices, they are free to do so. But they
should not seek to have the government impose their business
plan on others. The Commercial Mobile Service Alert Advisory
Committee's conclusion, by a vote of 41-1, that FM is not
appropriate for wireless emergency alerts was correct; and thus
decisions regarding the inclusion of FM capability and wireless
devices must be driven by commercial factors.
Today's audio sector demonstrates reliance on the churn and
the ingenuity of the marketplace will force better product
outcomes for platform providers, content creators, and
consumers alike.
Mr. Chairman, members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to appear on the panel. With the right
combination of good spectrum policy and regulatory restraint,
reliance on the innovative capabilities of American
entrepreneurs, and trust that consumers know what they want,
the future of audio is and should remain bright.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Guttman-McCabe follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Mr. Guttman-McCabe, thank you for your
testimony.
We will conclude our panel with Mr. Shapiro, who is the
President and CEO of the Consumer Electronics Association.
Mr. Shapiro, welcome to our committee again, and we look
forward to your testimony.

STATEMENT OF GARY SHAPIRO

Mr. Shapiro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. We
represent over 2,000 U.S. consumer electronics companies, every
one of which directly or indirectly touches or relies on or
sells sound or audio. And we welcome this hearing because it is
very gratifying to see Congress focusing on something we
cherish but we rarely discuss in Washington: the spoken word,
music, and sound. And we are pleased to share our views.
First, I am proud that many of our members make
loudspeakers and other audio products here in the United States
and export worldwide. Audio files around the globe actually
recognize and appreciate the phenomenal quality of these U.S.
products, including scores of great companies both large and
small.
Second, the popularity of American culture and products
abroad ties in directly with this type of innovation including
innovation in both audio, music, and word as our national
brand. If we can continue to innovate, our economy will
continue to grow and mitigate our tax and spending dilemma. Of
course, the challenge of innovation, including innovation in
technology and music and news distribution, is that innovation
always threatens incumbents, and they too often come to
Washington to protect their legacy business models.
Third, the world of reproduced audio parallels the world of
energy. Just a few decades ago we had a few choices. It was
radio or television or telephone in terms of reproduced sound.
Well, as we have heard from many witnesses and the members in
their opening statements, things have changed dramatically. And
just like with energy, we suggest an all-of-the-above policy,
which means that no one source should be given preferential
treatments over all others. For this reason alone, we are
puzzled why Congress favors broadcast radio over every other
source of audio.
Fourth, the phenomenal growth in digital video, the
resulting flattening of TV screens, and the high quality of
displays has created a huge opportunity and demand for quality
audio, and that is a big shift. And corresponding to that is
advancements in the science of sound reproduction which is
changing the world of audio. What we are starting to see in the
next generation is streaming surround-sound audio which will
solve a lot of problems and create a lot of opportunities.
Now, if you think about it, music is the only area where
millions of people still spend hours enjoying creativity from
hundreds of years ago. But the fact is that our best times are
still ahead of us, not only with content creation but with
devices and in terms of solving some of our problems. For
example, we have products that are starting to appeal to an
aging population, audio solutions that provide amplification,
and sound clarity will emerge through such devices as phones
and headsets. In fact, we have initiated a standards project to
enable people with hearing impairments to adjust audio
presentations for their specific needs.
We also are focusing on health maintenance, socialization,
and service to remote, aging, and other populations. Related to
this is an area of concern that we haven't heard about today,
and that is what we can do collectively to educate Americans
about the importance of protecting their hearing. Since 1981,
most reputable headphone makers have warned about playing music
too loud. And CEA has joined with the RIAA, the American
Speech--Language-Hearing Association, and others in a national
campaign aimed at ensuring children and parents learn very
early to value hearing as a very precious sense which must be
protected. We don't seek your action, but we do ask you to use
your bully pulpit.
Now, clearly the audio marketplace for music and
information is vibrant. We have been hearing about that in the
last hour. Innovations are entering very quickly, and thriving
new business models are being created. Consumers are the
winners here and new businesses. But with all of the advances
in audio distribution and consumption, it troubles me that we
are still fighting efforts to mandate the incorporation of old
technologies in new products; namely, radio broadcasters, which
they have been doing in writing and lobbying, seeking Congress
to intervene in the marketplace and require analog radio
receivers be installed in a host of digital devices. The fact
is is that analog radio and digital phones is not popular with
consumers. And if you look at independent research, the fact
is, consumers are not choosing and they are not saying they
want to buy them. In fact, all the products out there are not
generally being used. And the argument for them--all of a
sudden this new argument about emergencies, frankly, defies
logic.
First, many, if not most radio stations do not operate 24
hours in attended mode with live human beings present. In a
famous 2002 disaster, a train carrying deadly toxic chemicals
derailed near Minot, North Dakota. No emergency alert was sent
out because no one at the stations nearby could be reached by
phone.
Second, in the event of an emergency, what are people going
to do? Well, they will use their phones. They will use their
Internet devices. They could go to their home radio or their
car radio. They could access the Internet or platforms such as
Facebook and Twitter. These provide more specialized and
localized information that is more helpful than a generalized
radio update.
Finally, as we heard earlier, there is already a solution
in place that the Federal Government has required which
basically requires text alerts to telephones. We oppose a
mandate for FM chips in cell phones but also the current effort
should simply get a study. Taxpayers should not be spending
money about why there should be mandates. And we applaud you,
Representative Eshoo and Congressman Issa, for introducing
House Concurrent Resolution 42 which opposes the FM chip.
Innovation is driving our economy, and nowhere is this
truer than the audio industry. Hardware makers, online
innovators, and artists are all taking advantage of new
business opportunities. We urge Congress to ignore self-
interested pleas from declining industries and continue to
promote a vibrant and dynamic free-market economy that creates
investments in jobs. And we look forward to working with you in
these efforts. Thank you very much.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Shapiro, thank you for your testimony.
[The statement of Mr. Shapiro follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Now we are going to go into our question phase.
We welcome everyone to take on these questions.
Mr. Allison, I know not all the details are out yet, but I
would like to hear you elaborate on what you know of the Clear
Channel/Big Machine agreement from the artists' perspective.
And are you supportive of it? Obviously some of the details
aren't out, the concepts.
Mr. Allison. I think what is kind of interesting about it
is that it seems to kind of open the door. I mean, here we have
the biggest broadcaster conglomerate in America basically
agreeing that performance rights should exist. So I think it
kind of diminishes the argument that this right should not
exist.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Sherman, could you tackle that same
question, just from what you know?
Mr. Sherman. We are obviously delighted that the biggest
radio group has acknowledged that something should be done and
has actually gone and done something. I mean that is a
breakthrough. We have been advocating for this for about 80
years. So obviously it is very important. But we need an
industry-wide solution, not a label-by-label, piecemeal
solution. And we don't know whether other radio groups will
feel the same economic motivation to do a deal. So we need to
come up with something broader.
Mr. Walden. Thank you. Mr. Newberry, would you like to
commkent on this as well?
Mr. Newberry. Mr. Chairman I don't know the specifics of
the transaction. But I think what should be pointed out is--and
I referenced this in my statement--is it is a free-market
transaction. So to Mr. Allison's point, I don't believe that
Clear Channel simply made a statement about performance rights
as much as they entered a transaction and received something
back in return for that. What did encourage me as much as
anything was that it appeared to be a universal solution that
addressed the digital expense that that company is incurring.
So I think that that needs to be measured as part of the
analysis of that transaction that occurred.
Mr. Walden. I appreciate that.
I would like to ask unanimous consent to enter into the
record this February 2012 statement by the NAB saying the
Association does not support an FM chip mandate. Without
objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Mr. Smulyan, your written statement also makes
clear you are not seeking an FM chip mandate. If you are not
looking for legislation, can you tell us what you are looking
for?
Mr. Smulyan. We are looking for an honest assessment
evaluation. I take issue with Mr. Shapiro's statement we don't
want to study this. We think it is an issue that needs to be
studied. We are, as an industry, open to negotiations with the
wireless industry. We are engaged in those now. We think the
more people understand this issue, both from the wireless side
and the consumer side and here in Congress and at the FCC, that
they will understand that this is an idea whose time has come.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Shapiro mentioned that--we are talking
about analog radio, I think, in your comment. But you also
mentioned there is a newly developed HD digital chip?
Mr. Smulyan. Right. We have actually developed an HD chip
along with Intel and Ubiquity through the sponsorship of NAB,
and we are now demonstrating that. We previewed it at the NAB
convention. And not only does it provide HD and all the
intended benefits, but it also provides a back channel for
commerce, where consumers can hear an ad on the air, download a
coupon, walk into a store. They can find out the location of
events. They can find out the time of events, calendar. We
think there are some remarkable benefits to this. The HD chip
really does a lot more. There have been well over a billion
analog phones sold with radios in them around the world. This
is the next generation.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Newberry, there was a comment made about an
unattended operation, a situation in North Dakota. Are you
familiar with that one? And can you tell us your perspective
from a broadcaster about what happened there?
Mr. Newberry. I can. It is Minot, I believe, would be the
pronunciation.
It is a situation that occurred that the station had
provided a phone number to emergency personnel. And
unfortunately the emergency services personnel there dialed the
wrong number. So they were unable to reach the station
personnel.
But many stations in rural America do operate unattended at
night, Mr. Chairman. It is an economic reality and it is much
like volunteer fire departments in rural America. Just because
someone is not sitting at the fire department 24 hours a day
does not mean that those firefighters are not willing to answer
the call 24 hours a day when that emergency occurs.
But all of us have abilities, and I can go on online from
here with my phone and I can broadcast live on my station from
this location if I needed to.
Mr. Walden. And from my own experience, I know we were 24/7
and unattended. But we weren't the primary station. But we were
set up so that the primary station, when it triggered,
triggered all of our stations to do the alert. So we used to
sign off at 11:00 at night, like a lot of stations did. So we
wouldn't even be on the air. Now we are 24/7. I am out of
business but----
Mr. Newberry. If I can make a point. I think that is the
dilemma that broadcasters face. We could sign our stations off
the air at 10 at night and not have anyone there and not
provide any service, or we can provide service 24 hours a day
and have a very solid emergency plan to make sure that our
station is responsive in those overnight hours.
Mr. Walden. Thank you very much. My time has expired. Now I
will turn to the gentlelady from California, Ms. Eshoo.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to all of
the witnesses. I think that we had an excellent array of
testimony on several subjects.
I want to first go to Mr. Smulyan. But before I do, Mr.
Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous consent that--I have
two pieces to place in the record. One, an Annual Consumer
Survey Data 2012, and the other, activity and data use in
megabits, which I think are pertinent to our hearing.
Mr. Walden. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Now, Mr. Smulyan, you have been very clear that
the broadcasters are not seeking to mandate radio chips in
mobile devices.
Mr. Smulyan. Right.
Ms. Eshoo. But you have also raised the issue that in the
European market, what you would like to see in the American
market is flourishing, but you are essentially blocked by the
wireless industry. Now I think that consumers have a lot to do
with this, most frankly. And one of the pieces that I just
asked to be placed in the record is really instructive. And I
would like to hear your reaction to it.
This is the 2012 edition of a bipartisan survey that was
conducted by McLaughlin and Associates and the Penn Schoen
Berland of 1,000 adults. And what it asks of the people that
were contacted, other than making or receiving voice calls,
which one of the following cell phone features is most
important to you? And there is a long list: texting, Internet
access, email, a whole long list. And it goes across all age
groups, from 18 to over 65.
Now of the some 12 or 14 choices, FM radio chip set, you
know what, it is zero across the board. So how do you square
that off with your testimony? You make it sound like there is
something that you know tens of millions of people are
clamoring for. And yet consumers across the board in this are
saying, nyet.
Mr. Smulyan. It is interesting you say ``nyet'' because you
have a free market, probably, in the Soviet Union for this
issue. We don't have one here.
In the rest of the world----
Mr. Shapiro. No. But you used the word ``the free market.''
This is consumers saying that they have no interest in it. You
don't want a mandate. Consumers are not interested. Now I think
that if you can get people to put this in the sets and people
can make up their minds, I don't have any problem with that.
And I am glad you don't want it mandated. But I do think it is
interesting that consumers across the board--from the ages of
18 to 29, 30 to 40, 41 to 55, 56 to 65 and over 65, of all
these categories--are not interested in it. It is zero.
Mr. Smulyan. Interestingly enough, in this country
consumers aren't aware of this issue. It has become ubiquitous
in the rest of the world. If you go into a phone store in
London----
Ms. Eshoo. Let me ask CTIA or the wireless people or Mr.
Guttman-McCabe, do you block this? Are you not allowing access
to this?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. No, Ranking Member. And I think that is
the point I tried to make in my original testimony. There is
almost a sense here that these devices don't exist. And we had
an intern yesterday spend 25 minutes and found 59 devices. And
then we sent him out at lunchtime to go to Best Buy. He picked
up the Best Buy catalog, which we use a lot. There are 26
devices in the center pull-out section of the Best Buy catalog.
That is a third of the devices in that section that are FM
chip-enabled. But what we are hearing from our manufacturers is
the point that you made earlier which is, we are not seeing
consumer demand for it. And yet it is right here in the center
of Best Buy. It is not not available.
Ms. Eshoo. Sure. I understand that there are 40 phone
models on the market today with the chip. So there is a
discrepancy here. But it seems to me, long-short, that there is
not consumer demand for it. That is my take on it.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. We have a survey----
Ms. Eshoo. I just have 6 seconds left.
I would like to thank Mr. Westergren for what you have
done. It is inspiring. What is the kind of royalty regime you
are advocating for?
Mr. Westergren. We are advocating for a technology-neutral
regime, so give us all the same starting point, the same
language, the same criteria, and let the chips fall where they
may. We are not coming to you asking you for a specific rate--
--
Ms. Eshoo. Good expression.
Mr. Westergren. Forgive me for that. I didn't mean to do
that. Just something technology-neutral.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. I now recognize the gentleman from Illinois,
Mr. Shimkus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will go into this
round of questions with a lot of trepidation because they are
all my friends and it is a great panel. But obviously there are
struggles. And many of you know who have come to the committee
numerous times, that I am a late adopter of technology. I still
have teenage sons so they push me to see what really the
consumer--that is who is driving this--the youth, it moves
fast, it moves quick. You can't control it.
But one thing that was raised, just an observation of the
youth of our society right now is that I think this hearing
thing is an important thing because they walk around now with
headphones on all the time, whether they are gaming or whether
they are listening, streaming, maybe Pandora, but then there it
is Bluetooth over a headset device. I mean, I don't know how we
can really get a handle on that.
But I deal with a lot of Korean vets and World War II vets
who didn't have ear plugs in when the artillery cannons fired.
And hearing loss is a struggle for a lot of our society. So I
don't know, I just will put that on the record as something
that--I see my son and I try to listen to make sure that it is
not overly burdensome.
I am going to tactfully steer away from some issues. And
you know how tactful I am.
In my local community--not in my district but next door--
they have Art on the Square and there was a story--and it has
been very successful in the last couple of years. One of the
stories was how, from an iPhone, you could debit your payment
with an app and a little connection device. And I have seen it
happen a couple of times, too. Credit card readers. Thank you.
Pretty good technology, wouldn't you say, Mr. Shapiro?
Mr. Shapiro. It is terrific. It is a dongle, yes.
Mr. Shimkus. How did that evolve?
Mr. Shapiro. It evolved because innovators saw an
opportunity. They solved a problem. I mean Apple does a great
job in their stores of getting you in and out of there without
going to a cash register, and their store is always full. There
is a vibrant marketplace obviously for innovation in our
country. And we lead the word in it and that should be our
strategy. So every policy you look at, I suggest that you focus
on will it be good or bad for innovation?
As I think was Congresswoman Eshoo said so eloquently,
technology mandates choke off innovation. That is just a fact
and that is just what we have to be cautious about.
Mr. Shimkus. I was called yesterday by a reporter--and Anna
would appreciate this--from The Dallas Morning News who is
following CMAS and digital texting of warning alerts based upon
legislation that passed in about 2006, the WARN Act.
So to Mr. Guttman-McCabe right there, if I am emailing or
surfing the Internet on my smartphone, would I still receive a
CMAS alert?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Yes, sir. You will get a distinctive
tone. It will alert you to it and it will pop up on your
device. You do not have to do anything proactive. It is not an
opt-in service. It is a service that will come to you. And by
legislation, you will get the three classes of alerts. You can
later decide not to receive two of the three. But you will
proactively, without any effort on your behalf, receive those
alerts.
Mr. Shimkus. Which is a really good application. I was
trying to remember when the heck we did that piece of
legislation. And I try to remember. And I always fall back to
my days in the Army, up a tree on west German soil when we were
worried. The information we needed to have was which direction
do we need to go in case there is an emergency and a disaster.
And that texting ability is critical.
Mr. Westergren, you may not want to answer this question
because it is top secret information. I am a Pandora user when
I run. Seventies era. I am interested in how many people opt
out or--what percentage of people eventually go back and say, I
don't want these advertisements? I want to pay the $3 a month
for uninterrupted? How many?
Mr. Westergren. It is a very, very low, single-digit
percentage that subscribe.
Mr. Shimkus. So most people will put up with the ads or
two, every three to five songs?
Mr. Westergren. The vast majority, yes.
Mr. Shimkus. I successfully treaded this without causing
too much damage. I yield back my time.
Mr. Walden. We will make note of that in the record as a
first-time occurrence.
I will now turn to Mr. Doyle for 5 minutes.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Newberry, I know there has been a lot of talk today
about royalties and other issues. But I was looking at your
written testimony. And about a third of it was devoted to FCC
implementation of low-power FM and regarding power levels and
second adjacent waivers. And I would just like to ask you a few
questions for the record.
You agree that the FCC regulates operating hours for radio
stations, right?
Mr. Newberry. That they regulate operating hours?
Mr. Doyle. Does the FCC regulate operating hours for radio
stations?
Mr. Newberry. Yes, sir.
Mr. Doyle. And does it regulate what kind of antenna
stations can use?
Mr. Newberry. Not what model. It does set a technical
requirement for the station but it does not specify model.
Mr. Doyle. And it regulates for underwriting and
advertising?
Mr. Newberry. For public stations, yes.
Mr. Doyle. Are any of these issues addressed in the Local
Community Radio Act?
Mr. Newberry. There are power requirements that are
addressed in there. There are specifications in terms of what
the restrictions on the power for the low-power stations would
be. I haven't read that act in detail for some period of time.
Mr. Doyle. Right. I will help you out there since I wrote
it. So it is not in there?
Mr. Newberry. No.
Mr. Doyle. Thanks.
Now, you mention in your written testimony, you think the
FCC should not allow LPFM stations to increase their power
levels from 100 watts to 250 watts because power levels are not
mentioned in the Local Community Radio Act. The Local Community
Radio Act was written to address the issuing of insuring
licenses for LPFM. There are lots of other issues related to
LPFM that are not discussed in the bill, like power levels, but
also operating hours, antennas, programming, and everything
else the FCC has the authority to determine.
I just want to make the argument for you that 250 watt
service is still a very localized service compared to 50,000
and 100,000 watt full-power stations. So in fact, translator
stations routinely operate at 250 watts at greater tower
heights than LPFM without any problems. So I guess my question
is, as long as LPFMs are still required to operate under the
same very strict interference protections required by the Local
Community Radio Act, what difference would it make if LPFMs run
at a higher power level as long as they don't interfere with
neighboring stations?
Mr. Newberry. Mr. Doyle, that would be comparable to if I
have a radio station that has 25,000 watts of power, but it
wouldn't interfere with someone, so I could arbitrarily
increase that power to whatever level I could reach my contours
without causing interference. That is not the way the system
has been devised. That is not the way the system has operated.
There are classes of stations. You have maximum power within
each of those classes of stations. And that is how the FCC has
operated for years. It is not get as much space or coverage as
I can; it is operate a particular class.
Mr. Doyle. Sure. But you acknowledge translators run at 250
watts and there are not interference problems.
Mr. Newberry. Yes, sir. It is a different class of station.
Mr. Doyle. Yes, I understand. But I am just saying that
since we already know that translators run at that wattage
without causing interference problems, it wouldn't be an
interference issue. I mean, if the issue is interference, do
you think that somehow a low-power FM station operating at 250
watts would cause interference that a translator wouldn't?
Mr. Newberry. Well, I think the issue is what the intent of
the act of 2010 was that the NAB did go on record supporting
and we advocated for. And that was these were to be
microstations that cover particular neighborhoods, 100 watt
stations at 100 feet. And that was the class of station that
was authorized by that act. And that would be NAB's position,
just asking that the spirit of that legislation be continued.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you. And let me ask you about the second
adjacent frequency waivers, too. The act says that the FCC may
only grant an LPFM station a second adjacent waiver if that
station--and I will quote the act--``will not result in
interference to any authorized radio service.''
So a second adjacent frequency waiver cannot be granted to
an LPFM station that might cause interference to any radio
station no matter how far away, even outside that station's
protective listening range. And if interference somehow happens
anyway, the LPFM must suspend operations immediately. This is a
much stronger standard than full-power stations have to abide
by.
So what I want to ask, in your written testimony, you
propose that a full-power station should be able to review the
second adjacent waiver application of an LPFM station. This is
on top of the already exhaustive interprotections that are
enacted by the Local Community Radio Act. I am just curious why
you find it necessary to have that extra layer of scrutiny.
Mr. Newberry. It goes back to the principle of the concerns
of the degradation of the quality of the audio band. You can
look at what happened to the AM band in this country and see
why the NAB was so protective of the second adjacent channels.
The third adjacent does provide enough separation between the
stations that it avoids an unintended consequence of
interference. The second adjacent does cause more interference;
that is a fact of physics.
Mr. Doyle. But you acknowledge the act requires them to
shut down immediately if that is the case.
Mr. Newberry. Right. But what we are asking is that
broadcasters have the opportunity to be proactive and avoid
that problem so that our listeners are not--that the listeners
are not interfered with their habits of listening to our
station.
Mr. Doyle. But our experience has been that translators,
which are higher than 100 watts, that only about 5 percent of
translators have had to move or go off the air as a result of
this kind of scenario that you are describing. So I am just
curious; since it doesn't seem to be a big problem and we have
not had any issues with it, or very few issues with it, why you
see the need for the extra layer of scrutiny. I see my time has
run out.
Mr. Walden. I will let you respond.
Mr. Newberry. I would respond again by saying a different
class of stations with different license intentions through the
act of 2010.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Doyle.
I will now turn to the gentlelady from California, Mrs.
Bono Mack, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
this exciting, interesting hearing. It is great to have all of
you here. We appreciate very much your testimony.
I am just going to start by saying how important the
delivery of music has become. But I am a firm believer that
Shimkus started with dating ourselves. I will continue on in
that vein. Way back when, when you used to buy a car, we
actually used to look under the hoods and see what was under
the hood of a car, what kind of engine it had. Nobody cares any
longer. But we care what is in the dash. And that is the most
important thing, whether it is Pandora or whatever it is. We
are now buying two things, the gadgetry and the cupholders, I
am convinced.
My first question is to Mr. Israelite and then to Mr.
Sherman and to Mr. Allison. Is there a lot of discussion with
broadening the definition of a sync right?
Mr. Israelite. The synchronization right, where you marry
the music with video, is growing in importance for a lot of
reasons; obviously, things like professionally produced music
videos are becoming more popular. They are making income now.
YouTube user-generated content postings. So it is becoming a
very much more important income stream for songwriters.
The good news is that it is in a free market. Our rights
are not governed by consent decrees or compulsory licenses, so
we get to negotiate the value of that which is a valuable
thing. And in many instances the songwriter gets 50 percent of
the revenue with the record label and artist when we are both
in a free market, which is a wonderful thing for songwriters.
The challenge is we are not built for licensing. So one of
the things that we have been discussing among some of the
interested parties is how we can set up a system that doesn't
change the free-market nature of licensing synchronizations but
can make it more efficient so that when you need a mass amount
of synchronization that there is a way to license it. And we
had a pretty big ground-breaking deal with YouTube that NMPA
entered into, which I think can be a model for how to do this
in the future.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. I agree with what David has said. And there
are uses of sync now that are well beyond anything at the level
historically. For example, it is very common now to release
music videos as part of an album. So we need more of an ability
to license that stuff easily than the current system allows. So
we have been having conversations to figure out how to do that.
There is a lot of resistance to doing it under existing
copyright law at section 115, but we are trying to find
alternatives.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Would either one of you care to clarify the
difference between a YouTube version of Lady Gaga performing--
for example, one of her songs, and then I just pulled it up on
YouTube, now there are various fans with, what, 50 million
views of a song--is there a difference, whether it is Lady Gaga
herself or if it is a fan performing that song and how the two
would be treated?
Mr. Israelite. Yes. Actually there is quite a big
difference. Right now when a record label releases a
professionally produced music video, it will license to YouTube
or through Vivo the entirety of the licensing so that all of
the money that gets paid goes to the record label and the
record label then is responsible for licensing and paying the
songwriters. Sometimes that is happening. Sometimes it is not.
And we are going to address that.
When a user posts a video that includes that music or, for
example, does a cover song, then the person posting it is
supposed to have the responsibility of getting that licensing.
And one of the things we are trying to work out with YouTube is
that for advertising that is now placed on those videos,
YouTube is now actually paying directly the music publisher and
songwriter for the use of that composition. So that is a
tremendous step forward from where we were a few years ago when
that music was being used and the songwriter wasn't seeing any
income from the use. So music videos are still a challenge for
us, professional ones. User-generated, we have actually made
more progress on with this type of ground-breaking deal with
YouTube.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Do you want to add anything?
Mr. Sherman. That is right.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you.
Mr. Allison, you are leaving tomorrow for Bonnaroo. So that
is very exciting. I don't know if you got the opportunity to
play Coachella but I hope you will be at the Coachella festival
next year. Can you speak a little bit about the importance of
touring in relation to all of this?
Mr. Allison. Sure. I mean, touring is a major part of my
income. It is at least half. And I would say it is the reason
why I do what I do. I just want to perform. I just want to play
the bass. That is my goal in life. And touring, I derive a
certain percentage of my income from touring.
I guess the big problem in terms of the performing rights
part of the equation is that where I will have income from
touring and I will have income as a songwriter, I don't get
income--a royalty stream, that is--as a performer. And I work
in a kind of a field where as a musician, it is very
collaborative when we make recordings. We are working together.
And we are getting of each other. When we are in the studio,
people come up with great ideas and they throw them out there.
We were talking before about the great bassist Carol Kaye,
and she would contribute a great bass line to a pop tune.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I know one in particular.
Mr. Allison. Yes. And may go unrecognized. I guess you
could say I have two jobs. I am a songwriter, for which I
receive royalties. But I am also a performer, for which I do
not receive royalties. And I am talking about terrestrial radio
here. And usually if you have two jobs you get two paychecks.
In this case, I don't.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired. Thank
you very much.
Mr. Walden. Thank you. I was going to say we were going to
play your music, but we don't have a copyright agreement.
I will turn now to the former chairman, Mr. Waxman, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shapiro, you mentioned in your testimony that
advancements in audio technology have brought about more
immersive, enriching experiences for listeners. Some of these
technologies are relatively bandwidth-intensive. Are you
concerned that data caps could potentially undercut these types
of consumer experiences?
Mr. Shapiro. Well, clearly these use more data. But
generally, audio uses a lot less data than video. I think the
consumers really understand what they buy and there will be
transparency by the providers, and also that we have enough
spectrum so that we can do this both wirelessly--well,
wirelessly. I think wired is less of an issue now. We do have
pretty good broadband deployment and there is increasing
competition. But wireless definitely needs more spectrum
because we are facing a spectrum cliff.
I so much appreciate what was done by Congress and signed
by the President recently in terms of private broadcast
incentive auctions. But that will not be enough. And I think
that should be our focus: How do we plan 5, 10 years out for
this spectrum explosion? Because let's be honest, it is just
not about audio and new services and audio. It is about so many
things which the U.S. is leading on.
Mr. Waxman. Do you think the data caps could potentially
undercut these?
Mr. Shapiro. I think the broadband providers have certain
rights to offer their product and the best thing we can do from
a matter of public policy is to ensure vigorous competition.
And the consumers understand what they are buying and it is
disclosed very clearly.
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Allison, you mention in your testimony that
the Recording Academy has been very active on the issue of
sound quality which would require increased bandwidth for
higher resolution streaming and downloads. Could you share with
us your perspective on data caps and how that might affect your
efforts in raising the levels of sound quality?
Mr. Allison. I have no strong informed opinion on that.
That is above my pay grade in terms of data caps. But I can say
as a musician, sound quality is essential. I think art is an
immersive experience. And I come up in the era of vinyl
records. Still have them, still listen to them. And now we are
recording very high-resolution formats, 24 bit at the minimum,
which sound incredible. And I think that having high-quality
audio available has a lot to do with how people experience art.
Mr. Waxman. Well, we hear a lot about the technology
changing the business model for distributing music, but
technology is also changing the business model for the artist
in other ways. Have these new technologies and the Internet
changed how you and other artists create, record, and promote
your music?
Mr. Allison. Well, certainly the recording side has changed
a lot as technologies emerge. My first few records were
recorded on 2-inch analog tape which sounds great. The last
eight were recorded directly into a computer. So technology
certainly has changed. Also, of course, as a small
businessman--that is what I am, I am out there kind of hawking
my wears, trying to get people interested in my music--I use
social media quite a bit to try to get the word out. I think
that has definitely transformed how musicians connect with
their audience and hope to build their audience.
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Westergren, you note that for many of the
artists featured through your service, Pandora is the only air
play that they have ever received. Why do you think these
independent artists have such a hard time getting their work on
traditional radio? Have you seen changes in the traditional
radio industry's willingness to feature new or independent
content in the last 15 years?
Mr. Westergren. I think it is a fundamental feature of
broadcast. I have been a fan of broadcast radio all my life. I
have listened to it, growing up with it. They can only play a
single play list at a time, as opposed to the Web where you can
stream literally millions of simultaneous completely different
radio stations. So it just has a natural, innate ability to be
much more inclusive.
And if I may, to Mr. Allison's comment, for touring,
Pandora has the ability to alert listeners to local lesser-
known musicians when they are playing. We have email addresses
and zip codes upon registration. We have actually been
experimenting with filling clubs in small cities around the
U.S. by inviting people based on musical preference.
Mr. Waxman. So based on the preference that they have
expressed to you, you can inform them of a concert.
Mr. Westergren. That is right. We hope to build a
musician's middle class, like I said.
Mr. Waxman. Well, I appreciate the comments that all the
witnesses have given and I think that this has been a very
important and worthwhile hearing. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Waxman. I appreciate that.
Now we go to Mrs. Blackburn from Tennessee for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you. Mr. Allison, I hope you enjoy
Bonnaroo.
Mr. Allison. I know I will.
Mrs. Blackburn. It is a great Tennessee happening. Never
been. I hear it is a great happening out there.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit for the record some
testimony from a musician named David Lowery.
Mr. Walden. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you. I appreciate that. He wanted to
be able to weigh in on what we were hearing today.
Let me go back, I want to come to Mr. Sherman and Mr.
Newberry. The chairman referenced the agreement with Big
Machine and Clear Channel yesterday and talked a little bit
about that. And Mr. Newberry, come on back down to Tennessee, I
will introduce you to Mr. Bruschetta. He is one of my
constituents. And I think that this is something that we all
find interesting. And certainly it has been quite a part of the
subject that we are hearing today. So I would like to hear from
the two of you just very quickly. And if you want to expand on
it in writing, I think that would be interesting to the
committee.
Let's talk about what this agreement means to each of your
entities and to the future of performance rights as we move on
down the line in this discussion. So very briefly now. And if
you want to submit something in detail later, that is fine too.
So Mr. Sherman, I will start with you.
Mr. Sherman. Well, as I said before, we don't know how many
other radio stations and groups will think that this is
something that they want to do. So the mere fact that Clear
Channel has done this with one label doesn't solve the problem
for the entire industry. We have had Dionne Warwick come
testify in Congress. She is no better off today than she was
yesterday, notwithstanding the Clear Channel deal with Big
Machine. And most, 99.9 percent of the artists, are not any
better off.
Mrs. Blackburn. Let me cut you off and go to Mr. Newberry.
Mr. Newberry. Congresswoman, I would tell you that I think
it is a good thing from the standpoint of private enterprise
transaction. It was a decision made by a private company, Clear
Channel, to engage with a private company, Big Machine, and
reach an agreement--the terms of which I am not privileged to,
but reached an agreement that they were both satisfied with,
without government intervention. So it doesn't change our
position that there should not be a congressionally mandated,
but I think it signifies the willingness of both sides to
engage in conversations and look for solutions.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you. Mr. Israelite, I want to go back
to your testimony. And you mentioned a more efficient licensing
system for new business models. I just want to ask you this: Do
you agree that reforming section 115 of the Copyright Code
would be a good step in bringing the law up to speed with the
new technologies? And what type reforms would you like to see
in your organization, like to see us follow and consider?
Mr. Israelite. Well, thank you for the question. I think
reforming 115 is very important. The mechanical licensing
system was built on an old model where you would license one
song to one record label to put out. Today when Apple iTunes
store has 20 million tracks and others may want to open their
store with that many licenses, we are not built for that right
now. And I think we have some very innovative progressive
proposals of how we can change that licensing system to make
that work.
I would still be concerned about the existence of a
compulsory license on the songwriter. It doesn't exist for the
record label or the artist, but the songwriter is told the
value of their intellectual property. And I think once you
reform licensing we ought to take a look at removing that
compulsory license and let the free market operate.
On the performance base, we are very efficient in how we
license. We have three performance rights organizations that
license very efficiently. But, again, because of the existence
of consent decrees, there is no free-market negotiation and I
think the value for songwriters is diminished.
And on the synchronization front, while there is not a
consent decree and there is not a compulsory license, it is a
free market exercise, I do think that reforming 115 can lead to
opportunities and do a better job of licensing synchronization
in a free market. And that is basically what we have tried to
do with YouTube, where there was a model deal, it was offered
to all music publishers and songwriters who walked in, we had
very good success of people voluntarily doing that.
So thank you for the question. I think it is something that
is very important for the future of music.
Mr. Sherman. If I could just jump in. David left the
impression that there are no compulsory licenses for record
companies. We are actually subject to a compulsory license for
Pandora and all of Internet radio.
Mrs. Blackburn. Precisely. And that was part of the point
of the question and getting to the reforms in 115. I do have
other questions that I will submit for the record. I have got
one on the FM chip. I know we are about out of time. I have got
one on DMCA and Google, Mr. Sherman, that I have wanted to
discuss with you. And I will have to say, dealing with the FM
chip, I have just pulled up WSM online here and was tempted to
hit the on-air right now, listen live, so I could entertain
y'all. I will yield back.
Mr. Walden. I thank the gentlelady for her questions and
her interest in this hearing. And I congratulate her on this,
the anniversary of her 30th birthday.
Mrs. Blackburn. I am so pleased that you couched that so
delicately and gingerly.
Mr. Walden. Trying to be diplomatic here, but happy
birthday.
We now turn to the gentleman from Massachusetts Mr. Markey.
For 5 minutes.
Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much. I would
just like to have a little bit of an additional conversation on
this FM chip issue.
Mr. Smulyan, in Europe they include a chip in cell phones.
What is the frequency of use in Europe from your perspective?
Mr. Smulyan. It is one of the most widely used features.
What you find is, when you go into a cellular store there, it
is always listed. When the manufacturer lists the features, it
is one of the most widely accepted features. We have had
manufacturers say, look, for years people would pay a couple of
extra dollars to have an FM radio in there, and that has been
true. We have got research that shows that it is one of the
most requested features all over the world. And the NAB did a
study with Harris which said that 81 percent of the public
would want it. It has just not----
Mr. Markey. In Europe?
Mr. Smulyan. No, in the United States. But it hasn't been
known in this country. If you go into a cellular store today
and you ask about radio, they will talk about Pandora, they
will talk about streaming, but nobody talks about over-the-air
broadcasting. It has been left out of the literature.
Mr. Markey. So let me turn to you, Mr. McCabe and Mr.
Shapiro. What is your response to that? They are saying in
Europe it is widely accepted and it is a part of the culture.
Why not in the United States?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Sure. I guess first I would start off
by saying it is in 59 phones here in the United States, so that
is pretty significant if you can find 59 phones using a 20-
minute search. That is number one.
Number two, we have a manufacturer who manufactures phones
globally and they have done a similar survey--not in the
context of our discussion here--and they gave consumers 33
choices. In the United States, the FM chips came in 31st out of
33rd. In the United Kingdom, it came in 25th out of 33. In
Brazil it came in second.
Now it is just a different environment. The United States
is a different environment. We have Pandora, we have Spotify,
we have TuneIn. We have a range of options here that other
entities don't.
Mr. Markey. Let me go back to Mr. Smulyan then. He says
there are already 59 devices that have that in the United
States and it just won't work in our country. What is your
response?
Mr. Smulyan. Well, we are convinced that, yes, there are 59
and there are literally thousands of phones manufactured and
sold in the United States. It has been sort of gradually put in
since we have been having this discussion. Chips have finally
been activated. But I think what you will find is in the rest
of the world, most of the chips manufactured in the world today
are multifunction chips. So when they are shipped anywhere else
in the world--because it is a standard part of the system--they
are there. When they come into this country, they are still
installed in the phones. They are just not turned on. And our
question is, we would like--especially as we get into an era of
data caps, when people start paying not $30 a month for
unlimited data but maybe $40 or $50 or $60 or $70, we all like
the personalization of streaming. But when people understand
the cost, we think the idea of having a free option is a big,
big difference. We are going into the era of data caps.
Mr. Markey. You are saying they are just not turned on.
Mr. Smulyan. They are not turned on.
Mr. Markey. Yes. So would there be a problem with turning
them on, Mr. McCabe or Mr. Shapiro?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. No. Again, the 59 that we have
identified are active FM chips that you can utilize. Again, we
continue to have a discussion with NAB where they say they are
not seeking a mandate. And yet here we are in front of Congress
talking about something that NAB suggests is a business issue.
And if it is a business issue, why are they not advertising
this? If Mr. Westergren wants his product to be known to
people, he advertises it. I have yet to hear a single
advertisement or a single mention by Mr. Smulyan and his
multitude of radio stations----
Mr. Markey. Let's get back to Mr. Smulyan, if you could
answer that.
Mr. Smulyan. The industry has started promoting the fact
that you can get radios, but they have been so infrequent until
the last 6 months. But I think the question is we don't
understand--since obviously you use less battery life turning
on a cell phone with a radio than you do streaming--why aren't
they activated? They are activated all over the world. All you
have to do is turn them on. That was a question that we would
ask.
Mr. Markey. Well, Mr. Guttman-McCabe is saying they are
turned on.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Well, I could submit this for the
record, Congressman. This is a Best Buy catalog that lists 26
of them. Out of the less than 80 that they identify, 26 have FM
chips. There is a little dot in that FM chip category.
Mr. Markey. I will come back to Mr. Smulyan again, please.
Mr. Smulyan. It is interesting, the NAB did a study that
when they went to the Verizon catalog they had 18 specific
features that you could buy on their phones. Never was radio
mentioned. What we are finding is, it is almost deliberately
kept from the consumer. Yes, there are 59 phones and I am
thrilled that there are. Six months ago, there were probably 20
phones. A year ago there were none. But the reality is, we sell
thousands of different models of phones in this country. And I
would submit that out of thousands of those phones, of the
smartphones, a great majority of them have a FM chip that is
not turned on.
Mr. Markey. Mr. Shapiro?
Mr. Shapiro. If broadcast is such a powerful medium, they
should be advertising it to the consumers. If many of them
wanted to go buy it, then Best Buy and others will carry more.
I would also suggest, in comparing us to other countries, it is
cultural perhaps, but we are very different. We have a
different digital television system. We have a unique geography
and a unique culture. And also, we are the fountain of Internet
creation here. So there is nothing wrong with that.
And I want to paraphrase the acting chairman, Mrs. Bono
Mack, who I read a quote from this morning. But why not mandate
them in cars, in lights, in pillows; why all of a sudden
smartphones? And it is just not a matter of activating a chip,
I want to point out. You have to have an antenna that works for
FM which is not necessarily the same antenna that will work
well for the cellular signal.
Mr. Markey. So you are saying that the phones in the United
States, even if you activated them, would not be able to
receive it because they don't have the proper antenna?
Mr. Shapiro. Well, it is the quality of the reception as
well. I mean, you could get a very weak staticy signal without
a great antenna, but you might have to add a better antenna.
Mr. Markey. A quick final word, Mr. Smulyan.
Mr. Smulyan. The antennas that come with cell phones are
the antenna in almost every case. There are also internal
antennas. The phone I have here in the Fidelity is perfect. It
is the size of a human hair. So they are available. They have
dealt with this problem over a billion times everywhere else in
the world.
Mr. Markey. Thank you all for being here. It is a very
important discussion. Thank you all.
Mrs. Bono Mack. [Presiding.] The gentleman yields back. And
the chair now recognizes Mr. Latta for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you all for being
here today. As was already stated by others, it has been a
very, very interesting discussion.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe, if I could start with a couple of
questions of you. I found it interesting in your testimony that
you were saying that of course America is really at the
forefront of innovation across the globe. And also with that
innovation comes job creation. Any idea what is being created
out there, jobs in the industry today?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Yes. We are responsible directly for
several million jobs and indirectly for tens of millions of
jobs. And that continues to evolve as you see our service go
into areas--we call them vertical. So Mr. Shimkus, I think,
talked about the credit card swipe; mHealth, I am a beneficiary
of mobile mHealth products as well, mobile education. So it is
almost impossible to quantify the volume of jobs because you
see, you know, services like Mr. Westergren's and others moving
onto the mobile platform and things evolving on a daily basis.
Right now we have 6 percent of the world's wireless
subscribers, but we have 70 percent of the world's LTE
subscribers. So we are at the cutting edge--Mr. Shapiro talked
about sort of we are the Internet country. I think that is
true. I think that is why you see a different approach to FM
radio here than you do in other countries, because all of the
companies that we mentioned earlier began here in the United
States. They are all driving employees, they are driving
revenues, they are driving taxes and capex. And it is happening
here. And all we say with regard to this FM chip set
discussion, let there be choice, let the consumer choose. Let
innovation continue and flourish. And if consumers want more
and more FM-enabled products, I assure you, one of the 30 to 40
handset manufacturers will find ways of getting those products
to the consumers.
Mr. Latta. Well, I also see in your next paragraph in your
testimony you go on to talk about spectrum and the access to
it. Are you going to have enough spectrum out there?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Well we certainly--I think you may
recall CTIA, along with our friends at CEA put a paper together
which began the discussion about the incentive broadcast
auction, because we looked at the needs that were coming up and
then the spectrum that was in the pipeline, and it was an
equation that caused us concern. So we started talking about a
looming spectrum crisis.
We are, as Mr. Shapiro suggested, extremely happy with what
Congress did and what the President signed into law about
bringing more spectrum to market. That is key. It has to happen
in the next 3 to 5 years. There needs to be a move to get the
spectrum, not just from the broadcasters but from some of the
Federal Government users, into the pipeline and out to the
carriers so that we can meet up with this, whether it is audio
demand or video demand or the verticals with Am Health and
education. So we will continue to sort of bang that drum to say
Congress did its part. Now we need the agencies to push this
over the goal line to finalize that part of it, to actually get
the spectrum to market.
Mr. Latta. You also stated that you also need a light
regulatory touch. Could you define ``light regulatory touch''?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Sure. And I think the best way to
describe it is, if we look back 3 years ago--or if we will go
back 5 years ago--5 years ago, the hottest selling phone was
the Motorola RAZR. It was a flip phone. There weren't app
stores. There were less than 100 applications. And in that 5-
year period, almost 60 percent of the phones are now
smartphones. We have tablets. We have an environment that is
changing so dramatically that to suggest--and this is the
ranking member's opening statement talked about trying to not
lock in technology, because once you do that with a mandate,
you are overtaken by events.
In this world, it moves so quickly that by the time I have
a phone that I call new, you know, my team members have three
or four other phones that do things that I can't even
contemplate.
And so, for us, it is first do no harm, the physician's
mantra. Look at a regulation not just independent but as a
whole. Look at it holistically and, say, boy, adding this on
top of the other regulations that are out there, how is it
going to impact these tier 2 or tier 3 carriers, not just the
large carriers but all the others out there that are trying to
upgrade their networks? So, for us, a light regulatory touch
is, unless you see a significant failure in the market, you
really shouldn't be contemplating regulation in such a fast-
moving market segment as ours.
We have taken to calling it an ecosystem, because companies
like Pandora are now part of it. And our trade association is
changing dramatically as we sit here. We have more companies
now from the west coast, from Silicon Valley. We have the
Googles and the Microsofts, but we also have the smaller
companies. Because this ecosystem is evolving.
And so a light regulatory touch is first do no harm. Have a
sense of what you are regulating and make sure you don't have a
negative impact on investment, on jobs, on innovation.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much.
Madam Chair, I see my time has expired, and I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Latta.
The chair now recognizes Ms. Matsui for 5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Westergren, Pandora I know is a very popular app with
my constituents. I think I have 150,000 active listeners in my
district. And I am buying a new refrigerator. I am thinking
about having it embedded, I suppose. But I would spend a lot of
time with my refrigerator then I think, and I don't want to do
that.
Anyway, since everybody else has commented on the Clear
Channel business model, what do you think about that online
streaming business model of Clear Channel?
Mr. Westergren. I won't give you a course of the details of
that transaction.
The one way we think about it is it clearly is evidence
that, even for a company of Clear Channel's size and sort of
business competence, they are realizing that Internet radio is
a tough business. That is for a company that is probably one of
the world's best at selling advertising. So I feel it is just
one more signal that something is broken in the royalty rate
setting for Internet radio.
Ms. Matsui. So do you think that is a big signal?
Mr. Westergren. A huge signal. Absolutely. There could not
be a bigger one.
Ms. Matsui. How does the growth and the availability of
Smartphones and tablets correspond to the growth of Internet
radio?
Mr. Westergren. Smartphones is the ball game for Pandora.
Our growth rate doubled overnight the day we launched on the
iPhone. And it has not only led to a massive increase in
Smartphones. They have also driven adoption across consumer
electronics and cars, because people began taking Smartphones
and plugging them into their car dashboards and really using
Pandora in the car. That led to now virtually every major car
manufacturer partnering with us to embed it in the dashboard.
So mobile technology has completely transformed the whole
Internet radio industry.
Ms. Matsui. Mr. Guttman-McCabe, monthly data caps
potentially--could they have an affect potentially on
innovation for new audio services available through mobile
broadband connection and can you provide some examples?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Sure. I would say that when we look at
monthly data caps the word you chose is actually a perfect
word. It is innovation. So often we think of innovation in our
ecosystem. We talk about it in the context of devices or
networks or things like that. In our space, I have seen in my
11 years at CTIA as much or more innovation in the service plan
space as I have seen in the technology space.
So if you think back 10 years ago, we paid for every minute
coming and going. And then someone magically came up with
buckets of minutes and then we had nights and weekends and we
had prepaid and we had rollover minutes and myFaves and My
Circle, and then we had sort of the all you can eat and now we
have different entities offering levels of caps.
And the way that we look at it at CTIA, because of our
friends over at the Department of Justice, we tend to stay away
from pricing issues. But we look at it as allow the market to
continue to evolve and innovate. And we saw Cricket Leap came
up with a new service called MUVE, which is an audio-based
service, and came up with a unique pricing structure for it
which was separate from their cap--or their plan.
Ms. Matsui. Does anyone else have a comment on that?
Mr. Smulyan. I think what people have to understand is--and
you can see it with AT&T having--what--21,000 percent data
growth since the introduction of the iPhone--there is a
staggering amount of data being consumed for entertainment. We
are all big believers. We stream everyone in the broadcast
industry streams. We find it. And I guess the best way is to
give you an example, if I can, for a minute.
I have a radio station in Los Angeles. We reach a little
under 3 million people a week. My cost of electricity of that
radio station is $39,000 a year. So for $39,000 I can reach one
person in southern California or 15 million. But I actually
reach just under 3 million. If I took my transmitter down, my
cost of reaching my just under 3 million people would be a
little over $1 million a year. That is my cost to reach them.
Their cost to receive the signal would be identical or probably
actually higher, because I buy in bulk.
The question you have--and I think it is really the heart
of all this--listen, innovation, the consumer will make the
decision whether I am out of business or Tim is out of business
or anyone. But the real issue here that we are not noticing is,
is the American public willing to pay ever-increasing costs to
receive its entertainment in a spectrum that is becoming
increasingly crowded?
You now can use your entire monthly data cap on your
Smartphone or your tablet in watching a baseball game or a
movie in 3 hours. The fact is, if the American public wants to
pay it, great. Our whole point is, look, we have a free
alternative. Just turn the chip on. But the reality is the data
consumption for the American public is growing at staggering
rates and the question that really needs to be asked is, is
this the best way to entertain the American public or inform
them?
Ms. Matsui. I understand. Thank you very much.
Mrs. Bono Mack. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Bilbray for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilbray. Well, let's just follow up on and allow anyone
to jump in on this thing. But the question again is, if we have
the chips available, what is the opposition to turning those
on, again?
Mr. Smulyan. I have no idea. I think I know. Because if
people are consuming free radio, they are not buying data. That
is the opposition. Bluntly. They are not buying data.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. One thing that shocks me is that in a
techie, savvy world as we think it is, how few of consumers
realize that this is something that is available in the United
States or could be available. When you go over to third world
countries and you go overseas, you see this as being a matter
of course a lot more and more and more.
Of course, sometimes I think that people that are not being
distracted by old technology is getting a lot more hype on
that. I was actually, Madam Chair, surfing on an island off
Panama and a kid spoke perfect English. And when I asked him
what school he went to to learn it, he said, no, my iPhone
taught me the English language. But that shows you what they
have got.
How can we move this and allow the consumer to know this is
an option to where they can make an informed decision?
Mr. Smulyan. One of the things that we appreciate from our
friends at CTIA is, finally, in the last year you can now--
there are phones that are being activated. The chips are being
turned on. I am thrilled to see it is 59. A month ago, it was
about 20 or 25. And, again, there are hundreds maybe thousands
of phones.
But the reality is that up until recently--the NAB did a
study. They sent people into phone stores. And when they went
into phone stores, the sales people had no idea--when you got
the sales card, if you go into a phone store anywhere else in
the world, it says top features, and FM is always listed. You
found that card in the United States. It was never mentioned.
We need to change that, and we think it has been an active idea
to sort of not have the consumer be aware of it.
And I will also say something else. We as a broadcast
industry must also say, you can now get phones in cell phone
stores with radios in them. We haven't been able to say that
until recently.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Congressman, if I could, I don't think
you were here for this earlier, but I sent our intern, who used
to work on Capitol Hill, out to Best Buy to secure their June
catalog. They put out a wireless catalog each month, and here
it is. It always has a pullout section, and this pullout
section lists phones and features from carriers and from
manufacturers, and it lists about 80 phones. It specifically
identifies 26 that have the FM chip set available in it. And,
as I said, we have found 59.
So, again, Mr. Smulyan says he wants to have a factual
discussion, and the facts are that this capability is available
and if consumers desire it, they have access to it.
In the third world countries, some of those wireless
carriers don't have second generation, let alone fourth, or
what we have is a third, let alone fourth--what we have--
generation here. So our consumers are savvier. They see
services like Pandora and Spotify and others, and they take
advantage of those, and they get their music in their format
when they want it.
Yet there are still 59 phones available, and when our
manufacturers do an analysis of what sells in Germany versus
Brazil versus the United States, that differs, and they----
Mr. Bilbray. I am going to interrupt a second. Because,
Madam Chair and myself, we have districts that have suffered
massive wildfires, and one of the things that my consumers
would like to know about is the fact that it could be
lifesaving if they had that capability during an emergency
when, instead of using a reverse 9/11 call and all the stuff
that we have been doing with hardwire and with cell phones, is
the ability of somebody to be able to tune in and know exactly
from the local station what is going on and be able to carry it
with them, not have to be in their car and still be able to
have that information.
There is a big one there from the safety factor, that I
think you are going to see disaster preparedness people raising
that as being an option, much like the 9/11 chip was.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. And we recognize that. And, again, I
guess I would point to the fact that if consumers want that
capability it is in 59 phones. I have testified in the Homeland
Security Committee on the Warren Act and emergency alerts.
Several months ago, I was crossing the Roosevelt Bridge,
and I got my alert through my wireless device. We had our radio
on. We had our daughters in our car. It was tuned to a local
channel. We got our emergency alert through Arlington alerts
through our wireless device.
So we don't look that wireless is replacing the emergency
alert capabilities of radio. We look at it as supplemental.
And, to us, having both of those capabilities is fantastic,
just like having television broadcasts and others and----
Mr. Bilbray. I understand that. But, Madam Chair, my time
is up. I think that the fact is people are starting to depend
on this for more and more, and they want it consolidated. They
don't want to be carrying four or five or whatever. It is
becoming all inclusive. We just want to make sure the consumer
has that choice.
I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes Mrs. Christensen for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Smulyan, you seemed as though you wanted to answer that
last question?
Mr. Smulyan. Yes. I think I would ask the question, in his
district or your district or any district, when there is an
emergency are people actually going to be alerted and get the
information they need in a 90-character text?
We would say--we have been doing this--we have been
alerting and informing the American public for almost 90 years,
and I believe that especially in a world in which the Internet
clogs up, the cell system is jammed, or in the worst
emergencies it is gone completely, when we have emergency
generators, backup generators, we still remain the only people
who can inform the American public at the time they need it the
most.
Mrs. Christensen. I just saw that you were chomping at the
bit to respond and my colleague's time had been up.
But let me also ask you a question about something that
took place in my general neighborhood. The Puerto Rico
legislature recently held a hearing on legislation that would
require FM chips in cell phones in order to deliver those
emergency alerts, and the bill was endorsed by the Puerto Rican
Broadcasters Association. Did NAB support this legislation?
And as a follow-up I would like to ask you and also Mr.
Guttman-McCabe, do you believe that States and territories
should have the right to establish their own emergency alerting
systems and mechanisms?
Mr. Smulyan. I want to defer to the NAB, because I am not
sure what the position was. But, obviously, I can tell you I
believe that every portable device should have this chip. It is
included in most, and it can come on in any emergency.
I will defer to the NAB on what the position----
Mr. Newberry. We didn't take a position. I understand NAB
did not take a position.
Mrs. Christensen. OK. A lot of the questions that I had
were already asked.
But it is interesting we have had this discussion about
chips that are not activated. Do you know how many systems'
cell phones are not activated?
Mr. Smulyan. I think the question was how many chips are
not activated. It is hard to tell, because we understand that
almost every Smartphone shipped in the United States now has a
multi function that includes FM radio, but----
Mrs. Bono Mack. We were right about to change the chair
here. So give us 1 minute to do see what the technical problem
is; and it seems like the perfect point for me to leave and
hand it over to you, Steve. I think it was your seersucker that
did it.
Mrs. Christensen. Go ahead.
Mr. Smulyan. We don't know exactly. We think that most
Smartphones shipped to this country have a multi-function chip
which includes FM radio. For example, in every iPhone there has
been an FM chip that has not been turned on. We don't know the
exact number, but we think the great majority. And the only way
to do it is to tear a phone apart. But we understand, based on
sales figures, that almost all Smartphones that are shipped to
this country--and this is, obviously, millions--have an FM chip
that just hasn't been turned on.
Mrs. Christensen. Mr. Shapiro, did you want to answer that?
I remember having a phone maybe about 10 years ago, and I
like to walk and listen to music, and I used to listen to the
radio on my phone. I can't do it anymore. Did something change?
Mr. Shapiro. You can buy phones that do that. There are
several available--several dozen available in the marketplace.
As Ms. Eshoo pointed out, consumers don't really demand that
feature. I think the radio broadcasting industry can change
that dynamic by aggressively advertising for it, and then
consumers will do it.
The other way they can change the dynamic is, although we
have heard a witness testify it costs almost nothing, well, if
it costs almost nothing, they should be willing to pay for that
feature as other feature providers often do to have that in
telephones.
What this is really about is not about emergencies at all.
This is about an industry trying to preserve its market share.
Forty-seven percent of Americans listen to less radio today
than they did just 1 year ago. So it has gone down
dramatically. And they are coming to Congress and say they are
not requesting a mandate, but yet in word and action they are
acting very differently.
So all this talk about emergencies--and I specify in my
written testimony why the emergency feature is somewhat greatly
overrated, because you can--for various reasons. But this is
just about a rather old industry trying to deal with the fact
that there are new players out there and despite the fact they
don't even play fairly----
Mrs. Christensen. Let me try to get my last question to Mr.
Smulyan. Since they are already available, why should
individuals be forced to get these FM chips in their mobile
devices if they didn't want them?
Mr. Smulyan. Well, number one, I want to respond to Mr.
Sherman--Mr. Shapiro--forgive me. I really apologize.
Number one, the statement there is 41 percent less
listening is crazy. There are more people who listen to radio
stations in the United States today than ever have been. We
have 241 million of the 12-plus population and about 275
million of the 6-plus population. The fact is, more Americans
listen to radio today than ever in the history of this country.
Our whole point is we think, based on experiences around
the world and based on the study that has been done, that the
great majority of people would use the radio if it were
activated. We think that it is an opportunity, especially at a
time when data caps are coming and people are going to be
forced to understand how much more they are paying for audio
that they haven't had to pay before data caps came.
Mrs. Christensen. OK. My time is well up. So, thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Scalise [presiding]. The gentlelady yields her time,
and I will recognize myself for 5 minutes to ask questions.
I will start with Mr. Westergren. I have used Pandora many
times. It is an honor to meet the founder of Pandora.

I want to first ask on the royalty arrangement that you
have, 50 percent of revenue is what Pandora pays, is it based--
when you are dealing with the Copyright Royalty Board, is it
based on revenue? Is it based on the number of plays? How do
they come to the amount that you have to pay versus what XM and
what other platforms have to pay?
Mr. Westergren. Sure. It is actually written as a greater
of a per song fee or 25 percent of revenue. That is how it is
calculated. And, currently, that per song fee is the larger
number, and it equals about 50 percent.
Mr. Scalise. Was there a back and forth or did they just
impose this upon you and you have got your business model and
now you have to pay 50 percent of whatever revenue you have,
knowing that your competitors are paying a much lower rate? How
did that come about? And is there any kind of appeals process?
Mr. Westergren. It was imposed upon us by an arbitration, a
Copyright Royalty Board, which is a three-judge panel that is
part of the copyright office that actually legislative--per
law, Federal law, every 5 years determines what our rate will
be for the ensuing 5 years. And they came up with a ruling last
time that led to our current rates.
Really, the argument we are here to make is we are OK with
a centralized license. We actually really embrace that. It
really enables our business. But we want the rate setting that
we have to come from the same guidelines that other forms of
radio derive their rates, which currently is not true.
So that three-judge panel, when they consider our rates,
are guided by a different and worse or more disadvantageous set
of criteria than, say, XM Sirius or, of course, broadcast.
Mr. Scalise. And on the deal that was just reached between
Clear Channel and Big Machine, that to me seems like an example
of the system working, where private parties go and negotiate
rates and once they come to an agreement that is what they pay
and now they have got the ability to move forward and do
business. Is that a better model, do you think, than having a
government agency with their arbitration panel imposing rates
upon you where you don't really get that opportunity to go and
negotiate with the actual artist you are helping to promote?
Mr. Westergren. That is a great question. Where we come to
that topic on is part of Pandora's mission as a company is
about giving wide exposure to a huge catalog of artists, both
from the standpoint of artists as well as listeners, so playing
old big band music for somebody that is older and playing the
latest hip hop for kids.
Mr. Scalise. Or New Orleans jazz, as you mentioned in your
opening statement, which I am very fond of.
Mr. Westergren. You name it, we are playing it. And that
requires our ability to easily license and access a huge
catalog of music, much of what is being created by artists who
are not on labels, some of whom are literally hobbyists that do
it on the weekends at home making great music.
Absent a compulsory license, in other words, one place we
can go to to get permission to do all that, it would be
impossible for us to go find all those people and get the
proper permission to do it. That catalog which is about 1
million songs right now would be dramatically smaller. So the
great benefit of a compulsory license is inclusion for artists
and breadth of listening for music, for listeners.
Mr. Scalise. I will have to get name of the band that you
were in when you were playing, because I couldn't find it.
Mr. Westergren. I am never giving that up.
Mr. Scalise. I can't find it on Pandora when I search it.
Mr. Newberry, you had something you wanted to add.
Mr. Newberry. I would like to make a couple of
observations.
First of all, I think, while we disagree on some points,
Mr. Westergren and I would both agree that the Copyright
Royalty Board has set a rate structure that has suffocated the
expansion of the industry and makes it very difficult. I don't
know if I would have gone into his business model. But that is
a decision he made, and I will respect that. He is perfectly
capable of making that.
But where we disagree is that radio----
Mr. Scalise. If you could wrap it up, because my time is
running out.
Mr. Newberry. Radio is not just music. Radio stations--what
we represent as the National Association of Broadcasters--have
local information, compelling personalities, emergency
services. And when Mr. Shapiro says this is just an effort for
us as an outdated technology and questions our commitment to
emergency information and our services, I take disagreement
with that. We have a long heritage of providing that
information, and we are very sincere about that intent.
Mr. Scalise. My time is about to run out, and I have got a
question I wanted to ask Mr. Smulyan.
On the NAB Web site, you actually call on Congress--it is a
section that says action needed, and you are calling on
Congress to consider ways to expand availability of these FM
chips.
And, again, in a free market, if somebody wants one, I
think Mr. McCabe showed some examples of where people can go
purchase it. I know on laptops and other tablet devices if you
want a wireless card in some cases you have to pay extra for
that, even though it is something people use every single day.
I am happy to pay extra for it, but I have the option as a
consumer not to pay extra for it or to buy it later.
Are you asking for Congress to do something that they--
right now, you are saying that Congress needs to take action. I
am just asking you to expand on that.
Mr. Smulyan. Number one, we did a study that said 81
percent of the American public would pay more to have an
activated radio station.
Mr. Scalise. But what are you calling on Congress to do?
Because you are calling on Congress in the Web site.
Mr. Smulyan. We would like a study that was requested. We
would like this issue to be fully vetted. We believe that the
most important thing is it is not a question of paying more,
turn on the chips that people have already paid for.
When I bought this phone----
Mr. Scalise. So you are calling on Congress to take action
regarding mandates on--one way or another?
Mr. Smulyan. No. We are not. We are asking for a full and
complete discussion.
But my only point is--I don't want to call it a mandate,
but I paid for an FM radio in this phone. It is turned off. If
I buy this phone in London, England, it has got an FM radio. I
pay. I pay the same price in the United States for the same
phone. They turned the radio off. So we are saying, wait a
minute. And we would like that issue studied and discussed more
fully.
Mr. Scalise. My time is expired. I see that we have one of
our colleagues from the full committee not on the subcommittee
but is interested in asking questions. So I would ask unanimous
consent to allow Mr. Green from Texas to be allotted 5 minutes
to ask questions.
Without objection, the gentleman from Texas is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Eshoo,
and members of the committee, for allowing me to weigh in on
our committee today.
At any given time--I have been on Energy and Commerce since
'97. So I have been on the Telecom Subcommittee and off of it,
depending on where our seniority is at.
I want to thank our witnesses for appearing today.
I have been an advocate of free over-the-air radio for many
years, and the future of audio is an important topic for my
constituents in the Houston, Texas, area. All of us along the
Gulf Coast and I know my colleague sitting in the chair now
realizes we rely on radio for alerts, hurricanes, floods, and
other emergencies.
There is a proposal that the government set fees for radio
stations to pay to record labels, and it is deeply flawed.
Again, as the chairman mentioned, the announcement from Clear
Channel and Big Machine label group indicates that the private
marketplace is well suited for those negotiations and show the
government does not have to have a role here.
Mr. Allison, I would like to ask you a question. And again
we don't have a whole lot of time, but keep your answers as
brief as possible.
In your testimony, you say that broadcasters are getting a
free ride by playing music without having to pay. What would
the music industry do without radio now that actually provides
free coverage of a lot of music, no matter what venue?
Mr. Allison. I am certainly not advocating getting rid of
radio. I love radio. I am fortunate to have had six number one
albums, albeit on noncommercial independent radio.
But I think the big problem for me is, whereas they are
these royalty streams for Internet radio, satellite, cable for
performers, there is none for terrestrial radio.
Mr. Green. The Internet radio, oftentimes you pay a
subscription fee.
Mr. Allison. Yes, but there is no----
Mr. Green. But the difference is, if I turn on my radio in
my car--and, believe me, I am one of the huge group that every
time I am in my vehicle I listen to the radio. In my area, it
is country music or news. And thank goodness we do have an FM
news station now in Houston.
But artists are bound to benefit from that exposure on
radio.
Mr. Allison. Well, Pandora, is free as well.
Mr. Green. But the consumer pays for a subscription to
Pandora, is that not correct?
Mr. Allison. No.
Mr. Green. Well, Pandora must make money somehow from it.
Mr. Allison. For advertising, I guess.
Mr. Green. But, I guess my concern is Pandora is not
required to do, for example, emergency announcements. I don't
know if they do or not. Maybe Mr. Scalise could tell me.
But our free over-the-air radio has been there for decades
and provides that. No matter what venue you have, they all have
some kind of a public interest, whether it is news at the top
or bottom of the hour. But they also have access to emergency
alerts like 911 for a number of other issues that maybe Pandora
or other newer generations cannot do.
Do you believe that artists who are not currently getting a
lot of airtime would benefit from a fee regimen if there was a
certain fee agreement that was reached by a government agency
or something else?
Mr. Allison. You mean start charging for terrestrial radio?
Is that what you are asking?
Mr. Green. Yes.
Mr. Allison. I don't understand the question. I am sorry.
Mr. Green. Well, I guess the question is, do you believe
that artists who are not--who do not currently get a lot of
airtime would benefit from the fee-based regimen?
Mr. Allison. From a performance?
Mr. Green. From a fee-based regimen that royalties--that
radio would pay for royalties for paying, you know, similar to
other venues? Do you think that artists who are not receiving
free over-the-air radio now, are not currently getting a lot of
airtime, would benefit from a fee-based regimen, no matter who
imposes it?
Mr. Allison. No, I don't think so.
Mr. Sherman. Can I just jump in here?
Many artists will get payments. Background musicians, not
just featured musicians, will be paid if there is a performance
royalty for terrestrial over-the-air radio.
I would also like to just comment on the public interest
obligation. There is no subsidy given for rent or for
electrical use or transmissions or anything else for radio.
Songwriters are still paid even though--and they should be--
even though there is a public interest obligation by radio
stations. They get their spectrum for free.
Mr. Green. I only have 30 seconds left. Let me finish,
though.
That is the difference. We have a lot of new generation
technology that is great. But at the same time I don't want to
eliminate what may be--whether it is in the rural area of
Louisiana or a very urban area of Houston, that people will
turn on that radio and limit that availability because of the
costs that may be imposed by a regimen, whether it be Congress,
unless it is agreed to like what happened in Clear Channel.
Mr. Sherman. I can assure you that we have in--all the
legislation thus far has made huge accommodations to make sure
that small radio stations in rural Louisiana are not impacted
in any way.
Mr. Green. Well, I have been in those negotiations
typically with our jurisprudence or Judiciary Committee, and so
far they haven't reached that commonality where we could get an
agreement. That is the concern. I am mainly here because I am
concerned about the loss of that information available to my
constituents that are not provided by a lot of other new
venues.
And, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the time.
Mr. Scalise. The gentleman yields back.
With that, I would like to remind members that they have 10
business days to submit any questions to our panelists, and I
would ask that the panelists respond to those questions.
I would like to thank you for participating in our hearing
today; and, with that, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:48 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


