- ENERGY AND REVENUE ENRICHMENT ACT OF 2011

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ENERGY AND REVENUE ENRICHMENT ACT OF 2011

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 13, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-59

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
71-402 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
MARY BONO MACK, California           BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                GENE GREEN, Texas
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
Vice Chairman                      LOIS CAPPS, California
JOHN SULLIVAN, OKlahoma              MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JAY INSLEE, Washington
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

(ii)
Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
JOHN SULLIVAN, OKlahoma              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  JAY INSLEE, Washington
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  JIM MATHESON, Utah
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   GENE GREEN, Texas
PETE OLSON, Texas                    LOIS CAPPS, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia             officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Comonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement.....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     3
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     4

Witnesses

Hon. Mitch McConnell, a United States Senator from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky.......................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Gene Aloise, Director of Natural Resources and Environment,
Government Accountability Office...............................    13
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Daniel B. Poneman, Deputy Secretary, U.S. Department of Energy...    30
Prepared statement...........................................    32
Herman R. Potter, President, United Steelworkers Local 689.......    47
Prepared statement...........................................    51
Jim H. Key, Vice President, United Steelworkers Union Local 550..    59
Prepared statement...........................................    62

Submitted Material

Letter of May 31, 2011, from the International President of the
United Steelworkers to Secretary Chu, submitted by Mr.
Whitfield......................................................    81
Letter of June 10, 2011, from the Governor of Kentucky to the
Subcommittee, submitted by Mr. Whitfield.......................    83
Letter of June 10, 2011, from the Mayor of Paducah, Kentucky to
Senator Rand Paul, submitted by Mr. Whitfield..................    85
Letter of June 12, 2011, from the County Judge of McCracken
County, Kentucky, submitted by Mr. Whitfield...................    87
Letter of June 16, 2011, from Senator Rand Paul to the
Subcommittee, submitted by Mr. Whitfield.......................    88

ENERGY AND REVENUE ENRICHMENT ACT OF 2011

----------

MONDAY, JUNE 13, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 1:38 p.m., in
Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Whitfield
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Whitfield, Walden, McKinley, Rush,
and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff Present: Charlotte Baker, Press Secretary; Sean
Bonyun, Deputy Communications Director; Anita Bradley, Sr.
Policy Advisor to Chairman Emeritus; Cory Hicks, Policy
Coordinator, Energy & Power; Kirby Howard, Legislative Clerk;
Ben Lieberman, Counsel, Energy & Power; Dave McCarthy, Chief
Counsel, Environment/Economy; Mary Neumayr, Counsel, Oversight/
Energy; Andrew Powaleny, Press Assistant; Alex Yergin,
Legislative Clerk; Jacqueline Cohen, Minority Counsel; Greg
Dotson, Minority Energy and Environment Staff Director; Jocelyn
Gutierrez, Minority DOE Detailee; and Caitlin Haberman,
Minority Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call this hearing to order.
Today, we have another hearing on the American Energy
Initiative. This committee has had a series of hearings
regarding the energy needs of the United States.
Today, also, we specifically will be looking at H.R. 2054,
the Energy and Revenue Enrichment Act, which I have introduced
on the House side and Senator McConnell and Senator Paul have
introduced on the Senate side.
H.R. 2054 is a simple bill. It initiates a 2-year pilot
program to re-enrich the uranium tails. It allows for the sale
of the re-enriched uranium and deposits the money made into the
Uranium Decontamination and Decommissioning Fund to be used for
environmental cleanup.
I would also like to point out to those of you who may not
be familiar that what we are talking about here is about 60,000
14-ton canisters located in two geographical areas of the
country. There is about 40,000 of these canisters in Paducah,
Kentucky, of depleted uranium waste and about 20,000 of these
canisters in Piketon, Ohio.
For the last 5 or 6 years, I, along with others, have had a
lot of discussions with the Department of Energy about re-
enriching this material, which would accomplish a number of
things. Number one, it would provide additional revenue to the
Federal Government; number two, it would help the environmental
cleanup, certainly in Paducah as well as in Piketon, Ohio; and,
number three, it would prolong the life of the uranium
enrichment plant in Paducah, Kentucky, in which we have 1,200
jobs at stake.
So this is an important piece of legislation, and it makes
a lot of sense for the reasons that I have already stated. It
appears to be a win, win, win situation.
I would also like to remind everyone that this is a pilot
project, a 2-year pilot project, which I think will give the
Department of Energy adequate time to assess the situation, and
it certainly would be of benefit to our country. So I look
forward to the testimony of our witnesses today.
I would also at this time ask unanimous consent to
introduce into the record a letter from the International
President of the United Steelworkers, a letter from the
Governor of Kentucky, a letter from the Mayor of Paducah, a
letter from the County Judge of McCracken County, and a letter
of support from United States Senator Rand Paul.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Whitfield. I certainly want to welcome Senator
McConnell being here with us today as well. As you know, he is
the senior Senator from Kentucky and he is also the Republican
Leader in the United States Senate, and he is quite familiar
with this particular issue.
So Senator, we really appreciate your being here as well.
At this time, I would like to recognize Mr. Rush for his 5-
minute opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

I would like to call this hearing to order.
In 2008, this Committee's Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations held a hearing on the Department of Energy's
inventory of depleted uranium hexafluoride canisters called
``tails,'' where the Government Accountability Office (GAO)
testified that reenriching these tails to secure the useable
uranium would be worth around $7.6 billion, and maybe as much
as $20 billion.
Since that time, this potential value has dropped to $4
billion, as the GAO will testify today. Simply put, the
Department of Energy has failed to realize the value of the
uranium tails and as a result they have already lost the
taxpayers roughly $3.6 billion.
That is the reason we are here today considering my
legislation--the Energy and Revenue Enrichment Act. DOE has
talked to my office about these tails for 5 years and for 5
years we have not seen any results. All the while, this
Committee has been waiting patiently, as have the taxpayers,
for DOE to initiate a program that makes sense and should be a
no-brainer.
The time for waiting is over. My bill is simple. It
initiates a 2 year pilot program to re-enrich the uranium
tails, allows for the sale of the re-enriched uranium, and
deposits the money made into the Uranium Decontamination and
Decommissioning Fund to be used for environmental cleanup.
Now, I want to direct your attention to the poster board
located at the front of the room. Many people say a picture
speaks for itself. This poster shows the amount of waste that
we have been dealing with for the past 60 years. There are
40,000 of these canisters located in Paducah, Kentucky and
20,000 located in Piketon, Ohio. These canisters are scheduled
to be converted to a less harmful substance and will be
disposed of at an approved disposal facility. But, if this
conversion occurs before re-enrichment, we will lose $4
billion.
In addition, my bill will reduce the amount of waste for
disposal by 30,000 tons. This reduction in waste will save the
government $200 million and result in less harm to the
environment.
The bill does limit the pool of facilities where this work
can occur. We do this for two reasons. First, there is
contamination in these tails. The DOE sites are already
similarly contaminated, so reenriching the tails at the DOE
location will not further contaminate other sites. By contrast,
new facilities will be hesitant to take many of these tails,
further denying the taxpayer.
Second, the communities that have supported the
government's reenrichment program for decades need these jobs.
We will hear from the Steelworkers Unions about the equity
involved in this project. They will explain that for nearly 60
years, these communities have been home to millions of tons of
waste tails and now that the tails are recognized to have
value, and they should be the ones to benefit. They aren't
asking for a government handout, and they aren't asking for a
bailout, all they are asking for is to let them finish the
work, all in service to the taxpayer.
As I stated earlier, the uranium that will be extracted
through this pilot program will generate roughly $4 billion,
which my bill puts into the Uranium Decontamination and
Decommissioning fund. That money will help clean up these DOE
plant sites, which is so important to the communities where
they are located, both for purposes of human health and safety
and for economic development.
I am pleased we are making progress to make this bad
situation better by cleaning up these sites and trying to
repair injured families, but there is still 40 years worth of
environmental cleanup work left to do at these sites. This
money will go a long way in advancing this cleanup and it is
logical for this money to be used there.
I now yield to the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee for
his opening statement. I'd just like to thank the Ranking
Member for working with me on getting the updated GAO report we
will hear about today, and I hope he will join me as a
supporter of this legislation.
Before I yield, I would like to insert letters of support
from Governor Steve Beshear and the United Steelworkers Union's
International President.
----------

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman; and I want to
thank our distinguished guests, including our distinguished
colleague from the other side, Senator McConnell, the Senate
Minority Leader, as well as all the other guests for being here
today. The minority leader's presence here today speaks to the
importance of today's hearing on Chairman Whitfield's
legislation to the good people of the great State of Kentucky.
Chairman Whitfield and I have had conversations about the
Energy and Revenue Enrichment Act, better known as the Kentucky
Enrichment Act; and I hope and expect that we will be able to
move this bill through this committee in a collegial and a
bipartisan manner.
Mr. Chairman, I also hope and expect that this can be a
turning point toward a more collaborative and bipartisan
approach for enacting other initiatives and other pieces of
legislation in this committee that holds importance to both the
majority and minority sides.
With that being said, the Energy and Revenue Enrichment Act
will launch a pilot program to re-enrich uranium tails that are
currently stockpiled in yards in Paducah, Kentucky, and
Portsmouth, Ohio. These two plants hold up to 40,000 and 20,000
such tails, respectively. This bill will direct the Secretary
of Energy to re-enrich these tails and sell them at a profit
for the government. As written, the bill would then redirect
the revenue from the sale of these tails to the Uranium
Decontamination and Decommissioning Fund for environmental
cleanup.
This bill will also allow DOE to increase the domestic
uranium supply from 10 percent to 15 percent for 4 calendar
years.
Mr. Chairman, this hearing is also in response to a letter
that you and I wrote to DOE back on March 1 asking the agency
to update its 2008 report on DOE's conditional options for
dealing with these uranium tails. Of course, we have DOE here
today; and they will testify on different options for handling
these tails, as well as the value of selling these tails in
today's global market.
So, Mr. Chairman, I hope, sincerely hope, that my
willingness to work with you on this issue is evident to all
and that we will be able to move a bipartisan bill that will
bring and maintain jobs for the good people of Kentucky and
Ohio, while also ensuring that we have a transparent and open
bidding process that brings forth the best value for the
American taxpayers. Hopefully, Mr. Chairman, this bill will set
the tone for a brand new era of collaboration and
bipartisanship in addressing the important issues that all of
our constituents face, yours and mine.
I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to again
thank our distinguished guests; and I look forward to hearing
from our witnesses and the experts on this issue.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Rush.
Mr. Waxman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today, the subcommittee is examining H.R. 2054, Chairman
Whitfield's legislation to direct the Department of Energy to
enter into a contract to enrich its depleted uranium tails and
then sell the enriched uranium on the market. The way that this
bill is currently drafted, the only entity that the DOE could
contract with for these enrichment services is the United
States Enrichment Corporation, or USEC.
When USEC was privatized in the 1990s, proponents said
there would be many benefits from privatizing uranium
enrichment. Wall Street underwriters and lawyers made millions
of dollars on the transaction, but USEC failed to live up to
many of these promises.
Within a few years of being privatized, USEC abandoned
important national initiatives, announced layoffs of more than
800 workers, closed its Portsmouth facility in Ohio, sold off
large amounts of uranium, whipsawing the domestic uranium
industry.
With USEC's planned closure of its Paducah, Kentucky,
facility in 2012 fast approaching, we are being asked to direct
DOE to enter into a sole-source contract with USEC to process
what has become a valuable asset: DOE's uranium tails.
DOE already has the authority under law to do this. So the
question is, should DOE be forced by Congress to exercise this
authority?
I am concerned this legislation is not carefully drafted to
yield the best deal for the American taxpayer.
First, it is not clear how many hundreds of millions, maybe
even billions, of dollars this contract would cost the American
taxpayer. We should ask USEC about its capacity to execute this
contract, but the company refused to testify, and the majority
has not insisted that USEC send a witness today.
Second, by ordering DOE to enter into a sole-source
contract, it is almost guaranteed that the government won't be
able to negotiate the best deal for its uranium tails. The way
this legislation is drafted, as long as the government receives
one penny more in revenue than it costs to re-enrich the
uranium, the contract would be deemed ``economically viable''
and the Secretary of Energy would have no discretion not to
accept it.
Third, DOE has a number of options for managing its tails,
as well as its excess enriched uranium. Another option, for
example, would be to sell the tails to the highest bidder,
which would avoid the costs of enrichment. This legislation
charges forward with a highly prescriptive plan without giving
DOE the authority to implement the best strategies for
maximizing taxpayer value.
The legislation purports to raise money for the Uranium
Enrichment Decontamination and Decommissioning Fund, also known
as the D&D Fund. The D&D Fund is used to clean up contamination
from years of uranium enrichment activities in Kentucky, Ohio,
and Tennessee. Adequately funding these cleanup efforts is
important, but because of the flaws in the bill, it is not at
all clear that the fund will receive any significant funding
under this legislation.
Moreover, responsibility for contributions needs to be
apportioned fairly, with both the government and the utilities
that purchased uranium paying their fair share. There is an
estimated shortfall of more than $11 billion between the
projected cleanup costs and authorized funding for the D&D
Fund. Congress should reinstate the requirement that industry
contribute to the D&D Fund.
Finally, even though the uranium tails have become a
valuable resource in recent years, re-enriching them with old
technology may not be the best approach.
Experts agree that the gaseous diffusion process, which was
developed in World War II, is extremely inefficient and has
high production costs. Gas centrifuge technology, which is
currently being deployed in the U.S., uses about 5 percent of
the electricity that is consumed by the gaseous diffusion
technology used in Paducah. Using this more efficient
technology for enriching the tails may generate more resources
for the D&D Fund than using the old technology.
I hope we will be able to examine some of these issues
today. I understand the chairman intends to mark up his
legislation the day after tomorrow. That gives us a short
period of time to refine this legislation. I hope the chairman
will work with us to make this legislation a good deal for
taxpayers.
I thank the witnesses for appearing today, and I look
forward to their testimony.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Waxman.
Before I introduce Senator McConnell, I would like everyone
to look at this. These are some of the canisters--each one of
them weighs 14 tons--at Paducah, Kentucky; and the earliest
ones have been there for 60 years. This has been an issue for
60 years on the best way and how do we clean up this material.
With that, at this time it is my pleasure to introduce our
first witness. As I said, it is Senator Mitch McConnell, senior
Senator of Kentucky and Republican Leader of the U.S. Senate,
who has introduced similar legislation on the Senate side.
So, Senator McConnell, welcome. We appreciate your taking
time to be with us this afternoon, and you are recognized for
your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MITCH MCCONNELL, A UNITED STATES SENATOR
FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. McConnell. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman,
Congressman Rush, and members of the subcommittee. I appreciate
the opportunity to be here to talk about an issue that
Congressman Whitfield and I have been dealing with for a long
time. In fact, throughout my time in the Senate, this facility
and its related issues have dominated a big part of my career
and I know Congressman Whitfield's as well.
Where we are is we know this facility is going to be closed
down. It has been located, as Congressman Whitfield said, along
the Ohio River for nearly 60 years. It has enriched uranium for
use in America's defense and commercial nuclear reactors.
Today, Paducah is home to the only domestic facility enriching
uranium, making it a critical component of our Nation's energy
security.
The story of uranium enrichment in Paducah begins in 1950,
when the site was selected for the construction of a new
gaseous diffusion plant. For many years, uranium was enriched
to support our national security and then to support our energy
needs. However, after decades of work, it was revealed that
many of these employees were exposed to deadly toxins. The
Department of Energy failed to put certain protections in place
for these workers, and it was up to Congress to set them right.
I wish I could say that the Department of Energy has been
quick to recognize its shortcomings over the years and then
move swiftly to correct them. The sad fact is they have not,
regardless of which party controlled the Department. As a
result, Chairman Whitfield and I have frequently been forced to
step in and challenge the bureaucracy to live up to the law.
In the late 1990s, we learned about the dangers Paducah's
workforce had been exposed to, and we adopted a law to make
sure that the workers were compensated for their injuries.
Early last decade, DOE had to be forced--literally forced
against its will--to implement an effective worker health
screening program for workers at Paducah, Portsmouth, and Oak
Ridge, Tennessee.
Time and time again, DOE shortchanged cleanup efforts at
the site, requiring Congress to find resources elsewhere to
make up for their shortcomings. When DOE dragged its feet in
implementing a law to convert uranium waste at the site, I
helped secure passage of legislation to require groundbreaking
on a site by a date certain--in other words, literally make
them open the project by a date certain. Even after passing two
laws mandating action, DOE's efforts were still plagued with
countless bureaucratic delays and disputes.
And 4 years ago, we asked the Department what its plans
were for depleted uranium tails, the subject of this hearing
here today; and here we are today again, 4 years later, asking
why the Department does not have a plan that includes Paducah.
I don't want to sound like a broken record, but you can see
why Congress' patience has worn a little thin while waiting for
the Department to step up to do the responsible thing when it
comes to these enrichment facilities. At this point, the
Department has forfeited the benefit of the doubt.
The Department of Energy is in possession of 40,000
cylinders--the chairman just showed us a picture of it--in
Paducah and 20,000 cylinders in Portsmouth containing roughly
700,000 metric tons of depleted uranium hexafluoride from
former enrichment operations. The substances, more commonly
known as tails, sitting in these cylinders, exposed to the
elements, poses a myriad of health, safety, and environmental
risks. Paducah has the capacity to convert this toxic substance
into a more stable form for disposition, and that will be
necessary at some point.
We can keep kicking the can down the road, but this is
going to be necessary at some point.
However, it has also the capacity to re-enrich some of this
material into marketable uranium, which could then be sold to
benefit the taxpayers. I would ask those present here today to
consider this scenario: You have materials right in your own
backyard, you have facilities to turn it into a sought-after
product worth at least $1 billion, maybe more, and a workforce
trained and ready to do the work. Do you use that asset in a
way that saves jobs, or do you let the Department slowly
dispose of all of this valuable material and in the meantime
1,200 people collect unemployment? I know which option sounds
like the common-sense solution to me.
As the chairman well knows, the unemployment rate in
Kentucky is 10 percent, worse than the national unemployment
rate of 9.1. There are 1,200 jobs that would be immediately
eliminated by the plant closure. But that's not all. Hundreds
of additional jobs in the area would be cut by a shuttered
Paducah plant, potentially impacting the entire economy of far
western Kentucky. I would hate to see in this current time of
fiscal crisis and serious unemployment a missed opportunity for
the government to keep people employed and reduce the deficit
at the same time. Keep people employed and reduce the deficit
at the same time. What is a better outcome than that?
I know these people. I have seen how hard they work. They
are obviously concerned with their own employment, but they
also want to help the country. Let's allow them to do that. At
a time of fiscal crisis and double-digit unemployment, a plan
to re-enrich these tails helps employ people and reduce our
deficit. It has been a long time I have heard anything out of
Washington that makes as much sense as that.
Everyone knows Kentucky is a coal State, which we are, but
we are also a nuclear State. Paducah is a community that
enthusiastically supports nuclear energy. Allowing the Paducah
plant to close in 2012 and waiting years for the Department of
Energy to address what to do with the existing depleted
uranium, I believe, is both shortsighted and irresponsible.
So let me be very clear. We are not asking for a government
intervention; we are asking that the government live up to its
responsibilities and properly utilize inventory and facilities
it already owns, in the best interest of the taxpayers.
So I come here today not just as the Republican Leader of
the Senate but as a concerned American. When it comes to
nuclear energy, we have seen this administration abandon plans
and millions in taxpayer dollars before without much
consideration of the consequences. Take for example its
unwillingness to follow through on the nuclear storage site
Yucca Mountain, paralyzing further nuclear energy production in
this country. We cannot let the Department turn its back on
these facilities, these workers, or these communities again.
So that is why I am grateful to you, Mr. Chairman, for
crafting the Energy and Revenue Enrichment Act to give the
Department of Energy the flexibility it needs to temporarily
re-enrich tails at Paducah and Portsmouth. I am happy to be the
sponsor of that bill in the Senate, along with my colleague
Rand Paul; and it is my hope that we can work with our
counterparts in the House and Senate to find a fiscally
responsible solution.
I want to thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for the
opportunity to be here and commend you once again for your
extraordinary leadership on this subject. I don't know where we
would be on this issue without Congressman Whitfield. So I
thank you for what you have done, and let's continue to work on
it together and see if we can get a solution not only for
Kentucky but for the Nation. Thanks so much.
[The prepared statement of Senator McConnell follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Senator McConnell, thank you very much. I
know that you have a commitment at 2:00, but we do appreciate
you coming over and giving your opening statement. I look
forward to working with you on this legislation.
At this time, I would like to call up the witnesses for the
second panel. We have Mr. Gene Aloise, with the Government
Accountability Office, Director of Natural Resources and
Environment; and we have the Honorable Daniel B. Poneman, who
is the Deputy Secretary at the U.S. Department of Energy.
Gentlemen, we appreciate both of you being here today us
today. We look forward to your testimony and thoughts on this
issue.
Mr. Aloise, we will start with you.

STATEMENTS OF GENE ALOISE, DIRECTOR OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND
ENVIRONMENT, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE; AND THE
HONORABLE DANIEL B. PONEMAN, DEPUTY SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF ENERGY

STATEMENT OF GENE ALOISE

Mr. Aloise. Mr. Chairman, ranking member, and members of
the subcommittee, I am pleased to be here today to discuss
DOE's options for its supply of depleted uranium, also known as
tails.
As you know, since the 1940s, the government has been
processing natural uranium into enriched uranium, which
increases the concentration of the isotope uranium 235, making
the material useful in nuclear weapons or power reactors. The
production of enriched uranium over many decades has resulted
in about 700,000 metric tons of leftover tails which are now
stored at uranium enrichment plants in Portsmouth, Ohio, and
Paducah, Kentucky.
Although the tails have historically been considered a
waste product, increases in uranium prices may give DOE options
to use some of the tails in ways that could provide revenue to
the government. DOE's potential options include selling the
tails as is, re-enriching them, or storing them indefinitely.
While in our view DOE's legal authority to sell the tails as is
is doubtful, DOE has the authority to carry out the re-
enrichment and storage options.
According to DOE's comprehensive uranium management plan,
DOE stated that it would consider selling the tails or re-
enriching them. However, to date, DOE has not done so and
apparently has no current plans to sell or re-enrich this
material.
At current uranium prices, we estimate DOE's tails to have
a net value of $4.2 billion. However, we would have to
emphasize that this estimate is very sensitive to changing
uranium prices, which recently have been volatile, as well as
the availability of enrichment capacity.
Our estimate assumes the May, 2011, published uranium price
of $160 per kilogram of natural uranium in the form of uranium
hexafluoride and $153 per separative work unit, the standard
measure of uranium enrichment services. Our estimate also
assumes the capacity to re-enrich the higher concentration
tails and subtracts the cost of the enrichment services. It
also takes into account the cost savings DOE would realize from
the reduction in the amount of tails that needed conversion to
a more stable form for storage as well as the cost of
stabilizing any residual tails.
Based on 2010 total U.S. Demand for uranium, the total
amount of natural uranium produced as a resulted of enriching
the tails would be enough to supply all of the U.S. demand for
about 3-and-a-half years.
Importantly, a sharp rise or fall in prices could greatly
affect the value of the tails. For example, our March, 2008,
report estimated that the tails had a net value of $7.6
billion. Prices for uranium have since fallen, resulting in the
now-lower estimate of the value of the tails. Furthermore,
there is no consensus among industry whether uranium prices
will rise or fall in the future or the magnitude of any future
price changes. Also, the introduction of additional uranium
onto the market by the sale of large quantities of DOE's
depleted natural or enriched uranium could lead to lower
prices.
To help minimize the negative effects of DOE's sales on
domestic uranium producers, DOE has limited its sales to no
more than 10 percent of the domestic demand for uranium
annually. However, this limit lengthens the time necessary to
market DOE's uranium, increasing the time DOE is exposed to
swings in the price of uranium. Also, the enrichment capacity
for re-enriching tails may be limited, and the cost of
enrichment services are uncertain.
Uncertainty about the future of uranium prices and the cost
of availability of enrichment services makes it difficult to
place a precise value on DOE's tails. As a result, it is
possible that DOE could receive significantly more or less than
the $4.2 billion we estimate the tails are currently worth.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, as was the case when we
reported in March, 2008, the U.S. Government has an opportunity
to gain some benefit from the material that once was considered
a liability. However, it is unclear to us whether DOE can act
quickly enough to changing market conditions to achieve the
greatest possible value from its uranium inventories.
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my statement; and I would be
happy to respond to any questions you or members of the
subcommittee may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Aloise follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Aloise.
At this time, I would like to recognize Mr. Poneman from
the Department of Energy. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE DANIEL B. PONEMAN

Mr. Poneman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member Rush and distinguished members of the committee. I
appreciate this opportunity to appear before you to comment on
the Energy and Revenue Enrichment Act of 2011 and to provide
information on the management and disposition of the Department
of Energy's depleted uranium.
The Department holds a significant inventory of uranium in
various forms, including highly enriched uranium, low enriched
uranium, natural uranium, and depleted uranium hexafluoride,
all of which must be actively managed. The majority of this
inventory is depleted uranium the Department plans to process
and dispose of as waste.
The uranium equivalent contained in the remaining inventory
corresponds to almost 3 years of supply requirements for U.S.
Nuclear power plants. This uranium has both monetary value and
can help achieve vital departmental missions in maintaining our
domestic nuclear fuel infrastructure. Much of the inventory
requires further processing before it would be suitable for
commercial use.
The Department's depleted uranium hexafluoride came from
the government's prior uranium enrichment activities. This
material would require additional processing.
The portion of this material with higher assay levels that
is potentially marketable in its current form is subject to the
market price of uranium. This uranium could constitute at least
10 percent of DOE's total inventory of depleted uranium
hexafluoride.
The Department has broad authority under the Atomic Energy
Act to sell, transfer, dispose of, or utilize its inventories
of uranium. The Department must act consistently with other
relevant statutory provisions, including section 3112 of the
USEC Privatization Act. Section 3112 imposes limitations on
certain transactions, including the sale and transfer of
uranium to certain domestic users. Under this section, the
Secretary of Energy must determine that a proposed sale or
transfer of uranium ``will not have an adverse material impact
on the domestic uranium mining conversion or enrichment
industry.''
The Department believes that introducing departmental
inventories to the domestic market in amounts of no more than
10 percent of the average annual domestic demand would not have
an adverse material impact on domestic uranium industries. The
10 percent guideline is in fact one of industry's own
recommendations regarding DOE's uranium management. However, we
anticipate that in a given year the Department may introduce
less than that amount into the domestic market and in some
years more for certain special purposes. Regardless of whether
a transfer is above or below 10 percent, covered transactions
must comply with section 3112.
Within the Department, the Offices of Nuclear Energy,
Environmental Management, and the National Nuclear Security
Administration are collectively responsible for uranium
inventories. These offices coordinate transactions that are
planned or under current or future consideration for
disposition of DOE's uranium.
They also developed the Department's excess uranium
inventory management plan, which provides a strategy for the
sale or other disposition of this uranium. The Department is
committed that its management of excess uranium inventories,
one, complies with all legal requirements; two, maintains
sufficient uranium inventories at all times; and, three,
supports a strong domestic nuclear industry.
DOE has established priorities for the transfer of uranium
through 2013. This March, Secretary Chu announced DOE's
determination and market impact analysis authorizing uranium
transfers to fund accelerated cleanup activities at the
Portsmouth site in Piketon, Ohio. The determination found that
the proposed transfers will not have an adverse impact on the
domestic uranium industry. The total proposed transfers through
2013 are approximately 2,000 metric tons of uranium per year,
or about 10 percent of the U.S. reactor demand.
We understand that H.R. 2054 seeks to enrich the
Department's high assay depleted uranium hexafluoride to a
usable form of uranium, funding the enrichment through the sale
of the enriched material, assuming title to and responsibility
for disposition of depleted uranium or a transfer of a portion
of the enriched material in exchange for enrichment services.
The amount of funding needed to enrich depleted uranium tails
is significant and not currently within the overall priorities
for the Department as supported by the President's budget. As
acknowledged in the legislation, transfers of uranium for
enrichment might lead to a volume in excess of our annual
guideline of no more than 10 percent of uranium requirements at
domestic commercial reactors.
We also believe certain provisions of the bill, while well-
intentioned, may complicate the Department's ability to meet
its own missions. One of our objectives is to maintain
sufficient uranium inventories at all times to meet the
Department's current and foreseeable needs. Specifically, by
funding enrichment services through the transfer of the
enriched uranium, the bill might impair our ability to meet
mission priorities such as national defense programs requiring
domestic origin uranium. Also, several sections of the bill
appear to grant the Department authorities it already has. The
appearance of grants of authorities in H.R. 2054 could lead to
confusion over the Department's existing authorities.
In conclusion, in considering the management and
disposition of the Department's uranium inventory, including
enriching high assay depleted uranium tails, a variety of
factors need careful assessment.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I look forward to
answering any questions you have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Poneman follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Poneman, for your testimony
and taking the time to be here.
When I listened to Mr. Waxman's opening statement, he
almost convinced me to oppose this legislation. But when you
look into the depth of this legislation and the real
accomplishment of this legislation, it is very clear that this
is an answer to a significant problem.
Number one, it is not going to cost the government any
money to implement this legislation. Number two, it is going to
create revenue for the government. Number three, it is going to
save 1,200 jobs. Number four, it is going to expedite the
cleanup of the canisters, some of which have been there for 60
years.
Now, I understand the requirement to certify that we are
not going to damage the uranium mining industry; and that 10
percent ceiling that you referred to, that is not in statute
per se, is it? That is a judgment that the Department made; is
that correct?
Mr. Poneman. Mr. Chairman, that is a guideline that is our
interpretation of the statute. You are correct.
Mr. Whitfield. Right. It is in the statute that you have to
certify it won't be damaging to the uranium industry?
Mr. Poneman. Right.
Mr. Whitfield. And you all have determined that you can
sell up to 10 percent of the annual need without doing that.
And I would just say to you that this legislation is a
pilot project, and we simply raise it from 10 to 15 for that
period of time.
Another point that you touched on was your concern about
providing sufficient supplies for the national defense. You and
I know that the only other place that is enriching any uranium
in America is in New Mexico, and it is not fully in business
yet, is it? Aren't they still undergoing trials?
Mr. Poneman. I think they are operating, sir. But it is a
different plant with different ownership and different legal
regime.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, a centrifuge, for one thing.
But when you look at the practical aspects of this, as we
said, these things are 14-ton canisters. And if you start
transporting them around the country, and they are contaminated
to a degree--we know that because of recent reports--and the
site at Paducah is already contaminated, correct?
Mr. Poneman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Whitfield. So, number one, moving 14-ton canisters
around the country, say to New Mexico, would be quite costly,
wouldn't it, to transport them?
Mr. Poneman. There clearly is a cost, Mr. Chairman,
associated with the transport of the canisters.
Mr. Whitfield. And it would certainly contaminate that
facility out there, I am assuming. What is your opinion on
that?
Mr. Poneman. In other words, if you were to, Mr. Chairman,
take the contaminated gas out of the canisters and inject it
into some cascade, presumably something would have to be done
with the contaminants you have taken out or, indeed, I suppose
it could taint or otherwise deposit on the centrifuge rotors.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes. The bottom line is this: Yes, we could
take those additional steps. It would certainly cost a lot of
additional money. And I would think that the Department of
Energy would welcome this legislation, to be truthful about it,
because it helps solve your problem and it helps solve our
problem. It provides revenue. You and I know that there is a
shortage of funds for the Decontamination and Decommissioning
Fund. In fact, it is my understanding there is about $4 billion
in the fund right now; and in order to clean it up completely,
my understanding is it would be like $29 billion; is that
correct?
Mr. Poneman. The full, sum total I couldn't tell you with
specificity, but we are short.
Mr. Whitfield. But it is more money than we have?
Mr. Poneman. It is much more than we have. That is true,
sir.
Mr. Whitfield. And at least this legislation would provide
additional funding for that fund?
Mr. Poneman. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. We know it could be done safely at Paducah.
There is no question about that. The training and equipment is
there, and there is no problem with it.
So I understand the Department of Energy's concerns, but I
hope as we move forward with this we can keep our dialogue
open, because it seems to me that we are trying to accomplish
the goals that we have set for ourselves and DOE has set for
itself.
Mr. Poneman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If I may comment, there is much in what you say with which
we wholeheartedly agree. I always find on tough issues it is
always good to start with some first principles.
One of the first things you said, Mr. Chairman, was we have
invested in this tremendous asset all throughout the Cold War.
Indeed, Senator McConnell said the same thing when he sat
before you. It is in our interest, it is our right and our
obligation to optimize the value of that resource in which we
have invested as a Nation. So I think the only question is the
prudent way in which to do that.
I want to acknowledge Ranking Member Rush. I think this is
something we can do in a bipartisan manner. Frankly, I know of
few issues more than the nuclear issue on which we can so join.
So, really, Mr. Chairman, I think it comes down to how do
we prudently do this, given all of the facts we have lying
before us. We have this material: 60,000 of these cylinders;
40,000 in Paducah; 20,000 in Piketon, Ohio. And then the
question presented is, now that uranium prices have reached a
level that they didn't use to attain at which one can
contemplate doing this, how do we do this in a manner that
optimizes the value of that material to the American taxpayer?
So we have to take into account, A, the market--and, as Mr.
Aloise noted, the market is a volatile thing, going up and
down--and, B, we do have to be sensitive not only because the
statute requires us under the USEC Privatization Act, but
because it would not optimize the value to the American people
if we were to dump all of this material at the same time
because it would crash the market. Then you wouldn't get the
value you are looking for. So we have to be measured in how we
put this into the market.
Mr. Whitfield. That is why we put a 15 percent limit on it.
Mr. Poneman. That is why we have to be measured in how we
put it.
And we also have to take into account the cost associated.
See, up until now, we have been putting natural uranium which
has a market out into the market. That has a value, and people
just purchase it.
This, in order to gain the value, you have to get the assay
back up to the natural uranium of 0.7 percent, so there is
going to be a cost associated with that. How much the taxpayer
gets is going to depend on netting out the revenue received
from the cost to generate the valuable product.
So I think, Mr. Chairman, in short, the sentiments--
clearly, the objectives you articulate--the national defense,
the environmental protection, promoting jobs, and promoting the
restart of the American industry--these are ones that we
strongly agree with; and we would be very open to working with
you on a dialogue to figure out a way to optimize these
interests.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Rush, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Poneman, in your opinion, DOE's opinion, how many
companies have the capacity and the capability to re-enrich
these tails as this legislation calls for?
Mr. Poneman. Well, Ranking Member, there are currently two
operating facilities. We have, of course, the Paducah gaseous
diffusion plant, and there is the facility in New Mexico that
the chairman referred to. There is a third facility in Idaho
that is behind that is in the process of--it has gotten a loan
guarantee, and they are going to be building that one as well.
But those would be the facilities in the United States that
would have the capability to enrich uranium.
Mr. Rush. This is an issue that there should be some
bipartisanship on, that we can agree on, these nuclear matters.
I want to see these uranium tails disposed of, and I want to
see the American people gain something from the sale of them,
if they are to be sold.
But my concern right now is there is no significant
bipartisanship. There is bipartisanship that exists here, but
it seems like we are rushing to get this done and we are trying
to direct DOE, force DOE to do something that may not be in the
interest of the American taxpayer in the long run.
You mentioned the fact that there would be some costs in
terms of taking these tails and bringing them up to the level
and cost of natural uranium; is that correct?
Mr. Poneman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rush. Do you think if, in fact, there is one of these
companies that deals with this and if they were successful in
terms of getting an agreement with the DOE that they should
share some of the cost for bringing these tails up to where
they are marketable?
Mr. Poneman. Mr. Ranking Member, I would say, since the
material has a value, the American way, if I may say, to make
sure that the American taxpayer gets the best value for that
investment is to have it out to bid. And then whoever has the
least cost production would be able to offer the best price to
the Department of Energy. That would be how I recommend this go
forward.
Mr. Rush. So you are saying this should be competitively
bid?
Mr. Poneman. I would say, if it were competitively bid, you
would have a better chance of getting maximum taxpayer value
from it.
Mr. Rush. All right. And the absence of a competitive
bidding process would have what kind of results, as far as you
are concerned? If this bill were to go forward and become law
without a provision for competitive bidding, what would be the
results for DOE and the American taxpayer?
Mr. Poneman. Let me just say, sir, that there are a number
of factors that one may wish to take into account.
I think the chairman is referring to the fact that the only
unencumbered indigenous facility we have is Paducah. So there
are, if you will, certain noneconomic factors that come into
play. But if you are looking at a straight economic analysis,
the optimal value to the U.S. taxpayer I think would come from
a competitive bid.
Mr. Rush. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. I might just say that, in this legislation,
we say, enter into a contract that the Secretary finds
economically viable. So it is not like we are directing you to
enter into a contract. It has to be economically viable. I
would just say that the concern we have is contamination is a
serious issue and the transportation costs are serious as far
as being competitive.
At this time, I recognize the gentleman from Oregon, Mr.
Walden, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walden. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I am curious about these canisters, if I can use your chart
here. I can see them up close. It looks like they are rusting.
Is that something we ought to be concerned about, Mr. Poneman?
Mr. Poneman. I do believe--and my eyesight is not that
good, sir, but I do believe the condition of the canisters is
absolutely something that we need to be very mindful of and
that they need to be continually monitored to be sure there is
no risk.
Mr. Walden. As I look at that, I think of my own region,
Hanford, which the Department of Energy has had jurisdiction
over; and I heard echoes of that as I listened to Senator
McConnell talk about what DOE has done over decades there,
including we have Hanford, obviously, right next to the
Columbia River. There is really bad stuff buried in tanks that
leak, and I know DOE's involvement in cleanup activities there
will probably go on for your lifetime and mine, and beyond
that--and hopefully successfully, and sooner rather than later.
I am just curious. We have also got the chem-demil facility
just across the river in my district for all of the chemical
weapons storage. We are going through that on a regular time
basis. Is one of the issues here you don't have or you have
unclear authority to move forward on reprocessing this? I am
trying to understand the GAO report and finding.
Mr. Poneman. There is, if I understand it correctly,
Congressman, a difference of view. The United States Department
of Energy believes that under the Atomic Energy Authority Act
of 1954, as amended, we have adequate legal authority to use
and dispose of that material. Mr. Aloise noted two actions he
thought that we had authority for. Our general counsel tells me
we have authority to do all three, including the option that
GAO has concerns about. So I do think we have the authority.
But if I may, sir, because I think you raise a very
important problem, I have spent a lot of time out at Hanford. I
have seen that beautiful Columbia River, and we are responsible
for the 53 million gallons of tank waste out there. And we are
trying our best so it is finished in our lifetime, sir. But we
take this--it is not only a legal responsibility. It is a moral
responsibility.
I feel the same way about the material at Paducah. You
know, these people invested in creating the materials that
defended us all throughout the Cold War. So I think we owe it
to them to be responsible in stewarding that asset.
Mr. Walden. I do, too.
Obviously, there are people who have gone before both of us
who didn't hold quite that same opinion, or chose to look the
other way. We have got the down-winder issue. You have got the
leaking tanks. You have gotten not always a straight story from
the Federal Government when it has come to Hanford.
So I guess I look at this and say: How long does this sit
here? What is its condition as we go forward? I tie the two
because the chem-demil facility, we were concerned about
degradation of those canisters. I realize they are not this.
They were a chemical weapon. But the mustard gas and DX and
other things there, it seems like we ought to get after this.
Mr. Aloise, talk to me about your report in terms of the
conflict here in authorities.
Mr. Aloise. Well, Congressman, there are basically three
avenues DOE can go. They can sell the tails as is, they can re-
enrich them and sell them, or they can store them. It is our
view that they don't have the necessary authority to sell the
tails as is. We are basing that on our read of the USEC
Privatization Act.
Mr. Walden. If I may interrupt you for a second, this is
where you and DOE disagree. You think you have the authority.
You think they don't.
Mr. Aloise. Right. It would be a very simple fix for the
Congress to----
Mr. Walden. And this bill does that?
Mr. Aloise. No. But we recommended in the past that
Congress consider adding the words ``depleted uranium'' either
to amending the USEC Privatization Act or some other piece of
legislation to give DOE that authority.
But, as Mr. Poneman said, DOE believes they have that
authority.
Mr. Walden. OK. And what other conflicts do you see here
that hold them up from doing this?
Mr. Aloise. It is just a policy call at this point.
Mr. Poneman. I would just add, Congressman, since I think
it is directly apposite to your comment, precisely because we
look at those vast fields of tanks, we have built in both
Paducah and near Portsmouth what we call these DUF6 conversion
facilities. And, up until recently, we thought we were going to
disposition all of those canisters as waste. It is indeed one
of the things that we have done to say, now that we have some
value that is inherent in those canisters, we shouldn't just
disposition all of it; we should look to see if we can get some
value for the taxpayers.
Mr. Walden. Understood. So when you talk about disposition
of waste, I assume that means storage? This reprocessing idea?
Mr. Poneman. What I am referring to is uranium hexafluoride
is a very corrosive gas, sir; and, therefore, we want to turn
it into a much more stable oxide form. That is the process that
would happen in these so-called DUF conversion facilities.
Mr. Walden. My time has expired. Thank you, gentlemen, for
your testimony; and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Walden did raise one issue I would like
to follow up on. The GAO said that it costs, just for the
Paducah plant, like $4 million a year just to maintain the
canisters.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I must object right now to the
procedure. Mr. Waxman is here waiting.
Mr. Whitfield. Sorry. I just got so carried away.
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent you may
be given a minute.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much.
I just want to know, is that $4 million annual cost correct
or not?
Mr. Poneman. Actually, sir, overall, at Paducah, we are
spending on the order of $140 million per year on the
activities that we are doing out there. I don't know where the
exact figure of $4 million comes from.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
I recognize the gentleman from California for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am concerned about whether this bill gets the best deal
for taxpayers. The bill requires DOE to enter into a contract
with a company that has experience operating an enrichment
plant under authorization of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
Section 2 of the bill then defines an enrichment plant as a
uranium enrichment plant owned by the Department of Energy. Mr.
Aloise, can you tell me which enrichment facility would
qualify? Is it just this one enrichment facility at Paducah
that would qualify?
Mr. Aloise. There is only one that runs a DOE facility.
Mr. Waxman. So it would uniquely benefit USEC. That is why
I said in my opening statement that it would be helpful if USEC
had been here to testify. If USEC were here, we could examine
how they see themselves fitting into this legislation.
Unfortunately, they refused to testify.
The bill directs DOE to enter into a contract that is
economically viable. Those are the terms, economically viable.
But section 3(a)(3) of the bill states that a contract shall be
considered economically viable if ``the costs to the U.S. of
the re-enrichment are less than therevenue anticipated from the
sale of the re-enriched uranium.''
Mr. Poneman, if USEC proposed enriching the uranium tails
at a cost which was one penny less than the revenue expected
from the sale of the re-enriched uranium, would the contract be
economically viable under this bill?
Mr. Poneman. Congressman, I was reading this language last
night; and I concur that 3(a)(3), a one penny delta, would
constitute viability. But, I must say, sir, that it seems to be
somewhat inconsistent with some of the other language in the
bill, so I was trying to reconcile it. But that clause
certainly reads that way, sir.
Mr. Waxman. If this bill were to become law, would DOE have
the option of refusing to enter into a contract that met this
definition of economic viability, even though it provided so
little return to the taxpayer?
Mr. Poneman. This is where I was struggling. I am a
recovering lawyer, sir, but I don't practice law at the moment.
There is other language that talks about this.
Mr. Waxman. We won't hold that against you. It is a problem
shared by others.
Mr. Poneman. Thank you. In 3(a)(1), it says Secretary shall
seeks to maximize the financial return to the Federal
Government in negotiating the terms of such contract. I was
trying to reconcile how to read that term in the context of
3(a)(3), and I was having some trouble, sir.
Mr. Waxman. So it doesn't appear this is giving DOE
discretion. It sounds likes they are being mandated.
Mr. Poneman. Our concern is precisely that. Something that
has been granted to the Department as a discretionary power
that we have to maximize the taxpayer return would perhaps be
inadvertently curtailed by this.
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Aloise, what safeguards do you see in this
bill which would prevent USEC from overcharging DOE for the
enrichment services?
Mr. Aloise. We would hope that if this bill got passed DOE
would implement it in a manner that would benefit the
government much more than we have just discussed here.
Mr. Waxman. Well, USEC is a publicly traded company. It is
obligated to its shareholders to maximize its profits. USEC
will have no reason to do anything other than to charge the
maximum possible price. That would be good for its investors,
but it won't be good for the D&D Fund, the contaminated sites
in Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee, or workers who engage in
contamination cleanup.
It seems to me that forcing the DOE to enter into a
contract under statutory language that prevents the Department
from having sufficient leverage to negotiate a fair contract
will not adequately protect the American taxpayers.
This bill is being touted as a way to fund the Uranium
Decontamination and Decommissioning Fund and provide money to
clean up the enrichment sites. The Energy Policy Act authorized
contributions of $7.2 billion to clean up enrichment sites, and
liability was apportioned between the government and the
utilities that purchased uranium. In 2007, DOE said there was a
difference of $11.9 billion between the projected cost of
cleanup and funds authorized by the Energy Policy Act. Mr.
Poneman, is there still such a huge discrepancy between the
amount of available resources and the amount of resources
needed to clean up these enrichment sites?
Mr. Poneman. Congressman, I can't give it to the penny, but
there is still a significant shortfall, yes. That is why we
have sought in the President's budget to renew the collection
of those D&D contributions from the utilities.
Mr. Waxman. Has the administration proposed reinstating the
industry contribution to the D&D Fund?
Mr. Poneman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Waxman. The fund is clearly underfunded. Congress has
to take steps to make sure the environmental mess created by
these enrichment sites is cleaned up. However, this bill does
not guarantee that any money would be raised for the D&D funds.
The people of Paducah and Piketon and Oak Ridge need assurances
that their communities will be made whole. We need to provide
for real funding for the D&D Fund, and it just makes sense that
the utilities that benefited from enrichment activities pay
their fair share.
I appreciate this opportunity to ask you questions. We may
have additional questions. Either I will submit them in writing
or, if the chairman permits and I am available, we will do a
second round.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Waxman.
It is time to recognize the gentleman from West Virginia,
Mr. McKinley, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To the GAO, this report has just come out; is that correct?
Mr. Aloise. The testimony today, issued today.
Mr. McKinley. If you had any second thoughts,
reconsideration, now that you finalized your report that would
change your opinion about the revenue--potential revenue that
could come in?
Mr. Aloise. No, sir.
Mr. McKinley. No, sir? OK.
Then to Mr. Poneman, please. You have had a chance, I
suppose--have you read the report yet?
Mr. Poneman. The one from today?
Mr. McKinley. Yes.
Mr. Poneman. No, sir, I have not.
Mr. McKinley. From what you have heard in the testimony, do
you have any disagreement with it?
Mr. Poneman. Just, Congressman, the one that I mentioned,
which is that we believe that already under the 1954 Atomic
Energy Act we possessed all authority we need within the
Department to disposition this material.
Mr. McKinley. I guess the focus I am on is more as a
revenue.
Mr. Poneman. Oh----
Mr. McKinley. What I am referencing is that this thing
could generate 3 to 7 billion dollars.
Mr. Poneman. Actually, our assessments are different from
that. I have to caveat that sir, because it is something that
depends on a market that is constantly changing. But I think
the numbers we have were on the order of 830 million----
Mr. McKinley. Could you provide us then with some of your
own--so we could compare the two with your analysis between
that. If could you do that for us, please.
Mr. Poneman. I am happy to. It would have to be caveated by
the market uncertainties and also by the cost of production of
the separative work needed to get----
Mr. McKinley. Thank you.
What I heard earlier in the testimony was some of those
cylinders have been there as much as 60 years, certainly before
your time and my time on it. What is your plan?
It seems like around here we criticize each other, the
other side of the aisle, they are back across this side. Anyone
puts a plan out; everyone shoots it down. So here's a plan that
raises revenue for the Federal Government 3 to 4 to 7 billion
dollars.
Mr. Poneman. Right.
Mr. McKinley. It protects 1,200 jobs, and it gets rid of a
problem at a site where the degradation of the tanks and gets
rid of some of the problems, the environmental issues, but you
sound like you are opposed to this bill.
Mr. Poneman. Oh, sir, I did not mean to convey that. I said
that I thought that the sentiments of the bill and the
optimization of the value to the taxpayer are laudable things
and objectives and all things that could be supported and the
environmental protection and so forth we are strongly
supportive.
Mr. McKinley. You are supportive of this legislation?
Mr. Poneman. No, I said we are supportive of the purposes
of----
Mr. McKinley. What is your plan then?
Mr. Poneman. Our plan is to make sure that, number one, we
continue to fulfill our mission to defend the Nation in terms
of preserving the tritium and so forth that we need----
Mr. McKinley. In concrete, not abstract. Here is a concrete
plan to do something to generate revenue and protect jobs and
clean up a site, and I want to know what is your concrete plan
now to do that.
Mr. Poneman. Our concrete plan is to produce the tritium we
need for the deterrent out of the material that we have already
offered to exchange in the 2,000 tons that we are now putting
into the market. The balance of that material is going into the
existing obligations to decommission and decontamination----
Mr. McKinley. Could you speak in the mic just a little bit
better for me? I am having a hard time hearing you.
Mr. Poneman. Sorry.
First is the national security requirement. Second is the
D&D obligations we have at Portsmouth. Then, with respect to
the cylinders there in Paducah, we have a plan both to
disposition that which does not have market value in the DUF6
conversion facility, and we are willing to work with the
committee to find out a way to optimize the value to the
taxpayer of the cylinders that have market value.
Mr. McKinley. If we followed that plan--seemed pretty
general still--how many of the cylinders would be gone from
Paducah and Portsmouth?
Mr. Poneman. Oh, we need to look at the market, look at the
cost of producing the separative work.
Mr. McKinley. A year from now they could all still be there
or 2 years they could all still be there, correct?
Mr. Poneman. This is something, Congressman, that----
Mr. McKinley. And we wouldn't have the jobs associated with
it. I am just sorry. It sounds like we study things to death
here instead of doing something. It seems to me more that we
have made perfect the enemy of good.
Mr. Poneman. Congressman, we have statutory obligations we
need to fulfill, and we need to make sure that we are doing the
right thing by the taxpayer. Now if it costs $150 million to
produce separative work that will give you $151 million worth
of benefit, you have not done really what you need to do. So
that is why we are trying to work with the committee, with the
other House of Congress, with all the stakeholders to find out
how to get the best value for the taxpayer. It is very
practical, and we feel the fierce urgency of now. We are not
trying to be anything other than very focused and concrete
about this.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you. I look forward to getting the
information from you.
Mr. Poneman. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, I think that culminates the questions
for this panel.
I would say this, Mr. Poneman, I know DOE has been working
on this issue for a long, long time. The GAO even talks about a
March, 2008, report, so forth. And I do take you at your word
that you all are interested in solving this issue. And we have
an opportunity to solve it. So, hopefully, we could have some
additional discussions about this. Because I do think it is
imperative that we--not only are we talking about disposing of
this material and creating revenue for the government, we are
talking about saving 1,200 jobs.
So, with that, this panel is dismissed; and we will call up
the second panel. Thank you all very much--I mean, the third
panel.
On the third panel, we have Mr. Jim Key, who is Vice
President of the United Steelworkers Union Local 550; and we
have Mr. Herman Potter, who is the President of the United
Steelworkers Local 689.
So, Mr. Key and Mr. Potter, thank you very much for joining
us this afternoon. We appreciate your coming into Washington
for the purpose of testifying.
And at this time, Mr. Potter, I would recognize you for 5
minutes for the purpose of making an opening statement; and if
you would be sure to touch the button so that your microphone
is on. Thank you.

STATEMENTS OF HERMAN R. POTTER, PRESIDENT, UNITED STEELWORKERS
LOCAL 689; AND JIM H. KEY, VICE PRESIDENT, UNITED STEELWORKERS
UNION LOCAL 550

STATEMENT OF HERMAN R. POTTER

Mr. Potter. Thank you.
I would like to thank the chairman and the committee
members for the opportunity to come before you to testify on
behalf of my constituency and also to support my colleagues
from the Paducah, Kentucky, site. I also would like to
acknowledge our Ohio delegation, which has always proven to be
very helpful with issues related to the Piketon site in
Southern Ohio and specifically those issues that deal with the
enrichment site; and we encourage them to support this
legislation and respond to this positively.
Mr. Chairman, I am going to kind of deviate a little bit
from some of my details in my written testimony just because it
is kind of redundant to what was mentioned before as far as
some of the details and issues that went on the site. But I do
want to identify some concerns that we have and some issues
that we support.
My name is Herman Potter. I am the President of the United
Steelworkers Local 689 at the Department of Energy Uranium
Enrichment Site in Piketon, Ohio. I represent approximately 850
members that are involved in the environmental remediation,
surveillance, maintenance, infrastructure, and also the
depleted uranium conversion activities at the site.
Also, our local actually intends to eventually be the
workforce at the American centrifuge project at the site, since
our members were at the original--they actually operated the
original uranium enrichment site that was closed down in the
early 1980s. With multiple contractors and multiple jobs at the
site, we actually have people working there that actually
extend out in the whole region, including northeast Kentucky
and also West Virginia. And even though I work at the Ohio
site, I am actually a resident of Kentucky myself.
We know that the Members of Congress have debated the
possibility of enacting this legislation to direct the re-
enrichment of tails material since the uranium market had
determined there is value when at one time it did not exist.
The value of the material due to the market change has
provided us an opportunity for this re-enrichment to take
place, eventually returning that monetary value back to the
Department of Energy and allowing them to easily meet, or more
easily meet, their obligations to the workforce and the
communities where these DOE sites exist.
We believe that legislation is now warranted. The DOE has
demonstrated inactivity as an agency in the implementation of
this re-enrichment program due to the fear from foreign
influence to uranium producers associations and other
organizations. We respectfully request that you fully endorse
the House Bill 2054 authored and introduced by Congressman Ed
Whitfield for successful passage of the House by concurrent
support by you and your colleagues in the U.S. Senate.
We are concerned about some issues. One is the timing of
the Russian 123 agreement with the United States Enrichment
Corporation. We are concerned about that this possibly would
allow USEC to change their mission from being an uranium
enricher to uranium broker, which would negatively impact the
intended operation of the gaseous centrifuge plant in Piketon,
Ohio.
The agreement would also eliminate any re-enrichment
program, negatively impact the enrichment at the Paducah site,
and eliminate the return of millions of dollars back to the DOE
to fulfill their obligations.
Currently, we think more than $100 million per year can be
realized with introduction and implementation of the pilot
tails re-enrichment program. I would submit that the returns
from this program be clearly identified and monitored to be
used to fulfill the DOE's commitments and obligations. In so
doing, things such as the complete funding of the retirement
and benefits programs provided for those working at the Paducah
and Piketon sites.
Currently, at the Piketon site itself, the DOE is deviating
from the intent of the Congress by eliminating their
obligations through manipulation and abuse of the Federal
procurement process and reinterpretation of the law. The intent
is clearly to fulfill a policy of reduced post-retirement
health care and pension obligations. The legislation would
provide the funding that would eliminate that financial
justification.
An additional concern needs to be addressed regarding the
operation of the two DUF6 plants at Paducah and Piketon. The
impact that this proposed legislation may have on the projected
time of operation has been expressed. It is our belief that the
number of re-enrichable DUF6 cylinders is limited in number and
clearly not the full inventory of depleted cylinders.
Considering the percentage of depleted uranium 238 to the
desired uranium 235, the negative impact would be minimal and
have little effect on the life span of the DUF6 plants.
However, strict guidance and oversight over the DOE to ensure
that the re-enriched material be returned to the site of
origination would ensure any anxiety created regarding the
reduction of plant life expectancy at the DUF6 plants.
We have concerns that the absence of establishing this as a
sole-source contract is not in the proposed legislation. The
fact that URENCO and AREVA are interested in the refeed
heightens our concerns that the additional costs of
transportation of the depleted tails cylinders from Paducah and
Piketon to either of the re-enrichment sites would not
considered.
Although we have historically had concerns about USEC's
reliability and DOE's adequate oversight, we are confident that
the strict guidelines and criteria would be put in place to
ensure that these commitments and obligations are honored.
The Department of Energy has a unique opportunity to
convert a stockpile of depleted uranium tails from its former
enrichment plant operations into a commercially valuable
product that can be sold to generate new revenue for the
Federal Government. At the same time, this program would extend
operations at the sole remaining U.S. gaseous diffusion plant,
providing time for the U.S. Enrichment industry to transition
to the advanced gas centrifuge technology.
The proposed program requires no additional appropriations,
and it is completely self-funded. In fact, it would reduce the
pressure to eliminate the commitments that this government
expects the Department of Energy to follow.
The sale of re-enriched material proposed in this
legislation would generate approximately $500 million. The
total net value of the tails has been calculated to be as much
as $4 billion.
And the congressman mentioned earlier about a concrete
plan. Well, our site has a true grassroots, concrete plan for
this funding.
We think these revenues should be used to provide full and
complete funding for the retirement and health benefits at the
Paducah and Piketon sites.
We think it should support the continued decommissioning
and decontamination activities at the site, which would include
reducing the contaminated barrel area footprint in preparation
for reindustrialization of the site.
We think it should be used for reindustrialization of the
Paducah and Portsmouth sites, which would include the
supplemental funding of a plant--recycled metal plant at the
Piketon site, which would reduce associated costs with waste
removal and establish a specific source of materials to be used
in construction and development at future nuclear sites. And
attached to the documentation we have a letter describing that
initiative and detail.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Potter, if you would conclude your
remarks, because you are already over about 3-and-a-half
minutes.
Mr. Potter. Oh, I'm sorry.
Also, we think we should support training and education for
a rapidly depleting nuclear workforce and support advanced
energy part initiatives.
In my conclusion, I just want to say that our constituency
does not want this funding to be used for deficit reduction. We
want to use these funds to fulfill the commitments made by the
Department of Energy and the expected intent of our government
to honor commitments and obligations to the aging workforce
while concurrently creating an environment conducive to
encourage site and workforce development. And I apologize----
[The prepared statement of Mr. Potter follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. It is OK. Thank you.
Mr. Key, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF JIM H. KEY

Mr. Key. Thank you, sir.
Before I begin, please allow me to take an opportunity to
thank you, Chairman, Ranking Member Rush, and commend members
for conducting this hearing today and allowing me to come and
testify on this unique opportunity to clean up waste, preserve
jobs, and actually make money for the government.
Mr. Chairman and distinguished committee members, I am Jim
Key, the Vice President of the United Steelworkers Local 550 at
the Paducah Gaseous Diffusion Plant in Paducah, Kentucky. There
are approximately 850,000 active members of the United
Steelworkers International Union, and we are North America's
largest industrial union. I represent approximately 1,000
members who are involved in uranium enrichment, environmental
remediation, infrastructure, and depleted uranium conversion
activities at the Paducah site, which houses our Nation's last
U.S. Government-owned, operating uranium facility.
I do not come before you today solely as the representative
of the union hourly workers but also as a representative for
the non-union salaried workers at the facility, for the
residents of the community of which I have been a part for the
past 56 years, and the economic stability of the region as a
whole. Twelve hundred workers are employed at the enrichment
facility, which is scheduled to shut down after advanced
technology comes on board.
The wages of the workers at the facility turn over six to
seven times within our regional community, providing over $50
million annually for the economy, which has a direct effect on
the viability of local businesses. Services and goods purchased
by our combined workforce allow businesses to not only operate
but also to thrive and provide the tax base of the community as
a whole.
Our region has recently been devastated by the shutdown of
major industrial employers in the past 5 years. It started with
the loss of the General Tire plant and has accelerated with the
most recent announcement of the closing of the Goodyear Tire
plant in Union City, Tennessee, very close to western Kentucky,
where an additional 1,600 family and community supportive jobs
will disappear at the end of 2011. I am sure in an era of high
unemployment you can fully realize the impact of an additional
loss of 1,200 highly skilled employees at the gaseous diffusion
plant and the devastating rippling effect it would have on our
regional area.
In order to keep these 1,200 jobs in Paducah, many of us
have been suggesting that the Department of Energy start a
program to re-enrich the 62,000 depleted uranium tails
cylinders stored at Paducah and Portsmouth. Until a few years
ago, these cylinders were considered a waste byproduct of the
enrichment process and an environmental liability to our
government and our community.
As a matter of history, Public Laws 105-204 and 107-206
were championed by Senator Mitch McConnell and enacted by
Congress to build facilities to convert these tails to a more
stable substance, which proves these tails were then considered
a liability to the government.
DOE has a unique opportunity to re-enrich tails left over
from the former enrichment plant operations into commercially
valuable natural uranium that can be sold to generate new
revenue for the Federal Government. At the same time, the
program will be a significant factor in extending operations at
the sole remaining plant in Paducah.
The proposed program requires no appropriations. It is
self-funded in that a portion of the natural uranium feed
generated will be sold to pay for the enrichment. This program
it remarkable in that it actually raises revenue for the
Federal Government through the sale of the enriched uranium.
This program would utilize all the resources of Paducah
plant while it is still operational. Once the plant shuts down,
re-enrichment tails become significantly more expensive for the
government because of transportation costs and the benefit of
the program is greatly reduced.
This issue is critically important to the members of the
United Steelworkers Local 550 in that it provides the best
opportunity to extend our production jobs at the Paducah plant
at a time when manufacturing employment is at record lows and
the regional economy is still sputtering to recover from a
nationwide recession, as shown in the latest jobs report.
There is also good reason to believe that the loss of the
second largest industrial customer will lead the Tennessee
Valley Authority to act on its plan to begin closing its
electrical power plant near the plant where I work, causing
further job losses of good jobs in a region that desperately
needs them.
After hearing about such a productive program, I am sure
you are asking yourself, why are we not implementing this
program? To answer that, we actually think DOE could do this
without legislation, but because of DOE inaction on this issue
over the past several years I believe legislation is now
warranted.
While DOE currently has a self-imposed policy which only
allows it to introduce enriched uranium into the market at 10
percent of the domestic uranium demand, we believe that this
quota is not conducive to allow domestic uranium enrichment
processes and programs to reach their full potential and value.
At current market value, a return of between 235 and 500
million dollars per year can be realized with the
implementation of the pilot tails re-enrichment program we were
discussing today.
Finally, there comes the issue of right and wrong. When the
United States needed a reliable supply of enriched uranium for
its weapons programs, it turned to Paducah and other nuclear
sites around the country for help. They found strong
communities and good people who were proud to assume that
responsibility in spite of the hazards that came with it.
For nearly 60 years, this community has been home to
millions of tons of DOE's waste tails; and now that the tails
are recognized to have value, Paducah, the region, and the
plant employees should be the ones to benefit. To even consider
shipping these tails away from Paducah to another facility is
simply wrong.
The highly trained sons and daughters of those original
enrichment facility employees continue working hard to provide
a safe operating facility at outstanding production levels,
providing a reliable, vital service at the Paducah plant; and
they deserve a chance to protect their jobs and the regional
communities in which they live by re-enriching these tails.
This is not a government handout, and it will not cost the
government or taxpayers one cent. To the contrary, the
government will make money. How many bills will you vote on
this session that can make that claim? This is a case of the
government making a sound policy and economic decision to
utilize an important national resource for the benefit of the
entire country.
In closing, I ask you to fully endorse and support H.R.
2054 offered and introduced by Chairman Whitfield for a
successful passage in the House of Representatives and
concurrent support by you with your counterparts and colleagues
in the Senate.
This concludes my opening statement. I will be happy to
answer any questions the committee members might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Key follows:]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Key and Mr. Potter, for your
testimony.
So, Mr. Key, you support this legislation, correct?
Mr. Key. That is correct.
Mr. Whitfield. And, Mr. Potter, do you support this
legislation?
Mr. Potter. Yes, we do.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, to be fair, critics of this legislation
say the U.S. Government, whenever it enters into a contract,
they have competitive bidding, which makes all the sense in the
world. Because, normally, you have competitive bidding and you
get a lower price. Would either one of you--I would ask one of
you, or both of you, to explain from your perspective what it
is about this legislation, while it does not have competitive
bidding, what are the practical impacts, what are the practical
problems if you had competitive bidding in this legislation?
Mr. Key. The problem I have, Chairman, with any competitive
bidding process is you have other enrichers that have foreign
influence. If they were successful in winning that bid, there
is nothing that would prevent them from loading these cylinders
up and transporting them to Russia, to France, or to a European
consortium and doing the enrichment process there, virtually
leaving the 1,200 plus workers at Paducah without a job.
Mr. Whitfield. And, in the United States--obviously, this
can be done at Paducah. I assume it can be done in New Mexico,
even though I still understand they are undergoing trials out
there with their process. And the Idaho facility is not going
to be built for years and years to come. So the reality is
there are only two places in the U.S. that it is conceivable
that it can be done; is that correct?
Mr. Potter. Yes. Yes, that is our understanding.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, we hear a lot about the contamination
issue, that this material, transuranic, and other things, that
it is contaminated and that the Paducah plant is already
contaminated. Well, the New Mexico plant is not contaminated.
So if you own the plant in New Mexico would you be excited
about bidding to enrich these depleted tails?
Mr. Key. If I was the owner of the New Mexico facility, I
would not want this material to be introduced into my system,
thereby transferring that contamination.
I also think the New Mexico facility was built--their
capacity that they have built that plant at is based upon the
contracts that they already have out in the previous years. I
don't think they have the capacity to enrich these fields.
As far as the problem as has been spoken today by others of
supposedly a sole-source contract and not going to competitive
bid, as far as the profit margin that the enrichment may make,
I think since enrichment would likely be at published
commercial rates, the profit margin, as I understand it, are
very minimal. The true value to the D&D Fund would come from
the uranium generated in excess of what the enrichment costs
the DOE will obtain when it is sold to the highest----
Mr. Whitfield. So you are saying that USEC would be paid a
fee for re-enriching the material; is that correct.
Mr. Key. Yes. I believe their charge as well as any
published rate that is currently there.
Mr. Whitfield. And there is a commercial published rate on
that, correct?
Mr. Key. Yes, sir.
Mr. Whitfield. And the Federal Government would sell the
enriched uranium and from those profits money would go to the
decontamination fund, correct?
Mr. Key. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Potter, did you want to have any comment
on that?
Mr. Potter. I think if we actually go outside, go to the
bidding process, I am not very confident that that money would
be funneled back into cleaning up the Portsmouth/Paducah site.
That is where these cylinders are, and that is where they were
generated. And I think there is some obligation to the
workforce in the area and the community in the area to maintain
the work and clean up those areas and reduce the footprints,
use that money to reduce the contaminated barrel site
footprints so they can reindustrialize.
Mr. Whitfield. And in the U.S. there is only two places
that it is conceivable that it could be done, correct?
Mr. Potter. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, just briefly, on the DUF6, your concern
about the DUF6 facility is that if you utilized too many of
these canisters for enrichment that you would jeopardize the
DUF6 plan?
Mr. Potter. Now let me clarify the point I was trying to
make. The thing of it is that one of the criticisms that we
have heard from a lot of people is that if you do this that it
would reduce the life expectancy of the DUF6 plans.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Potter. Because we have worked in the areas and we
understand the science associated with the enrichment process,
we believe that there is still--we are talking about a minimal
number of cylinders that would be generated to basically make
the enrichment--the newly enriched material. You still have
quite a number--in fact, mostly DUF6 material--that still would
have to go through the DUF6 process.
We think it would be fine. We don't think it would have any
negative impact at all. We just think that if there would be
some criteria established it may alleviate some angst that some
of the community people have and some of the naysayers would
have.
Mr. Whitfield. My time has expired.
Mr. Key, would you want to make a comment?
Mr. Key. To you put it in perspective, if you will, Mr.
Chairman, for every five cylinders of depleted tails that you
would feed into the re-enrichment pilot program, you would
still have three cylinders of depleted tails coming out on the
depleted end stream, which would then be taken into the DUF6--
--
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Key. I have also asked DOE and insinuated to them that
those cylinders sitting in the yard have various levels of
assay amounts. We need to take those that have the least amount
of assay material to start feeding in DUF6 to save the rest for
a re-enrichment program.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Rush, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Potter, do you trust USEC?
Mr. Potter. My sense, sir, no. We feel like they have been
unreliable in the past. That is why we are advocating putting
some very strict guidelines on USEC to make sure that they
follow the rules correctly.
Mr. Rush. What about you, Mr. Key?Do you trust USEC?
Mr. Key. I trust USEC today more than I did in their
formative years under the Presidential appointee that they had
operating as a CEO at that time, yes, sir.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Key, do you think that USEC will live up to
its obligations if this legislation will go forward without any
restrictions, any competitive processing occurring? Do you
think that USEC will live up to its word?
Mr. Key. Yes, sir, I do.
Mr. Rush. What about you, Mr. Potter?
Mr. Potter. I think so.
Mr. Rush. You indicated that you thought that USEC would
change its mission if this legislation was enacted. How fearful
are you that USEC would change its mission to becoming a broker
if this legislation was enacted?
Mr. Potter. I am pretty confident that we can establish
direction and guidelines to make sure that they could not do
that type of activity.
Mr. Rush. How would you do that? How would you do that?
Mr. Potter. I would hope that our Congress, somebody much
better--more than I am--could actually establish those
criteria.
Mr. Rush. So you think that this legislation is not
protective in a more profound and absolute way of the 1,200
workers, that the 1,200 workers, if we pass this legislation as
written, that you would be left at the mercy of USEC without
any way of blending or amending or in any way changing their
relationship with the 1,200 workers and your union?
Mr. Potter. I think that there is some guidelines that
could be established to prevent them----
Mr. Rush. Who will establish the guidelines?
Mr. Potter. Congress. I would think Congress could do this.
Mr. Rush. Are you suggesting that this legislation should
see through the possibility that USEC would take this
legislation if it became law and just run away and do what they
wanted to do, become whatever they wanted to become, and leave
1,200 workers that we are all concerned about, leave them
standing still and suffering as a result without pensions?
Mr. Key. No, sir. Ranking Member Rush, I do not expect USEC
to take this legislation in the form that it is written and run
away with the proceeds and not provide the obligation that this
legislation directs to keep the Paducah plant and 1,200
employees employed. I do not think that they would do that.
Mr. Rush. Do you agree with that, Mr. Potter?
Mr. Potter. Yes. That was some of the concerns that has
been brought to us, and we are confident that that would not
happen.
Mr. Rush. If there are only two domestic companies that
have the capacity and the capability to bid on the contract and
USEC is the best company to complete this bid, wouldn't it make
more sense to include competitive bidding language so that
everything is fair and transparent and that your union would be
in a better position to negotiate with USEC around the issues
that you hold near and dear?
Mr. Key. Well----
Mr. Rush. Such as----
Mr. Key. In response, Ranking Member Rush, last year we
completed a contract negotiation with USEC for the next 6 years
on a contractual obligation between the union and the company.
Again, I expressed my concerns with a competitive bid and
without any guidelines that would prevent those with foreign
interests to be able to bid and possibly successfully win that
bid and then transport those cylinders out of our Nation to re-
enrich, thereby taking away the money that this program can
create for the Federal Government while also keeping workers
employed.
Mr. Rush. Well, don't you think that it is within the power
of the Members of Congress to ensure that your experience is
not realized, that if there is a foreign company that bid or
even successfully bid that their commission restrictions placed
on that company in terms of--that would help your workers
maintain--we are all for protecting American jobs.
Mr. Key. Right.
Mr. Rush. I want to protect American jobs. I want your
1,200 workers to keep their jobs, keep their pension, and for
us to repay the extraordinary contribution that they made, to
pay them for that. All right. I am for that.
Mr. Key. Thank you.
Mr. Rush. And I want to protect that. But I don't want to
just give one company the sole authority to deal with this
significant problem that we are faced with as a Nation and then
for that company to renege on the American workers and on the
community right now. And I think the best way to deal with that
is to make sure there are some provisions in this law such as
competitive bidding, all right, that will help your workers and
help your community and to keep resolution of this issue in the
hands of the American workers and not foreign workers. That is
my concern. And I think we can get that through American--
through competitive bidding, a competitive bidding process.
Right now, without that provision, we are just giving USEC
the authority, mandating that the Department of Energy contract
with USEC, and we are hoping and praying that USEC continues to
be or turns out to be good guys and that they will keep their
word. I don't think we should go into this with that kind of
frame of mind. That is not good negotiating, as far as I am
concerned. And I admire labor for their ability to negotiate
strongly and to protect the American worker.
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Did you all want to make a comment?
Mr. Key. No. I agree with a lot of what the ranking member
said. Some of the funds in excess of what this program can
bring, a payment to the D&D fund, any excess value can go to
the reindustrialization of both Paducah enforcement sites.
I don't need to sit here and have a discussion concerning
the loss of manufacturing in this country in the last 10 to 12
years, and we as a Nation cannot continue to rely on service
sector jobs to pay off our national deficit and reduce our debt
and become a rich Nation again. We must invest--reinvest in the
reindustrialization of our manufacturing sector. This is a
clear example, this pilot program, of doing that.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. McKinley, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Can either of you give us an example of the exposure that
the men in the community have by having these canisters expose
the elements like that? What are the health hazards that we are
facing?
Mr. Key. --that occurs on these canisters is put in place
to check the wall thickness of the cylinders themselves because
of the elements they are exposed to. And we have in the past
had some of these walls to break through and create an HF cloud
in reaction to the moisture of the material and try to
encapsulate that and capture it. That is why we S&M--
surveillance and maintenance--of those, test the wall
thickness. But we have had those occasions where we have had to
repair the cylinders on site to reduce any exposure, not only
to the workers but also out to the community.
Mr. McKinley. You both heard the testimony from the DOE. We
have talked about and I really admire the fact that you are so
passionate to protect those 1,200 jobs in all facilities. But
we have a plan before us to protect the 1,200 jobs, we have a
plan that is going to raise money for however it is to be
spent, and we have a way to clean up an environmental problem.
They want to continue to study it. Am I missing something? What
did you hear that would put you at odds with the DOE?
Mr. Potter. I kind of get the impression that they do study
quite a bit. They study a lot. We need to start making
decisions to clean up these sites. There is some opportunities
here that we could actually do things in a reasonable,
practical way as far as reducing the waste at the site.
At the Portsmouth site, we can't move on with
reindustrialization until we can get rid of some of these low-
waste material--low-RAD-waste material areas; and that is only
going to help out. So that is why we had kind of a grassroots
plan to go in there and maybe dig up some of these old sites,
recycle some of the metal. That is a practical way to look at
things. Even if you don't do anything with the metal, you are
actually preparing it for future use and you are saving on the
waste, that you have to ship it off and bury it somewhere else.
Mr. McKinley. I am trying to understand why do you think
the DOE wants to continue to study it and not to protect the
1,200 jobs and not to raise the money and not to clean up the
site? What do you think their problem is?
Mr. Potter. Personally, I think it is fear to make the
decision, fear of making the wrong decision.
Mr. McKinley. Do you agree?
Mr. Key. To answer you, Congressman, I really don't know
what their plan is. It has been related here this morning, or
this afternoon, we had this same hearing in 2008. They had a
plan to forward, and here we are in 2011 and nothing has been
done.
There is a couple comments in the Deputy Secretary's
testimony that I will agree with, to support the maintenance of
a strong domestic nuclear industry while also supporting the
skilled jobs for American workers. I will agree with his
testimony on that. That is my intent and my desire out of the
legislation that the chairman has introduced.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you. I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. McKinley.
Do you have anything else?
Well, I want to thank Mr. Potter and Mr. Key for being with
us today and for your testimony. We look forward to working
with you as we attempt to move forward with this legislation.
So, with that, we will conclude today's hearing; and we
will have the record will remain open for 10 days for
additional material to be submitted, members to ask additional
questions.
And with that, thank you very much for being with us.
[Whereupon, at 3:21 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]


