- THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 21: A FOCUS ON THE NEW PROPOSAL BY THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY TO TIGHTEN NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR FINE PARTICULATE MATTER IN THE AMBIENT AIR

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 21: A FOCUS ON THE NEW PROPOSAL BY
THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY TO TIGHTEN NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR
FINE PARTICULATE MATTER IN THE AMBIENT AIR

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 28, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-157

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
81-303                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JIM MATHESON, Utah
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JOHN BARROW, Georgia
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

7_____

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             GENE GREEN, Texas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   LOIS CAPPS, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio)
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     7
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, prepared statement..............................    91

Witnesses

Mark Herbst, Executive Director, Long Island Contractors
Association, Inc., on Behalf of American Road and
Transportation Builders Association............................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Brad Muller, Vice President of Marketing, Charlotte Pipe and
Foundry Company................................................    17
Prepared statement...........................................    19
Tee Lamont Guidotti, Medical Advisory Services, Inc., on Behalf
of American Thoracic Society...................................    30
Prepared statement...........................................    32
Peter A. Valberg, Principal, Gradient Corporation................    44
Prepared statement...........................................    46
Collin O'Mara, Secretary, Department of NERC, State of Delaware..    51
Prepared statement...........................................    54
Anne E. Smith, Senior Vice President, NERA Economic Consulting...    58
Prepared statement...........................................    60
Jeffrey R. Holmstead, Partner, Bracewell and Giuliani, LLP.......    78
Prepared statement...........................................    80

Submitted Material

Statement, dated June 28, 2012, of American Forest & Paper
Association and American Wood Council, submitted by Mr. Walden.    93

THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 21: A FOCUS ON THE NEW PROPOSAL BY
THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY TO TIGHTEN NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR
FINE PARTICULATE MATTER IN THE AMBIENT AIR

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 28, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:02 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed
Whitfield (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Bilbray,
McKinley, Griffith, and Rush.
Staff present: Anita Bradley, Senior Policy Advisor to
Chairman Emeritus; Maryam Brown, Chief Counsel, Energy and
Power; Allison Busbee, Legislative Clerk; Andy Duberstein,
Deputy Press Secretary; Cory Hicks, Policy Coordinator, Energy
and Power; Heidi King, Chief Economist; Mary Neumayr, Senior
Energy Counsel; Alison Cassady, Democratic Senior Professional
Staff Member; Caitlin Haberman, Democratic Policy Analyst; and
Alexandra Teitz, Democratic Senior Counsel, Environment and
Energy.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call this hearing to order
this morning. We are on our 21st day of hearings on the
American Energy Initiative. Over the course of this hearing we
have heard expert testimony on a wide variety of issues and
also problematic EPA rules. Many of these new and proposed
measures we believe threaten to impose high costs and possible
job losses on the American people.
Quite a few are part of EPA's, in my view, bias against
coal. Each new rule adds to the unknown cumulative impact of
the multitude of rules that have come out of EPA, many of which
are the result of litigation and settlement agreements, and I
personally do not believe that is the way to develop
environmental policy through litigation and settlement
agreements.
However, today we are going to be discussing the proposed
National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Fine Particulate
Matter. Specifically, EPA's proposal calls for ratcheting down
the already stringent annual standard for fine particulate
matter set in 2006.
The new 2006 standard hasn't even been fully implemented
yet. Indeed, this committee recommended in a recent letter to
EPA and requested that the agency consider retaining the
current standard, but they, I think, have ignored this
suggestion.
I might add that particulate matter has many natural
sources as you well know, such as forest fires, windblown dust,
volcanoes, and even sea spray. Even the EPA admits that
background levels can approach the agency's existing standards
and on occasion exceed them.
Among the manmade sources of fine particulate matter are a
wide variety of activities such as driving a car, running a
factory or power plant, farming, and even household fireplaces
and backyard barbeques. And it is precisely because fine
particulate matter comes from so many different sources and
activities that EPA's proposed rules would be costly and
intrusive.
In fact, in order to achieve earlier particulate matter
standards, the agency even issued standards, for example, for
wood stoves. One could only imagine how many different
activities would be impacted by the more-stringent proposed
rule.
It is also important to note that when we are talking about
the cost of the proposed Fine Particulate Matter Standard it is
not just a matter of dollars and cents. The cost can also be
measured in terms of damage to public health and safety. For
example, roadwork is a source of particulate matter emissions,
and EPA's proposal can make it harder to undertake the kind of
projects that make our roads and highways safer, and we all
know that we have a dire infrastructure problem in America
today, and we need to be improving our public infrastructure
needs.
And, of course, we are also talking about regulations with
the potential to be an obstacle to job creation, and we need to
take into account the very serious adverse health implications
of unemployment.
As costly as the new Fine Particulate Matter Standard would
be in isolation, we also must be mindful of all the other new
and proposed rules that will also apply to many of the same
sources and activities. In other words, the cumulative impact
of the multitude of rules coming out.
Whether it is a domestic manufacturer struggling to remain
globally competitive or a coal-fired power plant owner facing
costly upgrades in order to remain in compliance, we have to
consider the cost of EPA's Fine Particulate Matter Proposal in
the context of Utility MACT, Cross-State Air Pollution Rule,
Boiler MACT, ozone standards, greenhouse gas regulations, and
all others.
I should note that reductions in air pollution are an
environmental success story. We all are proud of the fact that
we have a much cleaner air today than we have had in the past,
but I think realistically we also need to ask the question at
what point do you get to a point of diminishing returns.
We have a great panel with us today, and you all have great
expertise in this area, so we look forward to your testimony
and your thoughts on this subject as well.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.003

Mr. Whitfield. And at this time I would like to recognize
the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Rush, for a 5-minute opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. We are here
today to discuss the EPA's proposal to revise the National
Ambient Air Quality Standards for Fine Particulate Matter. As
have been the routine since the beginning of this Congress, the
majority side has invited witnesses who will testify on the
burdens associated with implementation of the proposed revised
standards, while the minority side has invited guests to speak
on the health impacts associated with particulate matter and
why the science informs us that these standards are necessary
to protect our most vulnerable constituents.
Of course, this hearing is taking place amongst the
backdrop of today's--of Tuesdays' unanimous DC Circuit Court of
Appeals decision to uphold four greenhouse gas regulations
which delivered a huge moral and practical victory for the EPA
and its actions. We will dig much deeper into the impacts of
the Court's decisions on that case tomorrow when we will have
the EPA Assistant Administrator for Air and Radiation, Gina
McCarthy, testify before the subcommittee.
But, Mr. Chairman, as far as today's hearing it is
important to recognize how we got to this point. Mr. Chairman,
we know that in mid-June the EPA released a proposal for
lowering the fine particulate standards from 15 micrograms per
cubic meter average over a year to between 12 and 13
micrograms, while retaining the current daily standard and the
same standards for core particulate particles. EPA did not
choose to address this proposal in a willy-nilly fashion or
without cause, but Mr. Chairman, I must remind you that that
were legally forced to issue this proposal after several States
and public health groups challenged the agency for missing an
October, 2011, deadline for releasing the new standards. That
lawsuit came about after a Federal Court threw out the 2006,
standards on the grounds that they were insufficient for
protecting the public health.
Let me repeat. They threw out the 2006 standards on the
grounds that they were insufficient for protecting the public
health. In fact, Mr. Chairman, the science is clear that the
EPA must strengthen the national air quality standards for
particle pollution, which is made up of microscopic specks of
soot, metals, acid, dirt, pollen, mold, and aerosols that are
tiny enough to inhale and lodge deep in the lungs where they
can cause serious damage. And the American Lung Association
informs us breathing these particles can trigger asthma
attacks, increase the risk of heart attacks and strokes, damage
lung tissue and airways, increase hospital visits for
respiratory and cardiovascular problems, and even cause death.
The science also informs us that children, teens, senior
citizens, people with low incomes, and people with chronic lung
disease such as asthma, chronic bronchitis, and emphysema are
especially at risk for being sickened by these particles.
Mr. Chairman, the Court ruled that EPA must propose a
standard by June 14 and gave the agency until December 14 to
finalize the rule after first holding public hearings which are
set to begin in July.
So, Mr. Chairman, we are here today in a very familiar
position, where the majority and industry representatives
arguing that these rules are too burdensome on industry and
will cause jobs, while the minority side will stand by the
science and those who argue that these rules will protect our
most vulnerable citizens and will save lives.
Mr. Chairman, we acknowledge that you are the majority.
However, Mr. Chairman, the majority does not possess the power
to hold back the night. You cannot delay or deny the
inevitable.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Rush, and at this time I
would like to introduce the members of the panel. We once again
appreciate all of you being here, and we look forward to your
testimony. We have with us today Mr. Mark Herbst, who is
Executive Director of the Long Island Contractors Association,
who is testifying on behalf of the American Road and
Transportation Builders' Association. We have Mr. Bradford
Muller, who is Vice President of Marketing for the Charlotte
Pipe and Foundry Company. We have Dr. Tee Guidotti, who is a
Medical Advisory Services Inc., he is with them, and he is
testifying on behalf of the American Thoracic Society. We have
Dr. Peter Valberg, who is Principal in Environmental Health
for--at the Gradient Corporation. We have Mr. Collin O'Mara,
who is Secretary for the Department of NREC for the State of
Delaware. We have Dr. Anne Smith, who is Senior Vice President
of NERA Economic Consulting, and then we have Mr. Jeffrey
Holmstead, who is a partner with Bracewell and Giuliani.
So welcome once again to all of you, and I am going to
recognize each one of you for a 5-minute opening statement, and
at the end of that time then we will have some questions for
you, and I would just note that on the table there are two
little boxes, and when your time has expired, the little red
light will come on, and we are not going to cut you off
immediately, but if you go to 8 or 9 minutes, we might. So,
anyway, thank you for being with us, and Mr. Herbst, you are
recognized for a 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF MARK HERBST, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, LONG ISLAND
CONTRACTORS ASSOCIATION, INC., ON BEHALF OF AMERICAN ROAD AND
TRANSPORTATION BUILDERS ASSOCIATION; BRAD MULLER, VICE
PRESIDENT OF MARKETING, CHARLOTTE PIPE AND FOUNDRY COMPANY; TEE
LAMONT GUIDOTTI, MEDICAL ADVISORY SERVICES, INC., ON BEHALF OF
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY; PETER A. VALBERG, PRINCIPAL,
GRADIENT CORPORATION; COLLIN O'MARA, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF
NREC, STATE OF DELAWARE; ANNE E. SMITH, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
NERA ECONOMIC CONSULTING; AND JEFFREY R. HOLMSTEAD, PARTNER,
BRACEWELL AND GIULIANI, LLP

STATEMENT OF MARK HERBST

Mr. Herbst. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Chairman Whitfield,
Representative Rush, members of the subcommittee. I am Mark
Herbst, Executive Director of the Long Island Contractors'
Association, and I am here today on behalf of the American Road
and Transportation Builders' Association, where I serve as the
Chairman of the State Council of Executives.
ARTBA, now in its 110th year of service, provides Federal
representation for more than 5,000 members drawn from all
business sectors of the U.S. transportation construction
industry, public and private. Our industry generates more than
$200 billion annually in U.S. economic activity and sustains
more than 2.2 million American jobs.
We appreciate this opportunity to discuss the Environmental
Protection Agency's recent decision to recommend tightening the
Federal Clean Air Act standards for particulate matter. At the
outset please know that we share your interest in assuring that
all Americans can both breathe clean air and are able to be
part of a sound and stable economy.
With this in mind it is essential that all parties involved
in this proposal recognize any tightening of the PM standard
would increase the number of counties that do not comply with
Federal standards.
As a result, Federal highway funds could be withheld from
these communities. This reality creates a counterproductive
cycle where new standards delay needed improvements to the
Nation's highway and bridge network, which has already reached
critical mass in terms of being able to serve the needs of our
citizens and the economy.
In many cases the projects put on hold or canceled are
intended to alleviate traffic congestion, a major cause of
mobile-source emissions. The stated goal of the PM standards is
in part to improve public health. Policymakers, however, must
be cognizant of the impact more stringent PM standards would
have on other Federal objectives.
Nearly 32,000 people die on U.S. highways each year and
many Federal aid highway improvements are intended to address
safety issues. As such, EPA's recommendation to tighten PM
standards clearly emphasizes one public health threat over
another. States and counties need predictability and time to
develop transportation plans which achieve PM reduction and
create jobs. Adding a new layer of requirements on top of the
existing standards that have not been fully implemented only
complicates these ongoing efforts.
Specifically, existing projects need to be in compliance
with the Clean Air Act when first undertaken and could be
thrown out of compliance if new standards are approved,
exposing project owners to costly, time-consuming litigation.
It should be noted that the committee's examination of
EPA's proposed PM standards is particularly well timed as it
coincides with efforts to complete the long overdue
reauthorization of the Federal Surface Transportation Program.
With House and Senate conferees presently meeting around the
clock on the Transportation Bill, all sides are characterizing
it as a jobs bill.
Allowing this much-needed legislation to be followed by
implementation of EPA's recommended PM standards is at best two
steps forward, one step back. Providing resources and important
policy reforms to help States deliver critical transportation
improvements, while at the same time allowing EPA to greatly
reduce the areas where transportation projects can move forward
actually undermines the goal behind the Surface Transportation
Bill.
It is ironic that members of both chambers and parties have
made streamlining the environmental review and approval process
for transportation projects a priority of the Transportation
bill yet few talk about the EPA's PM proposal, which will
severely disrupt the very process they are trying to make more
effective. Essentially while any streamlining reforms in the
reauthorization bill could save years during the project
delivery process, the EPA's proposed PM standards will severely
restrict the opportunities States have to take advantage of
these reforms.
Rather than implement tighter PM standards, EPA should
focus on fully implementing the current standards that are
already producing improvements in U.S. air quality.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Rush, members of the
subcommittee, ARTBA deeply appreciates this opportunity to
present testimony to you on this important issue. I look
forward to answering any questions you may have.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Herbst follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.009

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Herbst, and Mr. Muller, you
are recognized for a 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENT OF BRAD MULLER

Mr. Muller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning. Good
morning, Ranking Member Rush, members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
My name is Brad Muller, and I work for a family-owned,
fourth generation company which has been in continuous
operation since 1901, producing cast iron pipe and fittings for
plumbing. Charlotte Pipe is one of only three U.S. foundries
left in America that produces the types of metal castings that
we do, and dozens of competing foundries having gone out of
business in the last 2 decades.
We employ 450 associates at our foundry, Mr. Chairman, many
of whom have been there for decades. In recent years Charlotte
Pipe and the entire metal casting industry has been hard hit by
this recession. Despite a massive loss of sales, we have not
laid off any associates, sacrificing our profitability to keep
our people working.
Today I have the privilege of speaking on behalf of not
only our company's associates but also the other domestic
foundries as part of the American Foundry Society, our
industry's trade association, which has more than 8,500 members
in every State.
We are alarmed, Mr. Chairman, by a wave of new regulations
that EPA is imposing that you documented earlier. As an energy-
intensive industry, we are significantly impacted by increased
electricity costs and reliability issues that will result from
these regulations.
Of particular concern are EPA's new Mercury and Air Toxics
Standards for coal-fired plants, known as Utility MACT. The
rule requires major overhauls of power plants around the
country yet is forecasted to result in double digit electricity
prices in a least 30 States.
On the heels of the Utility MACT, EPA proposed in March the
first-ever greenhouse gas standards for power plants, a rule
that will effectively ban new coal-fired plants in this country
and could threaten existing coal-fired generation.
According to a study conducted by NERA, the combined
estimated costs of the 2012 EPA regulations is a staggering
$127 billion.
In addition, Mr. Chairman, EPA has failed as you noted to
consider the cumulative impact of its power sector regulations
on grid reliability. So far more than 140 coal-fired generating
units in 19 States have announced they will retire by 2015,
creating volatility within the electric grid if steps are not
taken to balance the retirements with new capacity.
EPA recently announced a proposed rule that would increase
the stringency of the NAAQS Standards for fine particulate
matter. The more stringent PM 2.5 standards will bring
additional costs for existing foundries and create huge hurdles
to permitting for expansions and new plants, the exact
situation that we encountered.
A few years ago, Charlotte Pipe bought a significant amount
of land in Stanley County in rural North Carolina with the
intention of building a new, state-of-the-art, high efficiency
foundry and closing our current location in downtown Charlotte.
After we drew up plans for the facility, we submitted our
air permit for review. State regulators eventually told us that
while previous air dispersion models only had to account for
filterable particulate, new air permits now require
condensables to be included in the total PM 2.5 emissions,
making the standard that much more difficult to meet.
This permitting change, combined with EPA's intension to
lower the standards, made it impossible for us to build a new
plant. In our case, naturally-occurring levels in rural North
Carolina, where we were going to build the foundry, were are at
12.8 parts per billion, higher than EPA's lower end of the
range, proposed range.
Instead of the 450 acres we bought, Charlotte Pipe would
need 4,500 acres to comply with the new standards. A new plant
would have brought 1,800 jobs, including about 1,000 permanent
new jobs, to what is currently a depressed area of rural North
Carolina. The tax benefit of constructing and opening a new
foundry in Stanly County was estimated to be about $70 million
over the initial 4-year period, with $17 million each year
thereafter.
Charlotte Pipe understands and supports the need for
reasonable regulations to protect the environment, worker
safety, and health, but the continued ratcheting down of
emissions limits--I am sorry. But the continued ratcheting down
of emission limits produces diminishing returns at far-higher
costs. EPA's new stringent standards will put many regions out
of attainment, and manufacturers considering a place to build a
plant and/or expand production will not be able to obtain the
necessary permits.
Thank you, again, for the opportunity to appear today, and
I will be happy to respond to questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Muller follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.020

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, and Dr. Guidotti, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TEE LAMONT GUIDOTTI

Mr. Guidotti. Thank you for this opportunity. My name is
Tee Guidotti. I am a medical doctor and----
Mr. Whitfield. Would you put your mike just a little bit
closer?
Mr. Guidotti. Thank you for this opportunity. My name is
Tee Guidotti. I am a medical doctor and environmental health
scientist with training in epidemiology and training and
qualifications in toxicology. I have held many positions over
my career, including Professor and Chair of the Department of
Environmental and Occupational Health at George Washington
University. I am now an International Consultant based here in
Washington, DC.
I am here today representing the American Thoracic Society,
which is the world's leading medical organization devoted to
advancing clinical and scientific understanding of pulmonary
diseases, critical illness, and sleep-related breathing
disorders. The American Thoracic Society supports EPA adopting
a much stronger standard for fine particulate matter, PM 2.5.
First, on the ground that revision of the standard will be
protective of human health, and second, on the grounds that the
scientific evidence accumulated by EPA is sufficient and
compelling to justify a move to a more protective standard at
this time. The ATS recommends an annual standard of 11
micrograms per cubic meter combined with a 24-hour standard of
25 micrograms per cubic meter.
That specific recommendation has been supported by a wide
range of medical societies and public health organizations,
including the American Medical Association, the American
Academy of Pediatrics, the American Lung Association, the
American Health Association, and the American Public Health
Association.
The ATS further believes that the scientific evidence that
supports the proposed revision and upon which EPA relies is
sound, comprehensive, and validated. This body of evidence is
the product of decades of intensive research conducted with
stringent oversights, double and triple checking results,
reanalysis to confirm every important finding, and laboratory
validation of observations in human populations.
Hundreds, probably now thousands, of studies in the United
States and around the world have confirmed that elevations in
fine particulate matter are associated with an increased risk
of premature death, cardiovascular disease, hospitalization for
respiratory and cardiovascular diseases, and respiratory
symptoms within days of the exceedance.
A number of very large studies in the U.S. and around the
world have looked at the long-term health effects of ambient
particles. These studies have provided firm evidence linking
long-term exposure to ambient particulate matter and all cause
mortality, cardiovascular mortality, and non-fatal
cardiovascular events. The impact of particulate air pollution
on life expectancy in a word is substantial.
In the scientific review of the 2009, Integrated Science
Assessment for Particulate Matter, the external panel of
independent scientists that makes up the Clean Air Scientific
Advisory Committee, commonly called CASAC, and the EPA
scientists involved have concluded that a causal relationship,
meaning that evidence exists for a cause and effect, not just
an association, a cause and effect relationship is strong
between ambient fine particulate matter and both mortality,
meaning deaths, and cardiovascular effects and that the
evidence for a cause and effect relationship with respiratory
effects is also strong.
These conclusions were reached following a rigorous review.
EPA convened ten multi-day public workshops, CASAC meetings,
and teleconferences beginning in 2007, in a transparent process
that allowed scientific peer review by CASAC and public comment
at every step. The science has been thoroughly vetted. CASAC
reached a unanimous, unanimous conclusion that a range of 13-11
micrograms per cubic meter for the annual scientific, for the
annual standard was scientifically justified.
In epidemiology there are guides to whether an association
is likely to be causal or non-causal, meaning that the true
cause may be indirect because it acts on both the risk factor
and the outcome, or that it may be spurious. All of these
criteria have been abundantly satisfied in the case of fine
particulate matter, and there has even been equally strong
confirmatory and mechanistic evidence derived from toxicology,
from animal studies and even volunteer studies and laboratory
studies that now show us why this is happening and give us a
window on the mechanism of why these things happen.
These scientific studies have linked particulate matter
exposure to problems, including aggravated asthma in children,
increased emergency department visits, stroke, heart attacks,
more frequent deaths, and second heart attacks from people who
have already had one, and hospital admissions. It also
demonstrates that the situation is worse for certain parts of
the population such as children and teenagers, the elderly, and
people who already have cardiovascular disease.
Congress built into the Clean Air Act an orderly,
systematic process for the regular review of scientific
evidence related to the health effects of air pollution. The
American Thoracic Society strongly supports the authority of
the EPA to periodically review and update the air quality
standards as mandated by the Clean Air Act. The evidence of
harm from particulate matter pollution underscores how
important it actually is for EPA to review and adjust health
standards on an ongoing basis, and ATS believes that Congress
should continue to allow them to do so.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Guidotti follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.032

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, and Dr. Valberg, you are
recognized for a 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENT OF PETER A. VALBERG

Mr. Valberg. Well, thank you, and good morning to the
Chairman and members of the committee. I appreciate this
opportunity to speak. I am Peter Valberg, Principal at
Gradient, an environmental health consulting firm in Boston. I
have worked for many years in public health and inhalation
toxicology. For about a decade I was a faculty member at the
Harvard School of Public Health. I was a member of the National
Academy of Sciences panel that looked at the public health
benefits of air quality regulation. I have testified before the
Clean Air Science Advisory Committee, and today I am testifying
about the toxicity of airborne particulate matter, which I will
call PM.
And what I point to are the critical role of experimental
science in evaluating the PM health effects, and I do this
because I believe the EPA's health effects analysis of PM
relies too heavily on statistical associations per se, and EPA
undervalues the role of laboratory science in helping
understand the toxicology of PM.
Our scientific knowledge is based on--health risk is based
on three legs of evidence. One leg is statistical,
epidemiology, another leg is clinical data and experimental
studies with lab animals, and the third leg is understanding
biological mechanism. If any legs are weak or missing, as in
the case of ambient PM at the levels of the PM standard, the
reliability of our knowledge is compromised. Experimental
science calls into question EPA's forecast of harm such as
death caused by small increments in PM levels at concentrations
close to the present day standards.
That is neither data from lab animals inhaling PM nor human
clinical data validate a causal basis for the statistical
associations between PM levels and mortality that are reported
by some of the observational epidemiology studies.
Moreover, toxicologists have studied the chemicals that
constitute PM in outdoor air, and no one has found an ambient
PM constituent that is life threatening when breathed at levels
that we encounter outdoors. Remember that in human responses to
chemical intake it is the dose that makes the poison, and with
regard to mechanistic support, EPA does not provide a sequence
of recognized biological events whereby low levels in the range
of 12 or 13 micrograms per cubic meter of outdoor PM will lead
to death or effect serious enough to cause hospitalization.
On a more practical side EPA's health harm projections for
PM, which are based on statistical associations, are
contradicted by the health of people in dusty occupations,
where worker studies show that at levels of PM considerably
above ambient PM levels do not show increased mortality rates
in those work populations.
Likewise, in our own everyday experience we all breath
elevated levels of PM in our homes, cars, personal activities
such as lawn mowing, raking leaves, barbequing, vacuuming,
sitting by a fireplace. The PM levels we breathe are vastly
higher than the PM in typical outdoor air, and although of
short term, these elevated levels contribute significantly to
our annual and lifetime PM dose, and EPA does not make it clear
that according to their own health harm projections for PM
these indoor levels should be vastly harmful, more harmful,
should be vastly more harmful than outdoor PM.
EPA relies on statistical associations between central
monitor PM levels and population mortality rates, but such
correlations cannot establish causal links. The computer model
is required to uncover these PM mortality correlations, require
many assumptions and adjustments. The results you get depend on
the model you use, how you set it up, and how many different
tests you run. It is not possible to correct from any non-PM
air pollutants as well as non-pollution factors that may
confound these PM associations.
This model dependency is a known problem and has been
pointed out in numerous publications. Many unknown factors can
affect population mortality rates. For example, studies have
shown that population mortality is correlated with calendar
date, day of the week, stock prices, weather, or outcome of
sports events, and yet we wouldn't think of outlawing certain
calendar dates or the Super Bowl on the basis of these
associations which are quite consistent.
Even if we restrict our attentions to statistical studies
per se, there are unexplained inconsistencies in reported PM
effect factors across urban areas with no PM risk being
reported from any cities, leaving uncertainty as to whether
lowering the standards will truly yield health benefits, and
EPA does not explain or delve into why these ``no effect,'' or
inconsistent findings should be disregarded in favor of those
studies that do show small effects.
In summary, EPA's statistical approach is fraught with
numerous assumptions and uncertainties, and EPA does not
provide experimental evidence and laboratory science to support
PM-causing death and hospitalizations at levels below the
current standards.
Moreover, since EPA admits they have no understanding of
which PM constituent or which PM chemical they believe causes
the deaths they predict, does it really make sense to lower the
standards without such more specific information.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak, and I welcome your
questions and comments.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Valberg follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.037

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Dr. Valberg, and Mr.
O'Mara, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF COLLIN O'MARA

Mr. O'Mara. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Rush,
members of the subcommittee. My name is Collin O'Mara. I serve
as the Secretary of Energy and Environment for the State of
Delaware, and it is my pleasure to be with all of you today.
The proposal that we are discussing today is measured, it
is based on sound science, it is technically feasible, it is
cost effective, and it has been a long time in the making.
The PM2.5 NAAQS currently in effect includes an annual
standard of 15 micrograms per cubic meter, which was
promulgated in 1997, and then in 2006, the 24-hour standard of
35 micrograms per cubic meter, was established. As a result of
litigation, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia remanded the 2006, annual PM2.5 standard to EPA
because the agency failed to explain adequately why the
standard provided the requisite protection for at-risk
populations including children. When it became clear that EPA
would fail to meet its promised deadlines to the Court, many of
the plaintiffs, including the State of Delaware and several
other States and the American Lung Association, filed mandamus
petitions in the DC Circuit in November, 2011, on grounds that
EPA had unreasonably delayed responding to the remand order
from 2006. And the court then ordered EPA to respond.
EPA has now proposed its response, concluding that the
PM2.5 standards established in 2006, are, indeed, insufficient
to protect public health as required by the Clean Air Act, and
that the proposed revisions are warranted to provide the
appropriate degree of increased public health protection.
This proposed action by EPA is both a legislative and
Court-mandated requirement that is long overdue and necessary.
Peer-reviewed science clearly supports EPA's action. In
December, 2009, EPA published an analysis of a particulate
matter-related, peer-reviewed health science literature in its
Integrated Science Assessment, the ISA, which concluded that
the epidemiologic, controlled human exposure, and toxicological
studies each provide evidence for increased vulnerability of
various populations such as children, older adults, people with
pre-existing diseases, and lower-income individuals.
In June, 2010, EPA then published its Quantitative Health
Risk Assessment for Particulate Matter to quantify exposure the
risk. This analysis estimated that 63, between 63 and 88,000
premature deaths each year are related to PM2.5 exposure.
And then in April of this year, of 2011, EPA published its
Policy Assessment for Review of Particulate Matter National
Ambient Air Quality Standards, which recommended revising the
annual standard in the range of 11 to 13 micrograms per cubic
meter and then recommended leaving the current 24-hour standard
exactly the same at 35. Oh, I am sorry. Recommended changing
it, either leaving it at 35 or reducing it to 30.
EPA has proposed to update the annual PM2.5 standard within
a range of this 11 to 13 as recommended by the experts. They
propose staying between 12 and 13, at the upper end of the
range, and then to retain the 24-hour PM2.5 standard. In doing
so EPA exercised and is demonstrating moderation. The agency
easily could have selected, for example, a number at the lower
end of the range, i.e., 11. They could have set a tighter daily
standard, below 35, and they could have set a more stringent
PM10 standard. In other words, the proposal could have been
more stringent.
Finalizing this action at the lower end of the proposal, so
at 12, will provide increased protection for at-risk
populations against an array of PM2.5-related adverse health
effects and give the public greater confidence that the air
they are breathing is actually healthy.
Some have questioned whether we can afford this rule. Even
though EPA is statutorily prohibited from considering the costs
of implementing the NAAQS, they have conducted a Regulatory
Impact Analysis which provides the potential costs and benefits
of several alternatives. An analysis of this report suggests
that the benefits of a protective 12 micrograms per cubic meter
standard as proposed outweigh the cost by a ratio of 30 to 1 to
85 to 1. That is $30 of benefits for every $1 of cost up to $85
a benefit for every $1 of cost.
Our experience in Delaware reinforces both the importance
of this rule and the cost-benefit analysis for this standard.
We have proven in Delaware repeatedly that measures which will
achieve a health-based PM2.5 standard are both technically
feasible and cost-effective. Under the Clean Air Act, States
are given the flexibility to meet standards in the most cost-
effective manner by considering the economic impacts when
implementing rules to meet a more health protective standard,
and this is exactly what we have done in Delaware.
For example, in 2006, we promulgated a regulation that
required NOx, SO2, and mercury emission controls on all of our
coal and oil-fired power plants. This multi-pollutant approach
allowed effective facilities to design the most cost-effective
emission controls that would reduce these multiple pollutions
at the same time. It is important to note that this approach
did not require a specific target for PM2.5, but through this
approach we have already reduced PM2.5 emissions by 63 percent
from the 2006 levels and will be reduced by 83 percent by 2013.
These are already products that are in the works. This is not
speculative data. These are actual projects that are on the
ground.
We have worked with some of the largest companies in
Delaware, including NRG, Calpine, PBF, DuPont, Perdue,
Mountaire, Evraz Steel, and Croda, to reduce their emissions,
including PM2.5. We have seen dramatic decreases across several
sectors. Most of these projects have been actually kind of
public-private partnerships if you will, with the State
sometimes providing financing or expedited permitting to ensure
reductions across multiple pollutants, timely project
completion, creation of construction jobs and improved economic
competitiveness. We believe that we are proving they can have
both a very strong economy and a healthy environment at the
same time.
Yet despite significant progress in Delaware to reduce
PM2.5 and other traditional pollutants, our State continues to
suffer adverse health effects from sources of transport that
contribute more than 95 percent of the PM2.5 in Delaware. The
proposed national standard would bring us one step closer to
reducing this transport pollution that continues to plague our
downwind States and in doing so will help ensure healthy air
for all of our residents.
Thank you for the opportunity to be with you today. I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. O'Mara follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.041

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, and Dr. Smith, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANNE E. SMITH

Ms. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me. I am Anne Smith,
Senior Vice President at NERA Economic Consulting. I am an
economics and risk assessment professional. My testimony is my
own and does not represent the position of my company or its
clients.
The proposed PM NAAQS will likely be more costly than EPA
is reporting, and its benefits are far more uncertain than EPA
indicates. One feature of the proposed rule that will drive
costs above what EPA has estimated is a new requirement that
the fine PM monitors be placed near roads in each area. Near-
road monitors can be expected to have much higher fine PM
readings than the monitors that are currently used to assess
attainment status.
On its own this new monitor requirement may seem innocuous,
but EPA is also proposing the attainment status now be
determined by each region's single worst-case monitor. That
worst-case reading is likely to come from the newly-placed
near-road monitor.
So any NAAQS level, including the current NAAQS level if it
were still in effect, will become much more difficult to meet
as a result of these changes. EPA has not accounted for the
costs of the extra stringency that these combined changes in
the rule would create.
EPA's estimates of the benefits of the proposed PM NAAQS
are far more uncertain than EPA admits. The Administrator
argues for not setting the primary standard below 12 micrograms
per cubic meter because of increasing lack of confidence that
she has in predictions of health impacts from yet lower fine PM
levels.
But the Administrator's lack of confidence has not
prevented EPA from taking full credit for those predicted
health impacts as if they were absolutely certain when
estimating the proposed rules dollar benefits, and yet more
uncertainty is missing in EPA's dollar benefits estimates.
For example, almost all of EPA's estimate of benefits is
based on a presumption that the statistical association between
fine PM and mortality risk is a causal relationship. That
presumption of causality is still subject to question. This
point has been demonstrated vividly by a new method of
analyzing the fine PM risk data that was published in the
Journal of the American Statistical Association just a year ago
after EPA's causal determination was finalized.
When striking new evidence suddenly emerges that a
regulatory action may have no benefits at all, it would seem
prudent for EPA to take the time to more closely examine and
deliberate the new evidence before locking in the major new
regulatory action. But also this ongoing uncertainty should at
least be recognized in the benefits estimates, and it is not.
Let me now turn to the proposed new secondary standard to
protect urban visibility. This unusual new proposed standard
and proposed rule deserves close inspection. It would be based
on an arcane indicator called the ``deciview,'' and it has--
that deciview has some troubling implications for a PM
standard.
For one, a uniform national deciview standard will limit
fine PM concentrations to very different levels in different
cities. Just as an example, a 28 deciview standard such as EPA
is proposing, would imply 24-hour average fine PM limits that
could be as low as 18 micrograms per cubic meter in some areas
and as high as 43 micrograms per cubic meter in other areas. A
huge variation. Each U.S. city will face a different PM
standard under the proposed deciview standard.
While EPA says the visibility standard would have minimal
costs, small variations from the proposed level and form could
make it much more stringent than the primary standard to
protect health, but even if this visibility standard would be
binding in only a couple of cities as EPA says, do we really
want a rule that makes some cities spend more to protect its
public from its aesthetic distress than it will have to spend
to get its ambient PM levels down to levels that EPA considers
protective of the public health? No. This is clearly a reversal
of reasonable public spending priorities.
It also is unjustifiable because the EPA is using a
scientifically-indefensible method to determine when and if
visibility degradation does adversely affect public welfare.
EPA has ignored evidence that has been provided regarding the
method's lack of credibility. If this evidence were to be
acknowledged, there would be no basis for setting any
visibility standard.
Thank you. I have a longer written statement that
substantiates the points I have made, and I request that it
also be entered into the record, and I would be happy to accept
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Smith follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.059

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Dr. Smith, and Mr. Holmstead, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JEFFREY R. HOLMSTEAD

Mr. Holmstead. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Rush, it is a pleasure to
be here. Thank you for having me. My name is Jeff Holmstead,
and I am a partner in the law firm of Bracewell and Giuliani,
but today I am not representing my law firm or any clients. I
have not talked with anybody about my views, but I am here just
to talk about this proposal as someone who has really spent his
professional life working on the Clean Air Act and looking at
what works, what doesn't, and really looking at the
implications of the various different Clean Air Act Programs
that we have. As some of you know, I was the head of the EPA
Air Office for almost 5 years, and so I like to believe I know
a lot about what works in the Act and what doesn't.
My primary concern about the new proposed standards for PM
is that EPA is not being honest about the burden that it will
impose on State and local governments, on businesses and
companies, and on American consumers, and I, again, I was
amused. Some of you may have seen these charts and press
releases, but, you know, the press release says EPA proposes
Clean Air Act standards. Ninety-nine percent of U.S. counties
will meet the standards without any actions, any additional
actions. Ninety-nine percent of counties. They have a map that
says, oh, this isn't going to do anything. Depending on where
we set the standard you are going to have either two additional
counties or four or six additional counties that won't have to
take any action to meet these new standards.
Well, that would be great if that is how the Clean Air Act
worked. If all you have to do is wait for existing programs to
get the air into attainment by this 2020, date, but as I say,
that is not the way the Clean Air Act works. As soon as EPA
finalizes a new standard, there are immediate permitting
burdens that as several people have said, make it much more
difficult to permit anything, regardless of whether EPA is
projecting that you are going to meet the standard in just a
few years.
So, anyway, I just--it frustrates me because I think the
Clean Air Act is important. I think there are important
benefits from the Clean Air Act. I just think we need to be
honest with people about what the burdens are and my own view
is we ought to try to be achieving those benefits in the most
cost-effective way possible.
If I can just point out a couple of other concerns and
others have already mentioned some of these, especially Dr.
Smith, but this idea that this is only a minor adjustment to
the standard because we are just reducing it from 15 to 13 or
12 completely ignores some of the key parts of this proposal.
If we are now today essentially you put these monitors out in
an area, and you average across all those monitors because
everybody has essentially said that PM2.5 is an area-wide
issue, you don't look at the highest monitor, you look at the
average of all these monitors.
Now we are going to be looking at the worst case single
monitor, and we are going to be putting a monitor nearby a road
that will certainly be in almost all cases the highest monitor.
So we don't know whether the standard is going to increase the
stringency by 30 percent or by 50 percent, and I don't think
there is any way for EPA really to know for sure. I just think
we need to be honest about the implications of that.
I am also as someone who has been a regulator, a little
troubled about this new secondary visibility standard. Although
it is cloaked as a scientific determination, as Dr. Smith's
testimony explains, it really is extremely subjective,
extremely variable from one place to the other, and the idea
that you have someone that essentially says, we are going to
force society to spend a lot of money because we think that
there is a problem with visibility in urban centers, that is
not what Congress designed the Clean Air Act to do, and I don't
think that is an appropriate exercise of authority by a
regulatory agency.
So I am just troubled, again, that the Clean Air Act seems
to be misused for something it was never intended to be used
for. I am actually a big believer in the Clean Air Act and the
gains that we have achieved I think it is one of the major
success stories of the Federal Government, but we are spending
a lot more money than we need to spend as a society, and
unfortunately, there are many parts of the Clean Air Act that
have come to be used as weapons by people who oppose a
transportation project, even a state-of-the-art new facility to
build something, to manufacture something, and I think it is
time that we were honest with people about the implications of
this and that perhaps we look for more effective ways to
achieve our Clean Air Act goals.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holmstead follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.061

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Holmstead, and thank all of
you for your testimony, and at this time I recognize myself for
5 minutes of questions.
First comment I would make is that I have sat through 21 of
these hearings in the last period of months, and I think it is
very easy for people to say, well, Democrats support the Clean
Air Act, Republicans basically oppose the Clean Air Act, and
simplify the debate. And yet after the hearings that I have sat
through I genuinely believe that Administrator Jackson is
misleading the American people either wittingly or unwittingly,
and why do I say that? Because of this. You made the comment,
Mr. Holmstead, that EPA is not being honest, and I think that
is true in many, in some instances.
For example, when they adopted the Utility MACT, which they
call the Mercury Rule, they said that the primary benefit from
the Utility MACT adoption would come from reduction of mercury.
That would be the primary benefit, and yet their own analysis
and everyone agreed that the real benefit did not come from
mercury emission. In fact, there was minute benefit from
mercury emission. It all came from reduction of particulate
matter.
And just like Mr. Valberg has talked about how there is no
real evidence of which particulate matter causes health
problems, EPA admits they have no understanding of which
particulate matter constituents cause their predicted deaths or
health problems. They admit that, and yet frequently in the
analysis that they present up here, everything seems to be
absolutely, 100 percent certain.
And another frustration that I have had and Dr. Guidotti,
you wrote a book entitled, ``Global Occupational Health,'' and
I haven't read all of it, but I read parts of it, and I think
it is very good, but you made the comment employment is one of
the most significant determinants of health even though it is
not a typical work-related hazard. And you also said good
research strongly links unemployment with adverse health
effects.
And Mr. Muller made the comment that 140 coal plants by
2015 have announced they are going to be closing, and our
economy is pretty weak now, so those people are going to lose
their jobs, and Mr. Muller is not going to be able to expand
his business because he can't meet these air permit
requirements. He was going to hire 1,800 people. Some of those
people may be unemployed, and yet EPA never looks at the cost
of health because of a new regulation that causes unemployment.
And I would ask you, Dr. Guidotti, do you believe, I mean,
none of us want to trash the, get rid of the Clean Air Act, but
it hadn't really been looked at since 1990. Do you think that
that is a valid subject that we should explore of the health
impacts on those people and their families who lose their jobs?
Mr. Guidotti. Well, certainly I do or I wouldn't have
written that. I think that the----
Mr. Whitfield. And that is why I quoted it.
Mr. Guidotti. I am not entirely sure that I personally
wrote that, but the--you are referring to a book that had
multiple authors. The point, though, is well taken that there
are unemployment as well as many other social factors that do
on a population basis and on an individual basis we can see
with our friends and neighbors affect a person's health.
Nothing affects a person's health as badly, though, as having a
disease and----
Mr. Whitfield. Well, let me just interrupt a minute. I
mean, I agree with you that they have diseases, but people who
don't have access to healthcare get diseases also. So I don't
want to argue the point. I am just saying that I think it is a
mistake that they not at least explore the impact of loss of
healthcare on people who lose their job because of these
regulations or not able to get a job.
Mr. Bilbray. Mr. Chairman, may I respond?
Mr. Whitfield. Who said that?
Mr. Bilbray. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Oh, yes. Yes.
Mr. Bilbray. I would just like to reinforce when we look at
climate change, the justification for Clean Air Act in climate
change was that the economic, the disruption of economies
around the world would affect humans and human lives and that
basically the major health impacts of climate change was
economic chaos that was created for it.
It is interesting that it was able to be applied to climate
change issues but not based on the economic impacts of
regulation. It was sort of like a double standard, because we
looked at the economic impact of climate change, but we sort of
say that it is sacrilegious to look at the economic impact of
regulation. Isn't there an inconsistency there?
Mr. Whitfield. Well, my time has expired, and thanks to the
gentleman from California, I am going to get 20 seconds back
from you now.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Rush.
Mr. Rush. Not to deny, a lot of statements have been made
this morning, and you heard many of them. You were just asked
some questions by the chair. For the record, would you care to
respond more thoroughly to some of the claims that you heard?
You are a trained physician. Do you want to talk about some of
the known health impacts associated with breathing in these
particulates, and do you want to expound a little bit more on
the statement in the book that you coauthored about the
unemployment impacts on health? I am--my district is a very
poor district, high unemployment, and I agree that it does have
a serious impact on health.
Where does that sit in terms of this discussion that we are
debating today?
Mr. Guidotti. Well, thank you very much for asking. I think
that we are dealing with a complicated situation in which the
environment comes together with social factors, comes together
with health factors. I am qualified to speak about the health
factors, and that is what I am going to focus on here.
I think that the productivity and the continued future of
sustainable health in an economy in this and any other country
depends on having competitive technology and increasingly that
means clean technology, and it also means having a healthy
workforce, a workforce that is sick, a workforce in which
disabled individuals can't work because their health is further
impaired by environmental factors, people who are high risk of
a death this is, would be entirely avoidable and would be--if
they were sufficiently protected, and people who are present at
work but aren't able to focus and aren't able to work at full
capacity because their disease is like lung diseases and like
allergies, are made that much worse are also a strong grade and
a strong resistance to full productivity.
So I don't think that this is an easy issue of employment,
unemployment, and tradeoff between health and employment. I
think that the future of the American workforce depends in
large part on being healthier relative to other workforces,
maintaining and preferably enhancing the health that we have
today so that we are more competitive and healthier compared to
other countries than we are currently.
Mr. Rush. Is there a scientific basis for these EPA's
proposal for lowering the fine particulate standards from 15
micrograms per cubic meter average over a year to between 12
and 13 micrograms?
Mr. Guidotti. Yes, and thank you for asking. Dr. Valberg
referred to a three-legged stool, and I think that we can--with
it--acknowledging that it has drawbacks, I think that we can
talk about that three-legged stool in terms of the
epidemiologic evidence, which has the one overwhelming benefit
in that it tells us about human beings. And the evidence there
is overwhelming. I mentioned the guides to assessing
statistical evidence as being likely to be causal. They are
completely satisfied, and indeed, overwhelming in the case of
fine particulate matter.
If you look at toxicology, however, toxicology is the
science of poisons and the effects of external agents on the
body, and we have very strong toxilogical evidence that fine
particulate matter is disproportionately toxic to the human
body, and because of the third leg of the stool which has to do
with biomedical and laboratory research, we now have a pretty
clear idea of why, and we know, for example, that ambient fine
particulate matter in the outdoor environment is not
necessarily the same particulate matter that we have in the
indoor environment. That the toxicity of these fine particles
depends on the size and the distribution, and I have got to
come back to that because that is a truly critical factor.
Their composition, and we now know that those fine particulate
particles that include metals are far more toxic than others,
and they are more likely to include metals when they are
ambient. And atmospheric transformation because there are
processes in the environment that actually change the
particles, change the chemical composition as they age in the
atmosphere.
Size is particularly important because the tiny particles
we are talking about so much lower than the size of particles
that--in some of the studies that Dr. Valberg was alluding to
earlier, get into places in the body that the larger particles
don't, and that means that the does that the cell sees, the
dose that the tissue sees is a lot higher than the dose that is
delivered say in an experimental study or that is measured
outside.
So it is a size distribution composition and atmospheric
transformation are critical factors that you simply don't see
in indoor air pollution.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Dr. Guidotti, let me pick up a little but
there. If I follow your reasoning, if there is a scientific
basis to establish that people who have allergies or lung
diseases may be adversely affected, then the EPA under the
Clean Air Act should take action against the offending items.
Is that your testimony?
Mr. Guidotti. No. I think that is an extrapolation of my
testimony. I think that----
Mr. Griffith. Is it accurate?
Mr. Guidotti [continuing]. The reality--what is that?
Mr. Griffith. Is it accurate? Yes or no?
Mr. Guidotti. Could you repeat it?
Mr. Griffith. If people have, if there is a scientific
basis to establish that there is something in the air that is
causing people with allergies and lung diseases to suffer, they
may not be able to pay attention as well to work when they are
working, or they may not be able to do things that they might
otherwise do if this item wasn't present in the air, that the
EPA should take action.
Is that an extrapolation of your testimony, and is that
accurate?
Mr. Guidotti. No, it is not.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Tell me why.
Mr. Guidotti. Well, because there is----
Mr. Griffith. Because that is what I heard.
Mr. Guidotti. What is that?
Mr. Griffith. That is what I heard, sir.
Mr. Guidotti. Well, I am sorry that you heard it that way.
Let me clarify it, please. The----
Mr. Griffith. Well, let me try to straighten it out because
I only have so much time.
Mr. Guidotti. Excuse me?
Mr. Griffith. I only have so much time, so let me try to
straighten it out then, because that is what I thought I heard
you saying, that the EPA proposed rules would, based on a
scientific basis that some of these items cause people not to
be able to perform as well and that people with allergies and
lung disease we should be trying to take care of them. Is that
not what you said? I need----
Mr. Guidotti. Well----
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. A simple answer yes or no?
Mr. Guidotti [continuing]. The second statement that you
said is correct. The first statement is not.
Mr. Griffith. What is not correct?
Mr. Guidotti. What is not correct is that the implication
that you said in the earlier statement that it was----
Mr. Griffith. So the second statement was correct?
Mr. Guidotti. What is that?
Mr. Griffith. The second statement was correct?
Mr. Guidotti. The second statement was correct with----
Mr. Griffith. All right. So let me go through then because
here is what I heard you saying, and understand that I may be a
little edgy today because yesterday I had my son, my wife had
my son at the allergist, and he has been under an allergist's
care since he was 4 months old. He is 6 now. What I heard you
say was the EPA ought to be taking actions against trees
because my son's number one problem is trees. I have an issue
with trees as well.
You know, the problem is you can take these things to an
extreme to a point where they no longer make sense, and I would
submit that that is where we are with these new standards that
the EPA is proposing. Yes, you could make my son's life a whole
lot better if you tore down every tree in the United States of
America and the world, but that obviously is ridiculous.
But I would submit that what the EPA is now trying to do to
these gentlemen trying to produce jobs is just as ridiculous
because we have to have jobs, and as your book, whether you
wrote that chapter or not, says unemployment also has an
effect, and what we are doing is we are killing jobs left and
right, and you know, there is--it is so significant in my
district, I represent a coal mining area. Not all of my
district is coal mining, but a big chunk of it is. There is a
bumper sticker out there that says if you think coal is ugly,
wait until you see poverty.
And I submit that what we are doing is we are putting a lot
of people out of work, we are making the overall economic
situation so bad that people are truly hurting, and that that
is going to have a bigger health impact than these new
regulations would have. The positive impact these new
regulations would have is offset by a tremendous negative.
Let me ask Mr. Herbst this question in the time that I have
remaining. They are also in my district building a road up the
side of Christiansburg Mountain. They had to blow up half the
mountain or half of one of the hills, depending on how you want
to define them, to get this road laid out.
Are you telling me that under these new standards we
probably wouldn't have been able to add that extra lane?
Mr. Herbst. That is a very good possibility. The concern
that we have is the additional regulation changing things. We
were given with the Stimulus Program, if I can use that as an
example, what we saw is all this available money for
localities, for counties, States to come down for construction
projects, and what we had, the problem that we had was three-
fold. Number one, a lot of the municipalities did not apply
because they didn't want the strings attached. Number two was
another example that we are still going through right now with
a contractor who is owed over $1 million, family-owned, small
business, isn't being paid because the regulators came in
afterwards and audited and said all of these procedures by the
owner, which was a municipality, didn't fulfill their
obligation. So the municipality turns around and tells the
owner, we are just not going to pay you. So this contractor is
out over $1 million and is fledgling right now and may not stay
in business. So that is a problem with the additional
regulation.
The third one is probably more closely related to your
issue, is we had one contractor through this program that was--
bid he job to straighten out a curb line along the roadway,
major roadway in the town, and what happened was the Federal
Government came in and said, you know what? You need land
takings less than a foot and a half. It is not following the
Federal regulations. You are not eligible for the funds, and
that project could not go forward.
So that is what regulation does. We are told you can go
ahead and do this. Meanwhile we have lost 40,000 jobs in the
industry just in my bi-county region.
Mr. Griffith. Just in your region?
Mr. Herbst. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. Forty thousand jobs?
Mr. Herbst. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from West Virginia,
Mr. McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess let's start
with you, Mr. Holmstead, from your experience. Does the EPA
have, does it have authority to regulate air quality in a
school building?
Mr. Holmstead. Inside a building? No.
Mr. McKinley. Inside.
Mr. Holmstead. No, they do not.
Mr. McKinley. Does it have the authority to regulate air in
a home?
Mr. Holmstead. No, it does not.
Mr. McKinley. Does it have authority to regulate the air in
this room?
Mr. Holmstead. No, I don't believe it has any authority to
regulate----
Mr. McKinley. Does it have the authority to regulate air in
my former office building?
Mr. Holmstead. No.
Mr. McKinley. Does it have the authority to regulate the
air in my car?
Mr. Holmstead. I don't think so.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you. I am just curious because I want
to build back off what Mr. Valberg was saying, Dr. Valberg, and
what we have heard here over the last 18 months of my term here
in Congress has been about air quality, and I have struggles as
an engineer, one of just two of us in Congress, to see how we
differentiate between indoor air quality and outdoor air
quality. When we talk about the diseases that people are coming
down with, how have we--maybe, Dr. Valberg, maybe if you could
explain, how do we differentiate that when someone has an
asthma attack, how--why is it that some folks in this chamber
will say it is caused by outdoor air, but 90 percent of our
time is spent in indoor air? How do you think people can
differentiate between where they get the particulate matter
that causes an asthma attack?
Mr. Valberg. That is a very good question, and I agree with
Dr. Guidotti that the composition of different types of air is,
in fact, different, but it is EPA's position that, you know,
according to their paradigm and their formula, they treat it
all equally, even though indoor air may be different.
Mr. McKinley. But have you seen the EPA's own Web site?
Their own Web site says that indoor air quality is 96 times
worse than outdoor air.
Mr. Valberg. Yes. It is--not only is it worse, but we
mostly spend our time indoors. I think we all have this
impression that if we want fresh air, we go outdoors. If we
want to have less, more stale air, we are usually indoors.
Mr. McKinley. Well, Dr. Valberg, you know, all, the whole
panel, look. I know we can achieve this. Science and
manufacturers, everyone can provide us even better air quality.
We know that. We can achieve that. It is one of those moving
targets, however, that disturbs me as a former businessman
that, you know, just because we can doesn't mean we should.
Just because we can doesn't mean we should, and so I am looking
to see if it is--if we are trying to get down to 13 micrograms
per cubic meter today, well, what is the real goal? Where do we
really want--why don't we just set--that is the real goal we
are going to. Zero? Is it one? Once we start down that slippery
slope, I don't understand where we are going because I am
disturbed about us using--the EPA is using--science and Clean
Air Act as a weapon as you described.
Let me just, for all of you to understand what we are
really quibbling over here, is this approximately 2 micrograms
per cubic meter, and it is going to cost our economy billions
of dollars to comply, but I know in this room so few people can
relate to engineering terms or scientific terms. I love the use
of epidemiology and toxicology and pulmonologists. I am just
saying put it in relationship to where people can understand.
In this room is approximately 70,000 cubic feet of space.
What we are talking about at 2 micrograms per cubic meter, the
amount of particulate, the weight of particulate matter, is the
size of this piece of paper. This is smaller than a point on
your eraser. That is what we are talking about here. That is
the billions of dollars that we are going to put our economy
through. Those are the people that we are going to have
possibly fewer job opportunities for because we are chasing a
piece that small, because we can.
Should we? Can we afford that as a society when 24 million
people are either unemployed or underemployed? When we are
allowing a rogue agency to pursue that amount? Shame on us.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. McKinley. At this time I
recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Bilbray, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bilbray. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Holmstead, I think you said it probably the most
balanced approach and the fact is both sides may be in denial
of a lot of things; one, the health impacts of pollutants, but
also the big denial, and I will say this for my, the ranking
member, the denial of the impact that regulation overall, and
especially inappropriate regulation, has on not just the
economy but the entire lifestyle and thus the health style of
the general public. The impacts are there, and it seems like
there is a real denial there, and I will just say this for
those of you that don't know, everybody on this committee
knows, I spent 6 years on the Air Resources Board in
California. Ten years at the Air District.
Mr. O'Mara, let me tell you something. I have been where
you are. Can you come before us now and say that there hasn't
been major mistakes made by the Federal Government in the
implementation of the Clean Air Act?
Mr. O'Mara. I think that most, I think there have been
mistakes, and I think that many of them relate to, you know,
the science not being followed, implementation schedules being
moved around so there wasn't regulatory predictability for
companies to make informed decisions.
Mr. Bilbray. Or major strategies that were based on
misperceptions and not science. You are too young to remember
this, but some of us remember the Federal Government putting
auto emission standards in place that basically forced Detroit
to go to diesels during the '70s. The toxicity of diesel now is
rated way over benzene, isn't it? So the Federal Government
basically was pushing the private sector towards pollution with
what was claimed to be an environmental regulation.
Anybody here wants to stand up for the 1990 amendments to
the Clean Air Act? Anybody here want to say that it was a great
idea? Because----
Mr. Holmstead. There were certainly parts of them that
were.
Mr. Bilbray. Parts of it. Yes, but the optionate mandate,
the mandate that we put ethanol and MTBE in our fuel stream, we
knew in California within months, we tried to say Federal
Government, stay out of this. Now, the science might have been
flawed, but what I saw was more the politics was flawed.
Wouldn't you agree that there was forces that claimed to be
environmentally driven that were driven by economic greed and
the use of getting the Federal Government to force the general
public to use products that they would have a monopoly on? Mr.
O'Mara, wouldn't you agree with that?
Mr. O'Mara. Yes, and I would agree with Mr. Holmstead. I
mean, the vast majority was a very good bill, but I think there
were individual sections that were of special interest.
Mr. Bilbray. And wouldn't you agree that the mandate for
MTBE and ethanol was an environmental mistake?
Mr. O'Mara. We have concerns about the ethanol mandate
today as well.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. So my point being is that there is a lot
of people that wrap themselves up into a claim of environmental
strategy that does not reflect good science. I--then there is
other agendas, and these hidden agendas are what I get upset
about. While we are talking about reducing stationary sources
here, and I will tell you something, the secondary visual issue
with me, that boggles my mind because nowhere in the debate or
discussion of the Clean Air Act did people talk about
aesthetics. We talked about the public health.
Would everybody agree that public health, protection of
children, that was--Doctor, wasn't that the selling point of
the Clean Air Act to the people and to the Congress of the
United States? Either one of you doctors. It was the health
issue. Right?
Mr. Valberg. Correct.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. Now we have got what appears to be mission
creep, that while we are doing this, why don't we set this, and
why don't we use this, and why don't we do this, and we forget
about where it comes down to. This is where we get down to the
gentleman at the end.
How often when you are looking to build a road does your
air district require that we consider the environmental impact
of the no-project option? If you don't build that extra lane,
what is going to be the congestion that is going to increase
the pollution? How much weight under existing law is the no-
project option give when you consider it? Because I know they
darn well make you look at the emissions while building that
lane, but how much do they look at the benefits of reducing
congestion?
Mr. Herbst. It is relatively limited, the congestion
reduction, in most of the projects. The no-build opinion, they
consider it, but it is really, when they look at the air
quality because that is not really a major issue for us, and
that is something that we advocate because we, indeed, want to
create cleaner air, you have to remove the congestion, but
people on the other side say you are expanding the highway
system.
Mr. Bilbray. I would say this, and I will say this to both
sides of the aisle and the leadership here. It is interesting
that there are those who are quick to force the private sector
to change the way you do business to reduce emissions, but when
you have got major universities and studies showing government
inappropriate traffic control could be as high as 22 percent of
auto emissions, this is some place the Federal, that Federal
Government, Democrats and Republicans, ought to recognize that
the sin of omission, that requiring the private sector to do a
lot of things but allowing the government to continue to force
Americans to pollute and burn fuel they don't have to and
ignoring the government's impact on pollution, to me shows we
have no credibility on this issue. It looks like we are more
anti-business than we are pro-environment, and I think we need
to change that.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired.
I want to thank the panel for joining us today. We
appreciate your testimony. We have read all of the testimony,
and your insights have been quite helpful and with that we will
adjourn this hearing, and we will keep the record open for 10
days for--so thank you all very much, and that will adjourn
today's hearing.
[Whereupon, at 10:19 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 81303.067


