- THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY'S ROLE IN MANAGING CIVILIAN RADIOACTIVE WASTE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY'S ROLE IN MANAGING CIVILIAN RADIOACTIVE WASTE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND ECONOMY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 1, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-54

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov
_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

71-134 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas                     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                     Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida                JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                  Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois                EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania         EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                   BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                   ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                 ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina    GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                       DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma               LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania              MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee           CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN BILBRAY, California             JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLIE BASS, New Hampshire           TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                 MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana              ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
BOB LATTA, Ohio                       JIM MATHESON, Utah
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington    G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi             JOHN BARROW, Georgia
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey             DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana               DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky                   Islands
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

(ii)

Subcommittee on Environment and Economy

JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
Chair

TIMOTHY F. MURPHY, Pennsylvania      GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARY BONO MACK, California           JOHN BARROW, Georgia
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   LOIS CAPPS, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              HENRY A. WAXMAN, California, ex
CORY GARDNER, Colorado                   officio
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan, ex officio

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. John Barrow, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Georgia, opening statement.....................................     3
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     4
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     6
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, prepared statement......................................    52

Witnesses

Hon. Shelley Berkley, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Nevada......................................................     8
Hon. Doc Hastings, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Washington.....................................................    11
Hon. Mike Simpson, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Idaho..........................................................    13
Mark E. Gaffigan, Managing Director, Natural Resources and
Environment, U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO).......    15
Prepared statement...........................................    17
Gregory H. Friedman, Inspector General, Department of Energy.....    36
Prepared statement...........................................    37
Peter B. Lyons, Assistant Secretary for Nuclear Energy,
Department of Energy...........................................    46
Prepared statement...........................................    48
Gary Hollis, Chairman, Nye County Board of County Commissioners,
Nye County, Nevada.............................................    73
Prepared statement...........................................    76
Answers to submitted questions...............................   145
Martin G. Malsch, Partner, Egan, Fitzpatrick, Malsch and
Lawrence, on behalf of the State of Nevada.....................    80
Prepared statement...........................................    82
Greg R. White, Commissioner, Michigan Public Service Commission..    95
Prepared statement...........................................    97
Answers to submitted questions...............................   149
Christopher A. Kouts, Former Acting Director of Department of
Energy's Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management.......   106
Prepared statement...........................................   108
Answers to submitted questions...............................   153

Submitted Material

Letter of June 1, 2011, from Mr. Waxman and Mr. Green to Messrs.
Upton and Shimkus, submitted by Mr. Waxman.....................   129
Letter of May 27, 2011, from the Blue Ribbon Commission on
America's Nuclear Future to Messrs. Upton and Shimkus,
submitted by Mr. Green.........................................   124
Letter of May 31, 2011, from the Board of County Commissioners of
Clark County, Nevada to Mssrs. Shimkus and Green, submitted by
Mr. Green......................................................   127
Resolutions from Nevada counties, submitted by Gary Hollis.......   131

THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY'S ROLE IN MANAGING CIVILIAN RADIOACTIVE WASTE

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 1, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment and Economy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 1:15 p.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John
Shimkus (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Shimkus, Barton,
Whitfield, Pitts, Murphy, Bass, Cassidy, Gardner, Dingell,
Green, Inslee, Butterfield, Barrow and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Carl Anderson, Professional Staff Member;
Gary Andres, Staff Director; Charlotte Baker, Press Secretary;
Mike Bloomquist, Deputy General Counsel; Sean Bonyun, Deputy
Communications Director; Todd Harrison, Chief Counsel,
Oversight and Investigations; Cory Hicks, Policy Coordinator,
Energy and Power; Katie Novaria, Legislative Clerk; Chris
Sarley, Policy Coordinator, Environment and Economy; Peter
Spencer, Professional Staff Member, Oversight; Kristin
Amerling, Democratic Chief Counsel and Oversight Staff
Director; Tiffany Benjamin, Democratic Investigative Counsel;
Alison Cassady, Democratic Senior Professional Staff Member;
Jocelyn Gutierrez, Department of Energy Detailee; and Caitlin
Haberman, Democratic Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Shimkus. I call this hearing to order to recognize
myself. This is a part of our ongoing effort at the committee
to make certain we are providing safe and sustainable long-term
storage of high-level spent nuclear fuel. Specifically today,
we focus our attention on the part the Department of Energy
plays and the process by which decisions have been made when it
comes to a long-term repository.
No matter if you support the continued use of nuclear
energy or if you don't, we have a responsibility to deal with
existing spent nuclear fuel and high-level waste materials from
our Nation's defense complex. As we sit in this room, spent
nuclear fuel from commercial power plants is piling up and
remains scattered around the country in two-thirds of our
States.
It was always the determination that the Federal
Government, not the individual states and not the utility
companies, would take responsibility for the safe storage of
spent fuel and other nuclear materials. After a careful search,
we found a scientifically proven, geologically ideal site to
store these materials that is on secure, federal property, in a
remote desert, deep under Yucca Mountain.
Now we are at a crossroads. Politics, not science, is
driving the debate. It is time for us to decide if we will keep
our end of the deal with the Nation's citizens by delivering
exactly what they have been paying for all these years, or if
we will waste ratepayers' and taxpayer money by failing to
deliver on our end of the contract.
Recently, the Government Accountability Office released a
report examining the results of the Obama Administration's
withdrawal of the Yucca Mountain license application. What GAO
found was this unilateral decision comes at a cost of $15
billion so far, 9.5 billion of it directly collected from every
American's electricity bill. But the fleecing of taxpayers
won't end there. GAO estimates taxpayers are already on the
hook for $15 billion and an additional $500 million for each
year the project is delayed beyond 2020. Meanwhile, the U.S.
Treasury will be paying out taxpayer dollars, not ratepayer
dollars, in judgments to utilities for DOE's breach of
contract.
Billions of dollars and over 30 years of research from our
Nation's top scientists were jettisoned, not for technical or
safety reasons, but as the GAO report stated, ``social and
political opposition to a permanent repository, not technical
issues, is the key obstacle.''
When I visited Yucca Mountain last month, I heard firsthand
the overwhelming support from local residents and officials
from the seven surrounding counties. We will hear firsthand of
that support today from those representing locals closest to
Yucca Mountain, locals who raise families in that area and know
it is safe. Those who would be directly affected the most took
it upon themselves to ensure the safety of their children and
grandchildren through an independent scientific investigative
program, and what they found was high-level nuclear fuel could
be stored at Yucca Mountain while keeping their water supply
safe, a major concern, particularly for locals. They also know
it has the ability to infuse desperately needed jobs both
directly and indirectly related to the Yucca Mountain site.
We must not let the political games stop us from keeping a
promise to taxpayers. The licensing process for Yucca Mountain
must legally continue so that we can give the American people
the surety of a safe, centralized, permanent storage site for
spent nuclear fuel.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today
to give us their perspective on moving forward. I look forward
to their verbal testimony and willingness to answer any
questions members may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. John Shimkus

I call this hearing to order and recognize myself for 5
minutes. This is part of our ongoing effort at the committee to
make certain we are providing safe and sustainable long term
storage of high level spent nuclear fuel. Specifically today we
focus our attention on the part the Department of Energy plays
and the process by which decisions have been made when it comes
to a long term repository.
No matter if you support the continued use of nuclear
energy or if you don't, we have a responsibility to deal with
existing spent nuclear fuel and high level waste materials from
our nation's defense complex. As we sit in this room, spent
nuclear fuel from commercial power plants is piling up and
remains scattered around the country in two-thirds of our
states.
It was always the determination that the federal
government--not the individual states and not the utility
companies--would take responsibility for the safe storage of
spent fuel and other nuclear materials. After a careful search,
we found a scientifically proven, geologically ideal site to
store these materials. That's on secure, federal property, in a
remote desert, deep under Yucca Mountain.
Now we are at a crossroads. Politics, not science, is
driving the debate. It's time for us to decide if we will keep
our end of the deal with the nation's citizens by delivering
exactly what they've been paying for all these years, or if
we'll waste rate payer's and taxpayer money by failing to
deliver on our end of the contract.
Recently the Government Accountability Office released a
report examining the results of the Obama Administration's
withdraw of the Yucca Mountain license application. What GAO
found was this unilateral decision comes at a cost of 15
billion dollars so far--9.5 billion of it directly collected
from every American's electricity bill. But the fleecing of
taxpayers won't end there. GAO estimates taxpayers are already
on the hook for $15 billion and an additional $500 million
dollars for each year the project is delayed beyond 2020.
Meanwhile, the U.S. Treasury will be paying out taxpayer
dollars, not ratepayer dollars in judgments to utilities for
DOE's breach of contract.
Billions of dollars and over 30 years of research from our
nation's top scientists were jettisoned--not for technical or
safety reasons--but as the GAO's report stated, ``social and
political opposition to a permanent repository, not technical
issues, is the key obstacle.''
When I visited Yucca Mountain last month I heard firsthand
the overwhelming support from local residents and officials
from the seven surrounding counties. We will hear firsthand of
that support today from those representing locals closest to
Yucca Mountain.
Locals who raise families in that area and know it is safe.
Those who would be directly affected the most took it upon
themselves to ensure the safety of their children and
grandchildren through an independent scientific investigation
program. And what they found was high-level nuclear fuel could
be stored at Yucca Mountain while keeping their water supply
safe--a major concern particularly for locals. They also know
it has the ability to infuse desperately needed jobs both
directly and indirectly related to the Yucca Mountain site.
We must not let the political games stop us from keeping a
promise to taxpayers. The licensing process for Yucca Mountain
must legally continue so that we can give the American people
the surety of a safe, centralized, permanent storage site for
spent nuclear fuel.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today
to give us their perspective on moving forward. I look forward
to their verbal testimony and willingness to answer any
questions members may have.
I yield back the balance of my time.

Mr. Shimkus. With that, I will yield back the balance of my
time and recognize the ranking member, Mr. Barrow from Georgia.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN BARROW, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF GEORGIA

Mr. Barrow. Thank you, Chairman Shimkus, for holding this
hearing, and I appreciate the participation of all of our
witnesses today.
Mr. Green has asked me to fill his chair in his absence,
and I would like to think that at least in part is because he
knows something about my district that makes this hearing
particularly important to me. Considering both the commercial
and the defense applications, I probably represent as many
people touched by the nuclear industry as anyone else in
Congress.
I am proud to represent the expanding Plant Vogtle in Burke
County, Georgia, and I also represent a large percentage of
people who work at the Savannah River site just across the
river in South Carolina. The workers, the families and
associated industries attached to those facilities number many
thousands, and other positive economic impacts are very high.
For example, Burke County collects about 75 percent of all its
tax revenues from just Plant Vogtle. That is a lot of
schoolbooks, police cars and trash pickups from just one
corporate citizen.
However, those benefits bring challenges. The nuclear
industry is only as safe as we make it. Up to this point, we
have managed the processes and the waste well, and we have had
a very safe industry. However, as the industry grows as it is
doing in Georgia and a couple of other places around the
country and as the waste accumulates, we need to have a
concerted waste management strategy.
I believe we are too far down the Yucca Mountain road in
time and in money to turn back now, but if we aren't going to
pursue Yucca, then we need to be working together on another
strategy and we need to stick with it. That is one reason why I
am disappointed that the Blue Ribbon Commission was unable to
participate today. The Blue Ribbon Commission was recently in
my district at Vogtle and at Savannah River site. I am hopeful
they will have some concrete consensus solutions to offer, and
I suggest that it is in the committee's best interest to have
them back as soon as possible.
I know the witnesses today will have some good insight on
the way forward. I want to thank them for their time, I want to
thank the chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
As Mr. Barton makes his way up here, the chair would like
to recognize the chairman emeritus, Mr. Barton, for the 5
minutes which hopefully he will apportion out to Mr. Whitfield
and Mr. Gardner if he shows.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Barton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank our
distinguished first panel of Members. It is good to see you and
we are especially glad that Congressman Hastings is back and we
are hope you are healthy. Just remember, this is the Energy and
Commerce Committee. No more shenanigans like you were trying
earlier.
Mr. Chairman, our Nation is sitting on 13,000 metric tons
of spent nuclear fuel and high-level radioactive waste. Our
Nation is sitting on over 65,000 metric tons of spent nuclear
fuel from commercial nuclear power plants in 75 sites in 33
states. That is 78,000 metric tons of spent nuclear fuel in
over 80 sites in over 33 states. Yucca Mountain was approved by
the previous Administration as a repository for our nuclear
waste. As you well know, we spent over $15 billion in taxpayer
and ratepayer funds through 2009. It is clear that safe and
permanent storage of nuclear waste is a critical element of a
long-term energy strategy. Study after study has shown that
Yucca Mountain is suitable for storage of that waste.
We are now here today to discuss the Department of Energy's
reckless decision to terminate the Yucca Mountain repository.
In my opinion, the Administration decided to ignore the science
and circumvent the law. This Administration has for what I
think are political reasons determined that Yucca is not a
workable option and is proposing that millions of taxpayer
dollars be spent in further studies. I think it is unsettling
that DOE stopped short of characterizing Yucca as unsuitable,
instead choose unworkable. It seems clear that this
Administration did this to circumvent the law as defined by the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act to avoid explaining to the Congress
the basis for their determination.
We know that the economic impact of DOE's decision is
tremendous. There is no guarantee that a more acceptable or
less costly alternative can be identified, which will only
prolong the need for interim storage of spent nuclear fuel at
existing reactor sites. Delays in opening a repository have
already created an estimated $15.6 billion in taxpayer
liability plus an additional $500 million for each year beyond
2020. This is not only a financial issue but it is also a
national security issue. We cannot have over 78,000 tons of
radioactive waste scattered across 75 sites. We need a central
repository. In my opinion, that repository is Yucca Mountain.
At this point I would like to yield to the distinguished
subcommittee chairman, Mr. Whitfield.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Barton.
I would just like to say, this is, in my view, a perfect
example of a wasteful Federal Government on a very important
project. You have already heard about the amount of money that
has been spent, $15 billion. You have heard about 65,000 tons
located in 33 States and 75 sites. You have heard about the
legal liability of the Federal Government being sued by nuclear
power plants because the Federal Government has not taken
responsibility for this material, and that is an ongoing
liability. That liability is already in excess of $15 billion.
Estimates could easily go up to $50 billion. And it is no
wonder the American people are frustrated with the Federal
Government and this $14 trillion federal debt that we have.
So I want to thank Chairman Shimkus for having this
important hearing to bring attention to the predicament we find
ourselves in, and hopefully we can find a solution, and I would
yield back.
Mr. Barton. I am supposed to yield to Mr. Gardner but I
don't see him.
Mr. Shimkus. If the chairman emeritus would yield to Mr.
Murphy from Pennsylvania?
Mr. Barton. OK. I would yield the remaining time to Dr.
Murphy.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you very much.
We know that the States are suing the Department of Energy
because the mandate with an application approved waste storage
in Yucca Mountain, and the utilities have sued the DOE to halt
further collection of fees, arguing that the country no longer
has a disposal plan after ruling out Yucca Mountain. Simply
put, the Administration is acting in violation of the law.
You have heard about other members about the 65,000 metric
tons of spent fuel and the 75 different sites of storage. While
nuclear provides 20 percent of electricity in this country and
with superb advancements in technology like small modular
reactors and passive systems, it stands poised for renaissance
but only if the Administration gives the taxpayers an
explanation, offers to Congress a workable solution, not saying
this is unworkable, and also acts in accordance with the law to
apply the law, not to selectively enforce the law, and I yield
back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The chair now recognizes the chairman emeritus, Mr. Waxman,
for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am a strong advocate for serious oversight. Throughout my
service on the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform and
this committee, I have led numerous investigations into
governmental agencies, private companies and entire industrial
sectors, and I take the role of congressional investigator very
seriously.
Today this committee is holding its second hearing on the
decision to shut down the Yucca Mountain waste repository
project. Questions have been raised about this decision, and I
support a fair and impartial inquiry. But that does not appear
to be what this committee is doing. Even before the committee
launched its investigation, Chairman Shimkus had apparently
already reached his own conclusions.
In January, the chairman told The Hill that he wanted to
ask questions about whether the decision to ``pull the plug''
on Yucca Mountain was ``all politics.'' He stated that he
thought people already knew the answer to that question, but
``you should go through the process of asking the questions.''
Then, last month, he called the decision to halt the Yucca
Mountain license application and review ``politics at its worst
at its highest levels.'' Full committee Chairman Upton has made
similar comments.
A congressional investigation should be a genuine inquiry,
not a process of asking questions to reach a predetermined
conclusion.
At our first hearing, the chairman tried to prevent members
from asking relevant and important questions, and I believe was
off-base in his criticism of my right to question the NRC
chairman, Gregory Jaczko. The latest affront to fairness is the
effort to prevent Democratic staff from attending committee
interviews of fact witnesses. Ranking Member Green and I wrote
a letter today to Chairmen Upton and Shimkus protesting this
new policy, which I ask to be made part of the hearing record.
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Waxman. Excluding Democratic staff from committee
interviews is inappropriate and it is inconsistent with
committee precedents. The practice denies nearly half the
members of the committee equal access to relevant information
about the investigation. It wastes taxpayer resources by
necessitating duplicative interviews, and it calls into
question the basic fairness and credibility of the committee's
inquiry.
Our job should be to keep an open mind in the investigation
and follow the facts where they lead. If the evidence shows
that the Department of Energy decided to close Yucca Mountain
for invalid reasons, we should not hesitate to be critical. But
we should also not prejudge the facts or use unfair and
partisan procedures in conducting this investigation.
Mr. Chairman, we are still at the early stages of this
investigation. I hope we can resolve these procedural
differences so we can focus on the work of the investigation.
We can do it together, and I think that is the best goal of an
oversight investigation, to work together to see if we can get
the facts and then follow them wherever they may lead.
I hope this hearing and the witnesses we will hear from
today will help get us back on track, and I yield back my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
Before we go to the witnesses, I would ask unanimous
consent for 1 minute to respond to the comment. Is there
objection?
Mr. Waxman. Reserving the right. Would you give me a
potential minute to respond if I feel it is appropriate?
Mr. Shimkus. I would, sir.
Mr. Waxman. OK.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. First of all, the issue raised is
not timely with this hearing but the point we want to raise is
that the majority staff has been in discussion with this issue
in good faith with the minority staff but we also have raised
the issue that you are asking for a double standard. It is my
understanding that the minority has had meetings with other
witnesses during this session of Congress and has not included
the majority or provided notice to the majority. If we are
going to have a rule about this, it has to apply to both sides
equally, and I think if you agree to allow us when you are
questioning your folks, we can reciprocate by having you with
ours, and I think that would be a great way to resolve this
conflict.
It is my understanding that when you all were in control in
the last Congress, Republicans were not included in all the
discussions with potential witnesses and conducted interviews
without notifying members on our side. Having put that on the
table, I would just say if we can come to agreement where when
you are interviewing your witnesses, you invite us, we will
invite you when we are interviewing, and I think that can
resolve the conflict. I yield back my time.
Mr. Waxman. I thank you for yielding to me.
It is important to distinguish between consulting with
agency experts to understand policy issues and bringing in fact
witnesses to obtain information relating to an investigation of
alleged wrongdoing. There is no question that the interviews of
the NRC employees from which the minority were excluded were in
fact fact witnesses regarding our investigation, and I think if
we agree that when we interview anybody who has pertinent
information on the facts of the investigation, that we all
should be included, and I think your suggestion would be
appropriate.
My staff has spoken with the three of the individuals who
were interviewed, and each of them spent several hours in these
interviews, so in fact, as a reality, what we did is spent more
time with the same witnesses we should have been there
together. In the investigation relating to Yucca Mountain
licensing process, the minority has not conducted any fact
witness interviews either with or without the majority. We have
instead been focused on reviewing and understanding the
documents that have been produced to the committee on this
matter. In fact, we identified a fact witness we believe to be
important for the committee to interview, and we will discuss
that with you.
But I think you lay out a compromise that should help us
reach an agreement. If we are going to have witnesses that are
pertinent to the investigation, give us facts that we want to
know about. Just as we share documents, we should interview
those witnesses together.
Mr. Shimkus. If the gentleman would yield his time, I would
just say as he knows real well, I am not the chairman of the
full committee so I am speaking as the chairman of the
subcommittee, but I will have to run this all through Chairman
Upton.
Mr. Waxman. Well, I will certainly have to run it through
my subcommittee ranking member. Mr. Barrow will certainly be
involved in that. He is sitting in the chair of the ranking
member.
My last point is, I thought you said we had identified. The
point was, if we identify, we will share it with you, and we
think we should work together in interviewing them, and I hope
the full committee chairman shares the position that you put
out and that I have suggested affirmative response to.
Mr. Shimkus. Is the gentleman yielding back his time? The
gentleman yields back his time.
Now we will welcome our colleagues. If it is OK with my
colleagues, we will start from the left and go to the right, or
ladies first. It may be not politically correct, but with that,
we would like to recognize the Hon. Shelley Berkley from the
great State of Nevada, and you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Your full statement can be submitted into the record, and so
the time is yours.

STATEMENTS OF HON. SHELLEY BERKLEY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEVADA; HON. DOC HASTINGS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON; AND
HON. MIKE SIMPSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE
OF IDAHO

STATEMENT OF HON. SHELLEY BERKLEY

Ms. Berkley. Thank you very much, Chairman Shimkus, Ranking
Member Barrow and members of the committee. Thank you for
inviting me to testify today.
Let us get right to the point. Nevadans have been saying no
to Yucca Mountain for decades, and we will continue shouting no
at the top of our lungs until this effort to shove nuclear
waste down our throats has ended. I don't know who you met with
but I can tell you the latest polls show that 77 percent of the
people of the State of Nevada don't want nuclear waste stored
at Yucca Mountain. Why? Because we don't want our home turned
into a nuclear garbage dump, and we oppose more wasteful
spending on a $100 billion dinosaur in the Nevada desert that
should have gone extinct years ago.
I know members of this committee will hear today from
others who will say that Nevada's efforts to stop the dump is
all political and has nothing to do with science. Hogwash. The
truth is that Nevada's opposition has always been based on the
danger that Yucca Mountain poses to our State and our Nation,
and Nevada's resolve only hardened in the face of renewed
efforts to force us to accept this fatally flawed dump, given
the true risk it represents.
Make no mistake: the Yucca Mountain project was born of
politics starting with the infamous 1987 screw Nevada bill, and
why was it politics? Because the State of Nevada had a very
small delegation at that time and we were unable to protect the
State from the 49 others. You want to talk about science? There
are no radiation standards that currently exist because there
is no way to create radiation standards to protect the public
from nuclear waste with 300,000-year half shelf life, and there
is a GAO report that shows thousands of e-mails that make a
mockery of so-called scientific studies. I would be glad to
present those to you as well. Originally, they were going to
store nuclear waste at Yucca Mountain. Then they realized there
were groundwater problems so we were going to store it in
containers with a titanium shield to protect it from the
dripping water. Then they realized that wasn't enough because
the titanium shields were going to erode. So then they were
going to build concrete bunkers to contain the titanium shields
that contained the canisters, and then the last Secretary of
Energy in the Bush Administration actually said he was going to
create an army of robots that were going to go down to Yucca
Mountain because man can't go down there to be able to protect
us from the nuclear waste leakage.
This legislation, the screw Nevada bill, did away with any
pretense of science and it eliminated every other site under
consideration as a dump location. At the same time, the nuclear
industry and its allies have worked for years to silence
Nevada's criticism and to minimize the fact that the proposed
dump is located smack in the middle of an active earthquake
zone. This is an area that has been rocked by violent
earthquakes in the recent past and we know the risk it creates.
Proponents of the dump have also sought to dismiss scientific
findings showing that water will enter Yucca Mountain, causing
rapid corrosion of waste canisters and resulting in release of
dangerous radioactive materials, and dump backers have worked
tirelessly to downplay the risk to millions of Americans living
along the transportation routes from decades of waste shipments
barreling down our Nation's roads and railways with each
canister a potential terrorist target or accident waiting to
happen. Whether caused by human error, mechanical failure or a
deliberate strike, a massive release of these deadly materials
threatens to kill or injure Americans, to release radioactive
contamination and to shut down major portions of our interstate
highway system and rail system.
When it comes to plans for Yucca Mountain, the fact remains
that you could never eliminate the risks that will accompany
shipping nuclear waste across more than 40 States through
communities utterly unprepared to deal with radioactive
contamination. We are talking about shipments passing homes,
hospitals, schools every single day for four decades, and even
more incredible, at the end of those 40 years, there will even
be more waste in the cooling ponds than there were when the
shipments began, and that is because as long as a plant is
operating, some amount of nuclear waste will always remain at
the nuclear facility, and that is why the threat posed by Yucca
Mountain must be weighed against the availability of dry cask
storage as an affordable solution to this problem and it is
available today. Using this method, we can secure waste at
existing sites in hardened containers where they can remain for
the next 100 years until we figure out what to do with this
garbage.
The nuclear industry is already utilizing dry cask storage
at various locations around the United States. There is no
reason we should not require plants to begin moving waste right
now from cooling pools into hardened containers. This would
also give our Nation time to find a true solution to addressing
the nuclear waste issue that does not involve dumping $100
billion down a hole in the middle of the Nevada desert,
particularly at a time that we can ill afford it. Surely, we
can do better than a dump plan that is incredibly dangerous,
decades behind schedule and whose budget has ballooned with
every passing year to a staggering sum, even by Washington
standards. At the end of the day, the cost to build and operate
Yucca Mountain will exceed the amount it would cost to settle
lawsuits by plant operators seeking payment for the cost of
moving waste into dry casks.
It is also extremely important to remember that moving
ahead on Yucca Mountain won't mean savings for families in
nuclear States. Instead, they will continue paying the Yucca
Mountain tax that is slapped on power bills each and every
month. At a time when our Nation is debating spending cuts, I
am truly amazed that those that favor Yucca Mountain continue
to demand that we open the floodgates and let tens of billions
of dollars in additional spending come pouring out.
The good news is that we do not have to go down this
fiscally irresponsible path. Earlier this year, Congress passed
a package that fully eliminates funding for the Yucca Mountain
project. The time has come to let this boondoggle die and to
permanently end efforts to breathe life back into a program
that is too dangerous and too costly for our Nation.
In conclusion, Nevada remains, in case you don't already
know, opposed to more wasteful spending on a failed $100
billion project that threatens lives, the environment and the
economy of my community and others across the Nation. I will
lay my body down on those railroad tracks to prevent any train
that has nuclear waste in it from going to Yucca Mountain. I
make that pledge to you and the people I represent. Nuclear
waste can remain on existing sites in dry cask storage for the
next century, giving us time to find an actual solution to
replace the failed Yucca Mountain project, and if anybody
watched what was happening in Japan and still has the audacity
to suggest this for the people of our country, shame on us all,
and Germany just announced that they were ending their nuclear
program because they have no way to safely store nuclear waste.
If Germany can figure that out, by gosh, the United States of
America should be able to figure that out too.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Shimkus. It is a good thing I have a great relationship
with the trucking industry. Thank you. Obviously, all Members
will have as much time as they need for their statements. We do
appreciate your time, and we do appreciate your passion, and we
have been opponents on this issue for many, many years.
Ms. Berkley. Yes, I am hoping to bring you on to the right
side of this issue.
Mr. Shimkus. I think I am.
Now I would like to recognize the chairman of the Interior
Committee, Doc Hastings, for as much time as he may consume,
around 5 minutes, and welcome back to Washington and welcome to
the committee.

STATEMENT OF HON. DOC HASTINGS

Mr. Hastings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you for inviting me to go second.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, for
the opportunity to testify regarding the importance of Yucca
Mountain project to my district and to the Nation as a whole,
and my concerns regarding the Department of Energy's action to
illegally dismantle this program.
First and foremost, there should be no disputing that Yucca
Mountain is a national repository for high-level defense waste
and commercial spent nuclear fuel. Congress has voted to
reaffirm this decision several times. Billions of dollars and
many years have been spent studying what to do with nuclear
waste, and Yucca Mountain was determined to be the answer. It
is the law, period. Now, some may disagree with the law but it
is the law.
For more than 16 months, the Obama Administration acting
through the Department of Energy has acted outside the scope of
the law in order to pursue a purely politically driven mission
to shut down the Yucca Mountain project. Time and time again
DOE has been asked to provide technical scientific evidence to
justify their reasons to withdraw the license application for
Yucca Mountain. They have been unable to provide any reason,
only stating that Yucca Mountain is no longer ``workable.''
What is truly not workable is the uncertainty that faces
our commercial nuclear power industry as they look to a future
that may require them to house spent nuclear fuel on a site for
decades because there is no geological repository ready to
accept it. The same is true for the communities across the
Nation that are hard at work cleaning up the high-level defense
waste that is the legacy of our country's nuclear weapons
production program. Commercial spent fuel and high-level
defense waste are to be stored alongside each other at Yucca
Mountain, and it made sense to talk about them together.
The State of Washington, the State of South Carolina and
leaders in my hometown community have failed a lawsuit
challenging Department of Energy's ability to withdraw the
Yucca Mountain license application yet the Administration
continues to rush to terminate the project before the courts
rule or before the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's vote is
released on this matter. In addition, the GAO recently released
a report that determined that the decision to dismantle the
Yucca Mountain project was political and not based on sound
science.
My district in central Washington is home to the Hanford
nuclear site, part of the top-secret Manhattan Project that
developed and constructed the first atomic bomb. The work done
at Hanford helped win World War II and later provided the
nuclear deterrence that helped defeat communism and end the
Cold War. Today, Hanford is the world's largest environmental
cleanup project, and the high-level defense nuclear waste at
Hanford is slated to be shipped to the national repository at
Yucca Mountain. Right now, the Department of Energy is building
a critical $12 billion plant that will treat 53 million gallons
of high-level defense waste currently stored in underground
tanks at Hanford and turn it into safe, stable, glass logs that
are scheduled to be stored at Yucca Mountain. The waste
treatment plant, which is a $12 billion plant, which is over
halfway done, is being built to meet specifications designed to
match the geological structure and makeup of Yucca Mountain.
The Department of Energy is requesting increased funds to
reduce the risk and complete the waste treatment plants sooner
than the expected 2016 time frame. Changing the goal posts at
halftime will unnecessarily add risk to the project and has the
potential to waste limited cleanup dollars that are already
difficult to secure.
The waste treatment plant must move forward, but that
requires more than proper funding. It requires Yucca Mountain.
And I have an article I would like to submit for the record
detailing this, if I may, Mr. Chairman, an article on this
issue.
Mr. Shimkus. Is there objection? Hearing none, so ordered.
Mr. Hastings. Thank you. I will submit that.
Delaying or abandoning Yucca Mountain means that Hanford
will be home to high-level defense waste even longer, the
Federal Government's legal commitment to our State won't be
kept, and cleanup progress at Hanford will be jeopardized. With
more defense waste slated to go to Yucca Mountain than any
other State in the union, the stakes for my State of Washington
cannot be higher and the risks could not be more real.
In addition, Richland, which is just south of the Hanford
project, is the home to the Pacific Northwest's only commercial
nuclear power plant, the Columbia generating station. The spent
nuclear fuel from this plant is also slated to go to Yucca
Mountain but without Yucca opening, the spent fuel will have to
be kept on site for an unknown amount of time at great expense
to the taxpayers and ratepayers. In my district, we understand
that nuclear power is safe and that it provides good-paying
jobs but all of this being jeopardized by the Administration's
decision to shut down Yucca Mountain. At a time of record debt,
massive bailouts and trillion-dollar deficits, our country
cannot afford to waste billions of dollars going back to the
drawing board on a national repository. It is time for the
Administration to follow the letter of the law, as I pointed
out in my opening remarks, and to bring the Yucca Mountain
project online and accept the shipments of the spent nuclear
fuel and high-level defense waste.
I would like to again thank you very much for the
opportunity to be here, and with that, I yield back my time.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much, Doc, for joining us.
Now, I would like to recognize appropriator cardinal, Mr.
Simpson, from the great State of Idaho.

STATEMENT OF MIKE SIMPSON

Mr. Simpson. Before I start, let me just say for the record
that I haven't been questioned by either the majority or the
minority staff.
Mr. Shimkus. And I am not sure you would want to be.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I
thank you for the opportunity to testify before your committee
on the Department of Energy's Yucca Mountain decision.
I have been now in Congress for 12\1/2\ years. For 8\1/2\
years, I have served on the Appropriations Committee and the
Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development, which funds the
DOE including the DOE's nuclear energy division. In my short
time in Congress, there have been three Administrations, four
or five Secretaries of Energy and numerous nuclear energy
administrators and under secretaries. Each Administration has
its own priorities concerning the direction the department
takes with respect to addressing the energy needs of our
country, particularly nuclear energy. I lived through the IFR
bubble, the GNEP bubble, the NGNP bubble and the current SMR
bubble. The most frustrating dilemma I faced is this: After
spending billions of dollars going into ever-changing
directions, how do you sustain a program with a 20- to 30-year
lifetime frame in an environment of ever-changing policies?
What can we show the taxpayers for our investments? To make it
clear, it is not a problem that I blame on the DOE. New
Administrations and Secretaries are elected and appointed to
enact their vision of the future but it is a reality that the
short-term nature of our political cycles does not lend itself
to solving long-term problems.
One of the ways we address this dilemma is by enacting
statutes passed by Congress and signed by the President. These
statutes become the law of the land, binding on future
Congresses and Administrations. No Administration or Congress
can unilaterally decide the law doesn't apply to them. If the
Administration or Congress decides it doesn't like the current
law, there are ways to change it: enact a new law. Absent that,
the current law binds us all.
One of the most glaring decisions by the Administration to
ignore this fundamental principal of law is the attempt by the
Administration to unilaterally withdraw the license application
for Yucca Mountain currently before the NRC and to mothball
Yucca Mountain. Let me be perfectly clear here. We all know why
this decision was made. It wasn't about science or the
suitability of Yucca Mountain or even the need for a geological
repository for high-level nuclear waste. It was a promise made
during the heat of a presidential campaign. It was pure
politics.
We could spend days debating the suitability of Yucca
Mountain as a geological waste repository or the over 50
scientific studies that have been done on Yucca Mountain. We
know more about this patch of earth than probably any other
patch of earth in the world. We could talk about the $15
billion already spent on Yucca Mountain, the $9.5 billion
collected from the utility consumers for the nuclear waste fund
and whether that should be paid back to the consumers as well
as the $956 million paid out as the result of the 74 lawsuits
resulting from the government's failure to receive spent fuel
or the GAO investigation which concluded ``DOE's decision to
terminate the Yucca Mountain repository program was made for
policy reasons, not technical or safety reasons'' or the fact
that this interpretation is supported by volume 3 of the NRC's
safety evaluation report.
But all of this really isn't the point. The point is, the
President is obligated to follow the law of the land as enacted
by Congress and signed by a previous President. The Nuclear
Waste Policy Act was amended in 1987 to designate Yucca
Mountain as the repository for high-level nuclear waste for
whatever reason. I was not a Member of Congress at the time but
that law passed and Yucca Mountain became the law of the land.
Following a veto by the Governor of Nevada, the House voted to
override the Governor's veto by a 306-117 vote, and the Senate
followed suit by a 60-36 vote. Yucca Mountain is still the law
of the land.
Congress has reaffirmed its position. In fact, I have with
me here, and I want to ask to put them in the record because
they are available, 34 recorded votes in recent years assembled
by the CRS in which Congress has reaffirmed its support for
Yucca Mountain.
I can't fault Secretary Chu or Secretary Lyons for pursuing
this policy decision. After all, they work for the President
and he made this misguided decision to ignore the law. Based on
these simple facts, the NRC licensing board reviewed the
Administration's request to withdraw the Yucca Mountain
licensing application and denied that request nearly one year
ago, June 29, 2010. The commission reviewed and voted on the
licensing board decision but has yet to release its ruling
nearly a year later. The NRC is supposed to serve as an
independent watchdog which is driven by science, not politics.
Unfortunately, the chairman of the NRC has lost sight of its
mission in order to effect a political outcome that has eroded
the reputation of the NRC at a time when the public confidence
is needed most, and he should be replaced.
Again, I repeat, the issue of siting the Nation's nuclear
waste repository at Yucca Mountain is a matter of law, not
politics. It serves as the clearest example of an ever-changing
policy which is costing the taxpayers billions of dollars and
diminishing our ability to advance a long-term energy policy
for our country, and I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for inviting us
here today.
Mr. Shimkus. I want to thank my colleague, Mr. Simpson, and
my colleagues for joining us.
It is the tradition of this committee not to follow up with
questions but to move. We have two more panels that we have to
meet with and so we want to thank you for your time, and we
will see you on the floor for votes.
Without objection, the vote totals that Mr. Simpson had
mentioned will be entered into the record. Having no objection,
so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the
hearing.]*************** COMMITTEE INSERT ***************
Mr. Shimkus. I would like to place the first panel, Mr.
Gaffigan, Mr. Friedman and Mr. Lyons. We want to thank you for
joining us. As per the previous panel, we will start from my
left, your right, and each of you will be recognized for 5
minutes. Your full statement can be submitted for the record.
To begin with, I would like to ask Mr. Mark Gaffigan, Managing
Director of Natural Resources and Environment for the U.S.
Government Accountability Office. Thank you for your
attendance, and you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF DR. MARK E. GAFFIGAN, MANAGING DIRECTOR, NATURAL
RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY
OFFICE (GAO); GREGORY H. FRIEDMAN, INSPECTOR GENERAL,
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY; AND DR. PETER B. LYONS, ASSISTANT
SECRETARY FOR NUCLEAR ENERGY, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

STATEMENT OF MARK E. GAFFIGAN

Mr. Gaffigan. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I
am pleased to be here.
First of all, I want to summarize my remarks in three
areas, basically the current status of Yucca Mountain and the
Nation's nuclear waste policy, the nuclear waste policy
alternatives that have been discussed, and lastly, sort of
lessons learned from past experience that may help inform our
future as we go forward.
First, the Nation's policy for nuclear waste disposal is in
dispute, creating great uncertainty about its future direction.
In 1957, the National Academies of Science first endorsed
nuclear waste disposal in a geological repository as the means
for permanently disposing of nuclear waste. However, achieving
a permanent policy leading to an acceptable repository has
proven to be both costly and difficult. Under the Nuclear Waste
Policy Act from the 1980s, the Federal Government made a
commitment to take the Nation's nuclear waste and DOE has been
investigating Yucca Mountain a permanent repository,
culminating in a license application to the NRC in 2008.
However, after decades of work and expenditures of about
$15 billion in today's dollars, DOE is now seeking to withdraw
its application. DOE has not cited any technical or safety
issues but has stated that Yucca Mountain is not a workable
option, in large part because of the lack of public acceptance
by the people of Nevada. This decision is being challenged both
in the courts and by a board ruling that the Nuclear Waste
Policy Act requires DOE to continue with the application. While
these matters remain unresolved, DOE has proceeded to terminate
Yucca Mountain in a definitive manner that will make it more
difficult to reprise should they be compelled to do so.
In lieu of pursuing Yucca Mountain, DOE established a Blue
Ribbon Commission to consider alternative waste disposal
strategies. Based on past work, we have identified three
categories of alternatives. The first alternative is keeping
the waste on site at about 80 different sites, both commercial
and defense sites in the United States. This is the path of
least resistance option since it is our current de facto policy
for disposal. However, it does not address the commitment of
the U.S. government to take possession of the waste. As has
been pointed out, taxpayers have already paid nearly $1 billion
in legal judgments because of the government's inability to
meet its obligation. Estimates are that another $15 billion
will be paid out by 2020 with the bill estimated to be another
$500 million per year after that, again, coming from the
taxpayers through the Department of Justice's judgment fund.
Also, with continued onsite storage, DOE may not be able to
meet commitments to States to remove defense-related waste.
This could have negative impacts such as jeopardizing Navy
shipments of spent fuel and the refueling of Navy warships.
A second general alternative is centralized interim
storage. While this may offer some relief from onsite storage,
such a facility faces the same siting challenges, and DOE
states it does not have the authority to implement such a
facility.
Finally, the third option remains a geological repository,
the goal of the Yucca Mountain project. Despite the promise of
future technology that may reduce the demands on a geological
repository, the best thinking of experts today is that no
matter what, there will be some amount of waste in need of
permanent disposal and that a geological repository is the only
feasible option for permanently disposing of nuclear waste.
Lastly, I would like to address lessons learned that might
be instructive for future nuclear waste policy. DOE's recent
policy decision to terminate Yucca Mountain due to a lack of
public acceptance has been criticized because it was not based
on any technical or safety reasons. However, if we are to learn
anything from the Nation's struggle to implement nuclear waste
policy, it is the lesson that public acceptance is just as
important a consideration as any technical or safety issues.
Transparency, economic incentives and education are important
tools in achieving public acceptance of any future nuclear
waste policy.
A second broad lesson is that consistent policy, funding,
and leadership will be crucial in successful nuclear waste
management. Many stakeholders have suggested that an
independent organization not subject to political changes with
a predictable funding stream may be best suited to carry out
this policy.
In closing, let me emphasize that any nuclear waste policy
option whether it be continued onsite storage, centralized
interim storage or a move to a permanent repository will offer
benefits but face serious costs and challenges. With the
current uncertainty in the Nation's nuclear waste policy
direction and potential competing directions of that policy,
those costs and challenges only increase with little additional
benefit.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That concludes my opening
statement. I have submitted a formal statement for the record,
and I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gaffigan follows:]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
Now, I would like to turn to Mr. Gregory Friedman,
Inspector General at the Department of Energy. Welcome, sir.

STATEMENT OF GREGORY H. FRIEDMAN

Mr. Friedman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Rather than repeat many of the statistical points and data
that has been provided already, let me abbreviate my already
abbreviated statement, which contains a synopsis of the work
that we have done in Yucca Mountain over time and it is more
expanded in my full statement, which I hope will be submitted
for the record.
Getting down to the nub of the matter, our work to date has
highlighted a number of issues that require the continued
attention of department management. For example, as has been
mentioned, delays in the opening of Yucca Mountain have, as
demonstrated by a number of financial and performance reviews,
increased the ultimate cost of disposal of waste intended for
Yucca Mountain. Closure of the project could significantly
impact the department's future environmental remediation
liability currently estimated to be $250 billion. We will
further evaluate the impact of the closure as part of the
ongoing financial work that we do at the Department of Energy.
Further, unless the repository or other alternative strategy
becomes available in the near term, the department may miss a
number of deadlines which are part of tri-party settlement
agreements. As a result, the department may be subject to
significant assessments due to missed deadlines. As of
September 30, 2010, more than $800 million has been expended
from the Treasury's judgment fund for payments to commercial
nuclear waste producers for delayed acceptance of nuclear
waste. In addition, the department has estimated its contingent
liability for spent nuclear fuel litigation to be approximately
$15.4 billion.
In summary, in our judgment, the need to develop a viable,
effective and acceptable path forward for nuclear waste
disposal becomes more pressing day by day. The United States
has announced plans to dismantle a significant part of its
nuclear waste stockpile with the unavoidable reality of
increasing the volume of defense nuclear waste. Further,
commercial nuclear waste, which was to represent 90 percent of
the high-level waste stored at Yucca Mountain, continues to be
generated at nuclear power facilities across the Nation.
To paraphrase one draft recommendation from the Blue Ribbon
Commission on America's Nuclear Future, which was established
by the Secretary of Energy at the request of the President in
January 2010, the United States should proceed expeditiously to
develop an integrated, comprehensive plan for managing the back
end of the nuclear fuel cycle.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. I would be
pleased to answer any questions that you or the subcommittee
may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Friedman follows:]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Friedman.
Last but not least on the first panel is Dr. Peter Lyons,
Assistant Secretary for Nuclear Energy at the Department of
Energy. Sir, welcome, and you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PETER B. LYONS

Mr. Lyons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member and
members of the committee. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you today.
By way of introduction, I grew up in Nevada. I worked at
the Los Alamos National Laboratory with frequent assignments at
the Nevada Test Site. When I led the lab's energy and
environmental programs, all work on Yucca Mountain and
reprocessing of fuel reported to me. More recently, I visited
the Tunnel Complex many times while working for Senator Pete
Domenici and as an NRC commissioner. I have devoted 42 years of
public service to the Nation's needs for and uses of nuclear
technology. I am convinced that nuclear energy must remain a
part of our Nation's clean energy portfolio, an acceptable
solution to the Nation's management of used nuclear fuel and
high-level defense waste as a prerequisite for nuclear power to
play this role.
Secretary Chu has emphasized that a successful management
significant for used fuel must be founded on strong technical
criteria and public acceptance. The GAO made the similar
conversation that overcoming social and political opposition is
crucial. For example, there are successful repository programs
in Switzerland, Finland, Sweden and France where public
involvement and consultation are heavily emphasized. Our own
experience with the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant, or WIPP,
illustrates our success with achieving social and political
acceptance for a permanent repository and stands in stark
contrast to the Yucca Mountain project. As the Secretary has
stated, it is time to move beyond the 25-year-old stalemate
over Yucca Mountain. I agree, and I accepted this position with
full support for the Administration's position.
Let me turn to two interrelated statements made in the GAO
report with which the department has very serious concerns.
First, the GAO presumes that the Yucca Mountain repository
would have opened on a date certain, and second, GAO presumes
that an alternative would take longer than the Yucca Mountain
repository to implement. The GAO report uses 2020 for
operations as a firm date and expresses concern that the
department did not provide GAO with a more precise date. Yet
the department has consistently stated that the 2020 date was
subject to a number of contingencies over which the department
has no control. Thus, there was always considerable uncertainty
about when or whether the Yucca Mountain repository would open.
Among other things, that opening would require new legislation
for land withdrawal, a second NRC license, presuming the first
one were issued, and a new 300-mile railroad, and many related
actions hinging on availability of State-issued permits. All of
these would have faced persistent opposition from the State in
Nevada.
In shutting down the Yucca Mountain project, DOE is
committed to building better, more workable alternatives. In
fact, as the GAO report notes, if a more widely accepted
alternative is identified, it carries the potential for
avoiding costly delays experienced by the Yucca Mountain
repository program. That is a point that Secretary Chu has
emphasized. Thus, the department disagrees with the GAO
statement that the proposed termination of Yucca Mountain,
which had been planned to be opened in 2020, will likely
prolong storage at reactor sites, which would increase onsite
storage costs. There is simply no basis to assume that the
termination of Yucca Mountain will prolong this process. There
may be other alternatives that can be put in place sooner than
Yucca Mountain might have opened.
I would also like to highlight another statement in the
report to which the department takes exception, namely that a
final impact of terminating Yucca Mountain is that communities
may be even less willing to host nuclear fuel repositories or
other storage sites in the future due to further erosion of
DOE's credibility. Quite to the contrary, a new start with
Secretary Chu's emphasis on public acceptance I believe can
lead to enhanced credibility of the department, and as further
proof, the department's leadership of the WIPP program enjoys
very strong support from the local community.
In conclusion, the department is acting responsibly in
terminating the Yucca Mountain project. We can and we should do
better than the Yucca Mountain project. Working together, the
Administration and the Congress can seize an opportunity to
craft a new option with a higher certainty of success. I
personally look forward to the chance to put a successful used
nuclear fuel management program into practice that will serve
future generations and above all enable them to enjoy the
benefits of clean, safe nuclear power.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lyons follows:]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Dr. Lyons, and I would encourage
the first panel to stick around for the second panel because
you will have some local folks from the State of Nevada who
probably already have some acceptance of this position.
I would like to begin my first round of questioning and
recognize myself for 5 minutes, and I will start with Mr.
Gaffigan. How much has been expended on Yucca Mountain
development? How much money have we spent?
Mr. Gaffigan. About $15 billion in today's dollars.
Mr. Shimkus. And where did that money come from?
Mr. Gaffigan. About $10 billion from the nuclear waste fund
and another $5 billion from appropriations.
Mr. Shimkus. And how does the nuclear waste fund get its
money?
Mr. Gaffigan. It is a tax on the ratepayers, pay a one-
tenth of a cent.
Mr. Shimkus. Which ratepayers? Just those that----
Mr. Gaffigan. Those who benefit from nuclear power.
Mr. Shimkus. Of the money from ratepayers, are those fees
still being collected?
Mr. Gaffigan. Absolutely.
Mr. Shimkus. Of the taxpayer funds, what happens to
taxpayer spending if Yucca Mountain is terminated?
Mr. Gaffigan. The taxpayer spending continues. Current
estimates are $15 billion through 2020.
Mr. Shimkus. And what happens to this liability for each
year a repository is not accepting waste past 2020?
Mr. Gaffigan. Current estimates are $500 million per year.
Those are DOE's estimates.
Mr. Shimkus. And what other costs might the taxpayer face
if this nuclear waste issue is delayed?
Mr. Gaffigan. There will be costs associated with the
judgments. There are about 72 lawsuits currently brought and
about 6 have settled, so there will be Department of Justice
costs involved with it. There will be costs associated with the
waste on the defense side in terms of perhaps more storage
needed at these various defense facilities because Yucca
Mountain is not available or some other repository.
Mr. Shimkus. Great. Thank you.
Dr. Lyons, the Nuclear Waste Policy Act is the law that
governs nuclear waste and spent fuel disposal policy, is it
not?
Mr. Lyons. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. And the law says that the Department of Energy
must study, characterize for suitability, and develop a
repository at Yucca Mountain, correct?
Mr. Lyons. That is correct.
Mr. Shimkus. That is what the law says. The law says
further that DOE shall file an application for a license to
construct the repository, correct?
Mr. Lyons. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. The law also established the Office of
Civilian Radioactive Waste Management and a director for that
office, correct?
Mr. Lyons. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. The law actually makes clear DOE's--and I want
to note for the record for the transcript, all these questions
have been responded to affirmatively by Dr. Lyons.
The law actually makes clear DOE's duties and obligations
in the development of Yucca Mountain, and those obligations
presently are to support the application pending before the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, correct? I am talking about the
law.
Mr. Lyons. As you know, sir----
Mr. Shimkus. I am talking about the law so be very, very
careful how you answer this. What does the law say?
Mr. Lyons. That is what the laws, and----
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much. Now I will go to the next
question. What provision of the Nuclear Waste Policy Act, what
provision of the law is the Secretary relying on to withdraw
the application?
Mr. Lyons. I am not a lawyer, sir. Our general counsel has
reviewed that and believes that the Secretary has the authority
to withdraw the application.
Mr. Shimkus. I think you might need to get with your
general counsel, and you better be very careful in answering
these questions.
And I am out of time--I am not out of time but I have
finished my questions. I will now turn to the ranking member,
Mr. Green.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I apologize for
being late. I know we finished opening statements and I would
like to ask unanimous consent to place an opening statement
into the record.
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection, so ordered.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Green follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Gene Green

Thank you Mr. Chairman for holding this hearing and I want
to thank the witnesses for appearing before the committee to
discuss the issue of Yucca Mountain.
As you may know, I recently toured Yucca Mountain when I
went on a CODEL organized by Chairman Shimkus. I appreciated
the opportunity to view the facility up close and to meet with
some of the local individuals, including folks from Nye County,
to hear their thoughts on Yucca Mountain.
There has been a lot of discussion in this committee on the
decision by the Administration not to proceed with Yucca
Mountain. As I've stated several times before, The US alone
produced 806 billion kilowatt hours of nuclear power in 2008,
making us the biggest producer of nuclear power in the world.
The President has said he supports investments in
alternative forms of energy and Secretary Chu has testified
before this committee that we will be unable to meet the
President's goals if we do not continue to invest in nuclear
energy. This of course means we will have an increase of
nuclear waste and we will need to safety store it.
As we look toward and focus on investing more in nuclear
energy we will still have radioactive waste. Even if we have
better short term storage than we have now, we will still need
somewhere to put that waste 25, 50, or 100 years from now.
Let me be clear, no matter what decision we make on Yucca
Mountain, we still have a nuclear waste disposal issue. So, the
25 year old dilemma remains and we will need to resolve this
situation sooner rather than later.
I want to thank the witnesses and with that I yield back my
time. Thank you Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Green. I would also like to ask unanimous consent to
place into the record a letter from the Blue Ribbon Commission
on America's Nuclear Future, and also from the chair of the
Board of County Commissioners of Clark County, Nevada.
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Green. I thank our panel for being here. I think most
of you know that a number of us did a congressional trip to
Yucca Mountain last month, and I appreciate the opportunity to
view up close what are the decisions or what has been going on
since the 1980s, and I appreciate the opportunity the folks
from the local county to express their concern or their
interest in reopening Yucca Mountain from the decision. While
on the trip, I heard various reports on the actual cost of
building Yucca Mountain, and I know from the testimony of Mr.
Gaffigan, it was $14 billion?
Mr. Gaffigan. We put it all in today's dollars, about $15.4
billion.
Mr. Green. OK. Is there any of that that could be recouped
if we decided to, you know, forget about it and look for
another long-term facility?
Mr. Gaffigan. That money is spent.
Mr. Green. Any opinion from any other witnesses on the
panel?
Mr. Friedman. Well, Mr. Green, we pointed out in our
Lessons Learned report that the retention of the intellectual
property derived as a result of the expenditures associated
with Yucca Mountain is an extremely important focus of the
department, should be an important focus of the department, so
hopefully if the decision is sustained to terminate the site,
there will be a tremendous body of knowledge that will be
useful going forward. That is certainly our anticipation and
our hope.
Mr. Lyons. I would agree with Mr. Friedman.
Mr. Green. Do each of you agree that we should have some
long-term storage facility?
Mr. Gaffigan. I would say that the National Academies of
Science back to 1957 has said we are going to need some form of
permanent repository, no matter--and that is the current
thinking today, even if we go to some new technologies, there
will be some waste and we will need to dispose of it in a
permanent solution.
Mr. Friedman. I would agree with Mr. Gaffigan's comments,
Mr. Green.
Mr. Lyons. I would also agree, and the Blue Ribbon
Commission recently in their draft recommendations so stated as
well.
Mr. Green. Well, I guess I have some concern because I know
the only other alternative is along the Texas border and New
Mexico, and we could just be opening another can of worms if we
started out there. Obviously in Nevada, nobody runs for office
out there saying they support Yucca Mountain. I don't know if
anybody would run for office in New Mexico if they would say
they want to support a high-level nuclear storage facility in
New Mexico. That is one of my concerns about it, that we need
one, and we spent $15.4 billion and now in the last year and a
half the decision has been made to literally put a fence across
it and shut it down.
How long would it take us if we started anew right now? Did
Yucca Mountain actually start in 1982, the discussion of it, or
the decision on the site or the pathway to get to the decision?
Mr. Gaffigan. I think early on it was one of nine sites
that was considered, and eventually that was winnowed down to
about three sites by 1987 and then the 1987 amendment directed
that only Yucca Mountain be considered, so it is fair to say at
least----
Mr. Green. When did the decisionmaking start?
Mr. Gaffigan. It is fair to say we have been at this since
the mid-1980s. I don't know if Dr. Lyons would like to
elaborate.
Mr. Lyons. No, I would agree that there is some
characterization work that probably started even before 1982.
Mr. Green. So we are talking about 25 years to where we are
now, and do you think if we decided to do something that it
would take another 25 years to get there?
Mr. Lyons. I think it is important to note, sir, that as
the Blue Ribbon Commission works through this process and
evaluates successful models from both within the country, WIPP,
and in the international community that there may well be
approaches to the management as well as the selection that will
be suggested by the BRC that can lead to a much more
expeditious movement on this.
Mr. Shimkus. Would the gentleman yield on that real quick?
Mr. Green. I would be glad to yield.
Mr. Shimkus. Dr. Lyons, is it true that the Blue Ribbon
Commission was given a mandate not to consider Yucca Mountain?
Mr. Lyons. The Blue Ribbon Commission is not a siting
commission. They are not considering any----
Mr. Shimkus. But they were given a mandate not to even
consider Yucca Mountain?
Mr. Lyons. They are simply not a siting commission, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. So that is a yes?
Mr. Lyons. They are not a siting commission. That is the
statement I would make, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. So nothing, interim storage, nothing would be
considered with Yucca Mountain? If they are doing centralized
regional storage sites, Yucca Mountain could not be considered?
Mr. Lyons. I didn't say that. I simply said they are not a
siting commission. They are not evaluating sites.
Mr. Shimkus. It is my understanding that the Blue Ribbon
Commission was given explicit directions not to consider Yucca
Mountain. Would you dispute that?
Mr. Lyons. It is my understanding that they are simply not
a siting commission. They are not considering sites.
Mr. Shimkus. I yield back.
Mr. Green. Well, and my concern is, and it is more of a
statement than a question, is that we have all over the country
sites, two of them in Texas, where we are actually storing them
on-site, and we would hope that we would have some long-term
permanent storage. I support recycling so we don't have to put
as much there, but that is not available in our country, but
that is my concern is that by starting over a year and a half
ago, then, you know, it could be 25 years, maybe longer, but
even that, we are looking at 10 years away, and a lot of our
temporary storage sites were not designed to be the long-term
that they are now.
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Lyons. If I may, Mr. Green, the Blue Ribbon Commission
may recommend, since I certainly can't speak for what their
final recommendations will be, may recommend other paths such
as interim storage that could lead us to at least useful
options far sooner than a repository could be in operation.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time is expired.
The chair recognizes the vice chairman of the committee,
Mr. Murphy from Pennsylvania.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Are the current sites at nuclear power plants and other
facilities above and below ground in concrete containers, etc.,
suitable for safety?
Mr. Lyons. Yes, Mr. Murphy. That is reviewed on a regular
basis by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
Mr. Murphy. And they are adequate for how long?
Mr. Lyons. Excuse me?
Mr. Murphy. They are adequate for how long? I believe I
read some studies where some are good for 30 years or so.
Mr. Lyons. The decision recently reached by the NRC----
Mr. Murphy. Just give me a number.
Mr. Lyons [continuing]. Was 30 years after the cessation of
operations at the site. We have research programs----
Mr. Murphy. I just have to keep going. It has taken us 30
years to get this far. Does DOE maintain a record of the
balance of the nuclear waste fund?
Mr. Lyons. I am sure they do, sir, but I----
Mr. Murphy. Or how it is broken down by source or anything?
Mr. Lyons. I don't have those numbers but I would assume it
is available.
Mr. Murphy. Can you get us that information?
Mr. Lyons. We will provide that for the record.
Mr. Murphy. I would also like to know if DOE is continuing
to maintain that record, if it is available to the public, at
least to the State PUCs and make sure it is updated, and I
would like to know if we can have that information. That would
be helpful.
Mr. Lyons. Well, the number is around $25 billion. I am not
positive of the exact number.
Mr. Murphy. We would to know how the fund is broken down.
Mr. Friedman. That is correct. And it can be provided
broken down.
Mr. Murphy. Given that it has taken about 30 years to get
this far, what makes you think you can suddenly complete this
by 2020?
Mr. Lyons. I didn't say we could do it by 2020. I said we
may be able to do it sooner than Yucca Mountain----
Mr. Murphy. There is absolutely no basis to assume the
termination of Yucca Mountain will prolong the process, you
said.
Mr. Lyons. I said that there is as g question in my mind
whether Yucca Mountain will open. As to how soon one could do
an interim storage site probably could be----
Mr. Murphy. I am trying to go by the law here, sir, and I
hope you are too, but the law that Congress signed by the
President as we have gone through my Administrations here says
that this is the site that was selected. So I have to ask, is
there something unsuitable scientifically about the Yucca
Mountain site?
Mr. Lyons. The license application submitted by the
Department of Energy----
Mr. Murphy. Is it unsuitable? Yes or no. Unsuitable, yes or
no? Scientifically based, is it unsuitable, yes or no?
Mr. Lyons. The license application was based on the
technical criteria.
Mr. Murphy. Is it unsuitable? Yes or no.
Mr. Lyons. In the DOE's judgment on their application, it
met----
Mr. Murphy. You stated that GAO noted that overcoming
social and political opposition was crucial, and so in the
midst of the social and political opposition, I am assuming. I
am trying to find out if it is scientifically credible or not.
Did DOE mess this all up over the 30 years? Do we not trust
anything you do and basically say that all the work that DOE
has done in the last 30 years on deciding that Yucca Mountain
is suitable or not, is that scientific garbage or is it
scientifically credible, yes or no?
Mr. Lyons. As I indicated, sir, the license application----
Mr. Murphy. I am trying to find out----
Mr. Lyons [continuing]. Was based on the technical
criteria.
Mr. Murphy. So what does that mean? Is it suitable or not?
Is it scientifically suitable or not? This is really not hard
to do, sir. It is a yes or no. There are only two words you get
to say, yes or no.
Mr. Lyons. In the judgment of DOE, yes. They don't have the
final answer.
Mr. Murphy. That is important. So given that this is
suitable, I have to find out this thing. Now, you mentioned
some legal counsel in relation to Mr. Shimkus's question. I
would like you to provide to this committee all communications
regarding the judgment from legal counsel at the Department of
Energy saying that they don't have to comply with the law,
oral, written, e-mail, anything. It is important that we have
an opportunity. Will you provide that for us?
Mr. Lyons. The department has provided about 40,000 pages
already. We will try to provide what you mean.
Mr. Murphy. It is important that we have this really parsed
out so we understand when someone receives legal advice not to
comply with the law, I would really like to have that there,
not just say here is 40,000 pages. I hope you can do that.
Back to the question here with regard to--now that DOE has
ruled that the site was suitable back in 2002 and you just
confirmed it, a reversal is going to require new physical
evidence that the criteria suitability are not met and then DOE
would have to follow several explicit steps laid out in the
statute, in the law instead of just walking away. Do you have
that physical evidence that this site is no longer suitable?
Mr. Lyons. Again, sir, as was pointed out in my testimony
and by other speakers already, Secretary Chu has made the
statement that a workable solution----
Mr. Murphy. Just the facts.
Mr. Lyons [continuing]. And public acceptance.
Mr. Murphy. I am asking the facts. What we don't get to do
is to say we get to selectively enforce laws based upon that
the polls change or we need votes in States. I am asking you
from a scientific--because this is where DOE either is credible
as an organization or it lacks credibility. I really want it to
be a credible organization. I have the highest respect for many
of the scientists in there, and this is an opportunity to
either be a scientist or go by polling and politics.
Has there been some physical evidence that says this site
is no longer suitable which therefore says you are compliant
with the law by saying we don't have to do Yucca Mountain
anymore? Is there some scientific evidence out there that says
it is not suitable?
Mr. Lyons. As I stated, the license application was based
on technical criteria. Based on general counsel, the
Secretary's view is that we do have the authority to withdraw--
--
Mr. Murphy. I didn't ask if you had the authority. I am not
sure I am getting anywhere, Mr. Chairman, but I hope you would
provide that information to us because that is the crux of what
we are doing today.
Mr. Lyons. We will continue to provide information as best
we can.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time is expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Barrow, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barrow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A moment ago when we were going over the subject of the
cost that has been invested in the program so far, there was an
attempt to explain some of the value we recouped from this, the
knowledge, the information, the lessons learned. What I would
remind you is that the more you spend on something of doubtful
authenticity, the more likely you are to think you have the
real deal. If you spent $5 million on a pen-and-ink sketching
that is reported to be a Leonardo da Vinci, you are very likely
to believe it is the real deal. If you paid $5 for it, you know
it is a fake. The point I want to emphasize is, this vast
difference between the value of a lesson learned and the cost
of a lesson learned, and I am not exactly sure we have a good
understanding of the difference, what the magnitude of the
difference is in this particular case.
I want to try to see where we go from here. I want to
change the subject just a little bit. I had been present when
Secretary Chu has summed up the cost to the American consumer
of the fact that we were a nuclear pioneer country in this
world and we went down a bunch of different paths and got
different designs for different reactors here and there. It is
part of the legacy costs of being the pioneer and going first
and actually developing all kinds of different ideas. He was
talking to one of his colleagues in France, and his French
colleague says it is very simple what the problem is you
Americans, you have 80 different reactors and one cheese; we
have 80 different cheeses and one reactor. It is a good lesson
to learn. We have 80 different waste repositories in this
country, whether we know it or not and whether we like it or
not, and we have a whole array of approaches toward dealing
with the problem for the foreseeable future. Some of these are
wet storage, dry storage. Some are a lot more stable, some are
a lot more safe than others. Meanwhile, the American consumer
has been paying for this long-term repository program that has
stopped dead in its tracks right now. Two-thirds of the cost
has just been paid by ratepayers, whether they know it or not
and whether they like it or not and whether they support it or
not. Another third of this has been paid by the general fund by
taxpayers chipping in their income taxes to run the government.
All the money that has been paid in so far I gather has been
spent but the money is still coming.
One question I have, and maybe this is addressed in part to
the Blue Ribbon Commission but I want to address it to you all,
is what can we do to divert that income stream to provide some
stability, some predictability and some safety in the meantime
for all those utilities that are running and operating these
plants now and trying to operate these 70 waste repositories on
site that we have got right now? For example, if the money they
are forced to extract from customers in the form of an excise
tax on the rates they are paying can be diverted back to those
utilities on the condition that it be used to take wet storage
and turn it into dry storage, something that is inherently
unstable and likely to get loose into something that is very
stable, an asset that would not be stranded, something that
would have lasting value no matter what we are going to do in
terms of a long-term repository, wouldn't that be a useful
thing to do in the meantime? Does anybody have any suggestions
along those lines of what we can do with the current mess we
are in?
Mr. Gaffigan. I would say there are a couple hurdles. You
know, under the Nuclear Waste Policy Act, the money is being
collected for a long-term repository, and we talk about maybe
using it for a centralized repository. DOE is saying they don't
have the authority to use that fund for that so there would
have to be some change in law for that.
In the meantime, industry is saying if you are not going to
pursue a long-term repository, stop collecting the money. DOE
is proceeding to collect the money. In fact----
Mr. Barrow. That would require a law, wouldn't it?
Mr. Gaffigan. And they are proceeding on the basis of a
Yucca Mountain by 2020. That is how they base their rates. So,
you know, Mr. Lyons may have some doubt about the 2020 date but
it is still being used by DOE as the best alternative going
forward.
Mr. Lyons. If I may add to that?
Mr. Barrow. Go ahead, Dr. Lyons.
Mr. Lyons. The Department of Energy recognizes it has the
responsibility for the long-term management of the used fuel.
As that fuel is being generated at your Plant Vogtle, for
example, whatever the future option is going to be, that still
will require handling by the Department of Energy. That is the
rationale for continuing to collect the fee, and there has been
no rationale, at least demonstrated to date, to change that
fee.
Mr. Barrow. Well, here is my concern. I recognize you all's
need to set aside a little something in the future for handling
the charges you all are going to incur in the future, but you
don't have any ideas of when you are going to be handling
nothing, and we are handling it right now. My ratepayers are
handling it right now and our customers are handling it right
now.
My question is--and the questioning has shined a light on a
problem when you have a law that tells you what this policy is
going to be, it is going to take 25 years to implement and a
lot of annual appropriations bills that have to get through
both Houses of Congress in order to implement. I mean, if we
are going to have to have a change in law to do anything
positive, can we at least open the discussion and put on the
table the idea of changes we can all agree on to try and manage
the problem on site as long as it takes us to get our act
together? Because what took an act of Congress to start us down
the course and a plan that required several Congresses to go
along with it is going to require another act of Congress to
fix. Let us have an interim strategy we can all agree on. Let
us try to work together on that. That would be my suggestion.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania.
And just for the record, they are supposed to call votes at
2:30. We will try to get one or two more rounds of questioning
before we go down to vote but we will have to adjourn because
there are three votes in a row and not everybody will be
through, so we will have to recess.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gaffigan, the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 created
a federal legal obligation to accept nuclear fuel and dispose
it in a geologic facility. Is that correct?
Mr. Gaffigan. There was a commitment on the part of the
Federal Government to take possession of the waste and explore
a long-term repository.
Mr. Pitts. So is it accurate to say in light of this law
that Congress resolved how to manage spent nuclear fuel and
high-level waste back in 1982?
Mr. Gaffigan. It was a decision made by the Congress to
pass the Nuclear Waste Policy Act. That is correct.
Mr. Pitts. The development of the act was not the
development of a single Congress or some partisan maneuvering,
was it?
Mr. Gaffigan. No.
Mr. Pitts. In point of fact, in 1982 when the Nuclear Waste
Policy Act was enacted, there was a Republican President, a
Republican Senate and Democrats firmed controlled the House. In
1987, when Congress determined Yucca Mountain consistently of
the top three sites was to be examined for a repository, there
was a Republican President and Democrats controlled both the
House and Senate. In 2002, leadership of the Congress was
reversed but Congress overwhelmingly resolved to support Yucca
development 306-117. So when the Nation through its elected
representatives resolved how to solve the nuclear waste
problem, it did so in a consistently bipartisan fashion,
wouldn't you agree?
Mr. Gaffigan. Those are policy decisions based by the
Congress.
Mr. Pitts. Dr. Lyons, the Department of Energy motion to
withdraw the license application said ``the Secretary has
decided that a geologic repository at Yucca Mountain is not a
workable option for long-term disposition.'' Was the
Secretary's decision based on internal department scientific
evaluation by the Administration?
Mr. Lyons. As I indicated, the license application was
based on the technical criteria and the Secretary in his
evaluation recognized the importance of technical criteria and
social acceptance criteria.
Mr. Pitts. Was it based on any scientific evidence that
Yucca is not workable?
Mr. Lyons. No, it was based on the concern that there are
two major criteria, as I indicated.
Mr. Pitts. Isn't there in fact ample scientific evidence
that Yucca is workable and safe?
Mr. Lyons. That would remain to be determined if this were
to move through the process, sir. In the DOE's estimation when
they submitted the license, that was their determination.
Mr. Pitts. Has the department determined that Yucca
Mountain's repository is not suitable to meet the relevant
safety standards for long-term storage of spent fuel and
nuclear waste?
Mr. Lyons. No, there is no data that has been presented
along those lines. However, again, the decision has made to
withdraw, and whether that--and the legality of that is being
tested both through the NRC and the courts.
Mr. Pitts. In fact, DOE still stands behind the quality of
its application that the repository can be built and protective
of the public health for 10,000 years and more. Isn't that the
case? Doesn't DOE in fact admit as much in its application to
the NRC?
Mr. Lyons. Those were the technical criteria and others
that were deemed met by the Department of Energy.
Mr. Pitts. So technically speaking, Yucca Mountain remains
a workable option. Why is it not workable in DOE's view?
Mr. Lyons. I don't know how else to say it, sir, other than
the Secretary in his view, which I agree with, views both
technical criteria and social acceptance criteria as key to
ever moving ahead towards successfully opening a repository.
Mr. Pitts. What scientific evaluations has DOE performed to
make this determination?
Mr. Lyons. I believe I just indicated that it was a
question of social public acceptance.
Mr. Pitts. So this is the opinion of the Secretary. Did DOE
inform this opinion? Was anyone from the White House or the
Administration involved in this decision in any way?
Mr. Lyons. That was before I was involved. I simply can't
answer that, sir. I know the Secretary certainly has the
benefit of general counsel that it was within his rights to
withdraw the application, and that is now in the courts and the
NRC.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The chair recognizes the chairman emeritus, Mr. Dingell,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your courtesy.
This is to Mr. Gaffigan. We have here a splendid situation
where the Federal Government has invested huge sums of money in
a thing that we cannot use. We have taxed the daylights out of
the ratepayers, and how much is that fund that we have taxed
into the ratepayers?
Mr. Gaffigan. Currently, the current balance is about $25
billion and about----
Mr. Dingell. How much have we spent of that on what?
Mr. Gaffigan. Almost $10 billion.
Mr. Dingell. Almost 10. And what----
Mr. Gaffigan. Just to clarify, we spent about 10, plus
there is another 25 sitting there.
Mr. Dingell. So we have got a gigantic hole in the ground.
Now, tell me, there is a lawsuit going on in this matter, is
there not?
Mr. Gaffigan. There is, sir.
Mr. Dingell. And the Federal Government is being sued, but
because of the mercy and the charity of the plaintiffs in that
lawsuit, it has never progressed to the point where it is going
to lead to a judgment. Is that right?
Mr. Gaffigan. There was some oral arguments taken in March
of this year. The basic gist of those arguments was whether
there was a final action of the government, whether the NRC was
going to rule, so that was the gist of the oral arguments. We
haven't heard anything since.
Mr. Dingell. I am just a poor Polish lawyer from Detroit,
but you have stated that DOE officials stated they have
frequent meetings and focus groups to help guide the shutdown.
Can you tell me what that means?
Mr. Gaffigan. We had a hard time knowing what that means.
We asked----
Mr. Dingell. Does DOE know what that means?
Mr. Gaffigan. Well, I think they know what it means but we
asked them, could they at least document what they have in
terms of a shutdown.
Mr. Dingell. Did they explain it to you?
Mr. Gaffigan. They said they had a draft plan, they were
working on it, and this is something the IG looked at.
Mr. Dingell. Has that draft plan been submitted to anybody,
Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Shimkus. Not that I know of.
Mr. Lyons. No, sir, the draft plan was not completed, and
instead the department moved ahead as expeditiously as possible
to shut down by the end of fiscal 2010.
Mr. Dingell. Could we get the draft plan? I think it would
be nice if you would share it with us. Would you submit it,
please?
Mr. Lyons. I honestly don't know if it is completed, sir.
If it is available, yes.
Mr. Dingell. I don't care whether it is completed. Submit
the darn thing to the committee and we will tell you what we
think of it.
Now, in your testimony, Secretary Lyons, you said that DOE
takes exception to a statement in the GAO report that a final
impact of terminating Yucca Mountain is that communities may be
even less willing to host spent nuclear fuel repositories or
other storage sites in the future due to further erosion of
DOE's credibility. You go on to say that on the contrary, a new
start could lead to enhancement of the credibility of the
department's approach. I don't mean to make light of a
difficult situation but to your knowledge have communities
around the country been volunteering to host a nuclear waste
repository?
Mr. Lyons. Yes, sir, there have been communities that have
corresponded with the department.
Mr. Dingell. Who has volunteered to do this?
Mr. Lyons. One I am aware of is in New Mexico around the
Carlsbad area. There may be others. I don't know.
Mr. Dingell. Is that for high-energy waste or----
Mr. Lyons. Again, this is local communities supporting,
yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Mr. Friedman, how much is closing out the
Yucca Mountain project costing the Federal Government?
Mr. Friedman. You know, Mr. Dingell, I am not sure of the
answer to that question.
Mr. Dingell. Would you please get it and submit it for the
record?
Mr. Friedman. If I can, I certainly will.
Mr. Dingell. It isn't going for peanuts, is it? It is
costing lots of money, isn't it?
Mr. Friedman. No, no. They have spent a great deal of money
on the licensing support network and finalizing some of the
technical studies that have been done.
Mr. Dingell. Now, how much is it estimated that the
closeout of Yucca will impact the Department of Energy's
environmental remediation liability? Do you have any estimate
on that?
Mr. Gaffigan. We do. We expect that it will be----
Mr. Dingell. Would you submit that and the answer to that
for the record?
Mr. Gaffigan. I certainly will.
Mr. Dingell. Now, how much has the United States invested
in the Yucca Mountain project? How much of that was from the
nuclear waste fund, i.e., the ratepayers, and how much from the
Federal Government, i.e., the taxpayers?
Mr. Friedman. It was about two-thirds, one-third, two-
thirds from the rate fund, about $10 billion----
Mr. Dingell. What does that come down to, Mr. Gaffigan?
Mr. Gaffigan. Where does that what?
Mr. Dingell. How much does that come down to coming out of
the skin of the ratepayers and taxpayers?
Mr. Gaffigan. Ten billion from the ratepayers and about $5
billion from the taxpayers, and that doesn't include any of the
judgment fund.
Mr. Dingell. Now, you know, fellows, I know my questions
seem repetitive and everybody who comes up here from the
department gets the same because we have all heard about how
much spent nuclear fuel is stored at various sites around the
country and we just destroy the damn stuff. We don't reprocess
it the way the French do but we dig holes that cost lots of
money. And then we sit around and you guys come up and explain
to us and a little while later somebody else runs the committee
and then you come up and explain to us again, or your
successors do. And so we have got a facility here that
everybody wants to do something with. We have got a resource
that we are not using. We are threatening nuclear, which is
extremely important to this country in an energy shortage and
all the other problems that we have, and it seems that we have
no long-term plans for dealing with spent nuclear waste and the
best we can say is that you seem to be proceeding down a very
dangerous path with more and more and more of this stuff piled
up. And Members of the Congress need to know what is going on.
We need to protect the funds collected and we need to have a
long-term solution, either storage that will work or
reprocessing, and when are you going to get to this? This
question was going on when I was chairman of the committee, and
as a matter of fact, it was going on when I was a young member
of this body. When is it that I can look forward to being young
enough that I am going to get an answer on these questions?
Mr. Lyons. I think the best answer, sir, is that that is
the charge of the Blue Ribbon Commission. They will have their
interim report in July of this year. I am looking forward to
that report, and I too have been working many years to
understand what the long-term solutions acceptable in this
country will be.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time is expired.
Just for notice to my colleagues, first a question. We have
votes on the floor. We are going to finish with the Chairman
Emeritus Barton for 5 minutes and then we will recess. The
question to my colleagues is, what is your pleasure to ask the
first panel to come back, because some of you have been waiting
to address questions to them, or do we go to second panel? You
want the first panel?
Mr. Barton. I think you should let this panel come back
because some of the members----
Mr. Shimkus. That is my question, and that is what I am
posing to my colleagues, and I think that we will ask you to
come back after votes to finish.
The chair recognizes Chairman Emeritus Barton for 5
minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, and I know that we have to vote so I
am going to go through this pretty quick.
We had the Nuclear Waste Policy Act in 1982 as amended in
1987. That is 29 and 24 years ago. Under that law, the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission and the Department of Energy are
authorized to find a permanent repository for the high-level
nuclear waste both from civilian and military applications in
this country. Through a convoluted process, Yucca Mountain was
chosen as the repository. It has been through innumerable
hearings, studies, but back in 2008 a license application was
tendered to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission by the Department
of Energy. I think the law gives them 4 years to make a
decision. With the change in the Administration, the Obama
Administration last year asked to withdraw that application.
The board empowered to make the decision whether the
application should be withdrawn in a very unusual decision
chose not to allow it to be withdrawn and now we have got a
very convoluted process at NRC where we are trying to determine
whether there is a vote or isn't a vote, and we are in
discussions on a bipartisan basis with the Chairman of the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission about that issue.
The purpose of this hearing is to determine what the legal
criteria are for the Department of Energy to terminate Yucca
Mountain, and the distinguished Deputy Secretary or Under
Secretary has said, if I heard him correctly, that that
decision was based on social public acceptance. Is that
correct, Dr. Lyons?
Mr. Lyons. As Secretary Chu has testified many times, yes,
he views both technical criteria and public acceptance----
Mr. Barton. Where in the NWPA does it say that social
public acceptance is a criteria?
Mr. Lyons. I didn't say it was in the Nuclear Waste Policy
Act. I said that it----
Mr. Barton. Then why is that a variable in the decision-
making process?
Mr. Lyons. Again, sir, our Secretary has the benefit of
legal counsel, and this is in the courts and in the NRC----
Mr. Barton. If the Secretary of Energy decided that the
Yucca Mountain wasn't acceptable because it was in the desert,
would that be a criteria? If he just decided he didn't like the
color purple, would that be a criteria?
Mr. Lyons. I think you know our Secretary, sir, and he
would have substantially stronger criteria.
Mr. Barton. I don't think social public acceptance is a
criteria under the law.
Mr. Lyons. As I noted in my testimony, there are many, many
actions that are still required if Yucca Mountain were ever to
open. Many of those decisions require permits and concurrences
from the State of Nevada.
Mr. Barton. But my understanding is that everybody at your
level and above has to hold up your hand and take an oath of
office or an oath to uphold the Constitution and defend the
laws of the United States and all of this. We have a current
public law that has not been amended that gives the Department
of Energy the authority to tender an application. That
application has been tendered. The Secretary decided to
withdraw it but the board responsible for accepting that
withdrawal said no. So I would assume the Secretary of Energy
is knowingly and willfully violating federal law.
Mr. Lyons. Well, as you are aware, sir, the day after the
ASLB made that decision, then the commission decided that they
wished to take review. That is their prerogative as the
commission.
Mr. Barton. And we are in a, it is not a negotiation but we
are certainly in a situation where we are trying to determine
with the chairman and the current members of the NRC just what
they have decided or not decided to do, and that is a
convoluted mess if I have ever seen one.
Mr. Lyons. I certainly can't comment on what is going on at
the NRC, but between the NRC and the courts, because this is
also in the courts, the legality of that withdrawal is going to
be determined eventually.
Mr. Barton. Well, I have got 51 seconds. If this Congress
affirmatively states that the application should continue to be
reviewed and that Yucca Mountain should continue to be
considered according to current law, is the Secretary of Energy
and the President of the United States going to honor that law?
Mr. Lyons. If we are ordered by one of those mechanisms
that is not appealed to resume the license, we have indicated
repeatedly in testimony that yes, we can and will. However, at
part of our thinking, Congress has not provided any
appropriations in fiscal year 2011.
Mr. Barton. I have a feeling we will, before the end of
this year, do so.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. And just to correct the record, that is not
true. We stopped funding for the last half of fiscal year 2011
in the C.R. The first part of the fiscal year was under a
continuing resolution that still had it, and that is another
issue of debate.
The chair recognizes Mr. Inslee for as much time as he can
consume before we have votes.
Mr. Inslee. Thank you.
This is very disturbing on a couple of bases. One is, in my
State, the State of Washington, we have people very diligently
trying to follow their obligations legally and in their
profession getting this waste ready to ship to Yucca. They are
going to be ready to ship 9,700 canisters to Yucca. They are
doing their job, but the department is not doing its job, and
that is on a local concern.
But on a national concern, I just think this situation is
one of a failed state. They talk about failed states around the
world. Because of the failure to follow the clear law here,
this is the equivalency of a failed state. We reached a
national decision. It is unpopular in one local part, a
beautiful part of the country, as it will be in any part of the
country that we ever have this decision made, and yet we can't
execute a decision.
Now, this sort of flagrant statement that social acceptance
is now a legal criteria, I don't understand. I will just ask
Dr. Lyons, how are we ever to build anything like a nuclear
waste repository anywhere in the United States if social
acceptance is a mandatory criteria to build something?
Mr. Lyons. I used the example in my testimony of the Waste
Isolation Pilot Plant in New Mexico, which has the strongest
local acceptance, and I noted that there are a number of
international examples where with careful education with
transparent processes, there has been strong acceptance of
repository programs.
Mr. Inslee. So why didn't you do the same thing in Nevada?
Mr. Lyons. I also indicated in my testimony----
Mr. Inslee. Are you saying there is something unique about
Nevadans that make them unique in the United States and this
will be welcome as rosewater in the rest of the United States?
Mr. Lyons. Sir----
Mr. Inslee. It is going to smell the same no matter what
name we put on it, and this is just a failed policy looking for
another social acceptance criteria failure around the United
States. What evidence do you have that there is any more
socially acceptable place for this particular situation?
Mr. Lyons. I provided the example of the Waste Isolation
Pilot Plant. That is a different repository, different type of
repository, but it is a repository and it has strong local
acceptance.
Mr. Inslee. And obviously in the decision-making of the
department based on the best science and geology and hydrology,
we decided Nevada was the best place, but now you are telling
me we are going to maybe look for a less scientifically
credible, less geologically stable, less hydrologically
isolated place because we might get a little better social
acceptance. That is a failed policy by a failed state, and I
have to tell you, regardless who the Administration is, an
abject failure to follow federal law here is most disturbing
and it is unacceptable, and I don't really want to belabor you
with too many more questions. I just want to tell you it is
unacceptable by any Administration of any party. To make its
decision when we are dealing with this number of curies of
radiation based on social acceptance is just not a winner for
this country. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The votes are being called right now. There are three
votes. That is probably going to run around 30 minutes. We will
see who comes back, who hasn't asked questions of the first
panel, and if not, be prepared to answer questions but having
done this before, it may be it for you all but you need to be
here in case someone wants to ask you all a specific question.
I will recess this hearing subject to the call of the
chair.
[Recess.]
Mr. Gardner [presiding]. We will go ahead and resume the
hearing. I recognize myself for 5 minutes for my opportunity to
question.
Thank you very much for being here today and your time to
share with us. Just a couple of quick questions for you based
on some previous testimony by Dr. Lyons. I heard a great deal
of discussion regarding social acceptance, the social
acceptance theory as it pertains to the Yucca Mountain license.
Mr. Gaffigan, can you cite any statutory authority for social
acceptance criteria?
Mr. Gaffigan. Not in the Nuclear Waste Policy Act.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Friedman, can you cite social acceptance
criteria in the statute?
Mr. Friedman. Not that I am aware of.
Mr. Gardner. Dr. Lyons, can you cite statutory authority
for social acceptance?
Mr. Lyons. I am not citing statutory authority, sir, but
what I have tried to indicate is the number of steps that would
be required to ever open Yucca Mountain, steps that Nevada
stands, I believe, in opposition to, and I believe they could
very successfully block that.
Mr. Gardner. So you would agree that there is no statutory
authority or basis for social acceptance theories as criteria?
Mr. Lyons. Not specifically in the Nuclear Waste Policy
Act.
Mr. Gardner. So the answer is no, then, there is no
statutory authority for social acceptance?
Mr. Lyons. No.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you. And what is the theory of your
legal counsel when he believes that social acceptance is a
valid criteria?
Mr. Lyons. Our Secretary has outlined that many times. The
briefs that are our general counsel has filed either with the
NRC or in the court cases, those are available; your staff has
them. That spells out the position of the general counsel. I
certainly won't try to repeat it. I am not a lawyer.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Dr. Lyons.
Mr. Friedman, your role as Inspector General, what is that
role in a nutshell?
Mr. Friedman. Well, I have four responsibilities, Mr.
Gardner. One is to act as an independent set of eyes and ears
for the Secretary and for the Congress. Two is to bring to
justice those who are attempting to defraud the people of the
United States. Three is to be independent fact finders in high-
profile controversial matters, and four is to give the U.S.
taxpayers a seat at the table when important government
decisions are made.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Friedman. Mr. Friedman, do you
believe that the social acceptance criteria is a valid theory?
Mr. Friedman. Mr. Gardner, I don't exactly know how to
answer that question, to be honest with you. You asked me
whether I thought it was in statute, and I don't believe that
it is per se, so I would have to say it is somewhat
questionable from a legal standpoint, but I am not a lawyer and
I am not making legal judgment.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Friedman, in the four roles that you
mentioned the Inspector General has under its purview, do you
believe one of them is to expect or to perhaps visit with the
Secretary's office about the social acceptance criteria that
they are using if you believe there is no statutory authority?
Mr. Friedman. Well, we also have a responsibility under the
IG statute, Mr. Gardner, not to overlap and duplicate what GAO
has done. So I think it is fair to say that GAO's report, which
has obviously been a major topic of this hearing, has really
addressed that issue essentially.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you. And a further question, Mr.
Friedman. You stated that it is likely that the termination of
the Yucca Mountain project will significantly impact the
department's environmental remediation liability, which is
currently estimated at $250 billion in future cleanup costs.
Have you seen any evaluation by the department regarding how
its decisions will affect this liability?
Mr. Friedman. No. What we are anticipating, I indicate in
my long testimony, my complete testimony, that we will be
looking at this as the department prepares its financial
statements for the current fiscal year, and they will be
responsible for coming up with a revised estimate, which will
reflect their judgment as to the impact of the closure of Yucca
Mountain on the liability, and we will be reviewing that
carefully at that time.
Mr. Gardner. The Department of Energy's recent actions to
dismantle its nuclear stockpile will increase the volume of
defense nuclear waste. How has the department planned to
accommodate this waste as it shuts down Yucca Mountain?
Mr. Friedman. Well, Yucca Mountain, approximately 10
percent of Yucca Mountain was designated, as I recall, for
high-level defense spent nuclear waste. My understanding is
that the current inventory of waste in that category exceeds
even the 10 percent of Yucca Mountain that was reserved for
that purpose originally. There are lots of proposals right now
to compact the waste, to mix it with--to down blend it, if you
will. But the fact of the matter is, it will have an impact as
the level of the waste grows.
Mr. Gardner. Did the Department of Energy consider whether
its role in START would be compromised by its decisions on
Yucca Mountain?
Mr. Friedman. Well, that obviously is a very fundamental
issue, Mr. Gardner, and to be honest with you, it is outside of
my area, my purview. I don't know the answer to the question.
Mr. Gardner. Dr. Lyons, do you know if DOE did any analysis
under START implications?
Mr. Lyons. I have not seen such analysis. However, the
department recognizes its responsibilities for defense high-
level waste. That has never been in question.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you. My time is expired.
The chair recognizes Mr. Cassidy for 5 minutes.
Dr. Cassidy. On June 29 an administrative court judge--the
Department of Energy did not have the authority to close Yucca
Mountain.
Mr. Lyons. June 29, 2010.
Dr. Cassidy. Yes. But you did anyway. I mean, does the rule
of law have no say-so? Does the attorney you sought an opinion
from trump the administrative procedures that have been set up
to hear your concerns?
Mr. Lyons. The Atomic Safety Licensing Board decisions are
reviewed by the commission. The commission can take review of
any ASLB decision and the commission--and I was no longer on
the commission at that time--would like to take review of that
decision. That moves the responsibility from----
Dr. Cassidy. Excuse me. I have limited time. So the
commission has not yet issued its report and frankly, there are
some allegations of politicization of the process. But was
there a stay upon the ruling of the preliminary administrative
court, the June 29, 2010, board, was there a stay upon that?
The ruling has not been released by NRC but clearly you are
disregarding it.
Mr. Lyons. Not being a lawyer, I don't want to get into a
question of what a stay is in this case. I am positive that my
statement is accurate that the commission has taken the review
and the action is with the commission and the----
Dr. Cassidy. But you preempted the action of the
commission, if you will, because they have not yet issued a
ruling but you have shut down Yucca Mountain, even though you
were told you didn't have legal standing to do so, and if you
are not an attorney, I would ask next time you bring an
attorney because it is really fundamentally the question that
is before the taxpayers. We just blew $10 billion. It frankly
doesn't look like you had legal standing, and I am getting a
little bit of a legal rope a dope by you saying that you are
not an attorney, and I don't mean to be rude, but imagine the
frustration.
Now, let me ask you next. Mr. Friedman's complete testimony
in the written portion speaks of a process whereby after you
disregarded this Atomic Safety Licensing Board's ruling and
decided on 10/1/2010 to shut it down, you declared an
abandonment of, what was it, 22 metric tons, Mr. Friedman?
Mr. Friedman. You may be referring to the GAO report, Mr.
Cassidy.
Dr. Cassidy. Oh, I thought it was your report where this
was declared abandoned.
Mr. Gaffigan. It was some property that was declared
abandoned.
Dr. Cassidy. Tons. Now, granted it was steel and----
Mr. Gaffigan. Computers, office equipment, that sort of
thing.
Dr. Cassidy. Yes, trailers, I mean, stuff of both value by
bulk and by value. Why did you just declare it abandoned? I
mean, frankly it looks like you were trying to make it so it
would be expensive to restart, again, after deciding to
disregard the Atomic Safety Licensing Board's ruling. Why did
DOE just declare it abandoned?
Mr. Lyons. Again, sir, those decisions were carefully
reviewed by our general counsel. Abandonment is one of the
mechanisms by which property can be disposed. The department
was certainly working on an expedited schedule to complete the
shutdown within fiscal year 2010.
Dr. Cassidy. So----
Mr. Lyons. Or I should say that there is a complete
inventory underway now and there will eventually, as we go into
the closeout process, there will be a reconciliation.
Dr. Cassidy. One of the two--again, for whatever reason, I
came back and not entirely organized but one of the men had
testimony that said that it was a rather hasty shutdown and
that the complete sort of gathering of information that would
have been beneficial was not done, that I gather intellectual
property was lost. Am I speaking for one of the two of you?
Mr. Gaffigan. I would sort of summarize, I think both the
IG and GAO had concerns about the lack of a plan to shut down.
They basically started shutting down in June of 2010--I am
sorry, February of 2010 and had basically completed shutdown by
September of 2010. During that time, there was a draft plan
that never got finalized. They were trying to get things done
quickly, and we raised concerns about that.
Dr. Cassidy. So it really looks like there was an attempt
to abandon the process in a way which it could not be
restarted.
Mr. Lyons. Absolutely not, sir. As part of the quality
assurance program, as each decision has been made along the
way, the technical justification for that must be recorded in
writing----
Dr. Cassidy. So who made that decision to abandon tons of
material including things that could have been sold for scrap
or given to other federal agencies, instead, to turn it over to
a contractor? Who made that decision?
Mr. Lyons. It was an evaluation on the prospective value of
the property in that decision. However, I believe both of the
reports in question here note that the majority of this
equipment in question was transferred to other DOE sites,
particularly Hanford.
Dr. Cassidy. Well, I thought I saw where it was abandoned.
Mr. Gaffigan. It is declared abandoned, but then under that
process they can transfer it to other sites, so Dr. Lyons is
right. Most of it got transferred internally. It was considered
unusual but DOE had the authority to do that.
Our concern was, and we put this out in our
recommendations, that, number one, in some cases they didn't
have a good inventory. They would say they are working on and
we would say great and they should have a full accounting for
the inventory and what was sold. We still think that remains to
be done. And then lastly, we think they should consider a plan
to restart if they are compelled to do so. Those were our two
recommendations.
Dr. Cassidy. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Gardner. The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Butterfield, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
thank the three witnesses for their testimony today. I am sorry
I could not hear their testimony in their entirety but I will
certainly work with my staff and look at your transcript as we
go forward.
But Mr. Chairman, by any assessment, this is a very, very
complicated issue, but it is clear to me that the Department of
Energy's decision to withdraw its application for Yucca
Mountain is really the cherry on top of a greatly mismanaged
federal exercise. I generally believe that the Department of
Energy should follow the process laid out by the act and
maintain focus on the technical and scientific elements of
Yucca Mountain rather than the political considerations, but I
am a realist and I understand that all politics are local, and
that if any of our respective constituents came to us and said
this is our number one issue, we would certainly fight tool and
nail to stop it even if the focus should be technical in
nature.
Notwithstanding, ratepayers in my home State of North
Carolina have contributed $900 million of their hard-earned
money to help finance the construction of a permanent
repository for our nuclear waste. I believe in nuclear power. I
have said it time and time again. It makes up over 30 percent
of my State's generating capacity. I am embarrassed to tell my
constituents that their contributions have amounted to very
little as we appear to be in no better position for solving
this problem as we were when we started splitting atoms. We
have a responsibility to see this process through and to make
it a high priority.
So let us talk about some of the options set out by the
GAO. Mr. Gaffigan, you stated that an independent organization
with predictable funding might be a way to overcome some of the
administrative issues we have had with Yucca. Would such an
independent organization have to be created by statute or does
the Administration have the authority to create it?
Mr. Gaffigan. Currently, no separate authority exists so I
think it would have to be created.
Mr. Butterfield. Obviously, you might eliminate some of the
political capriciousness by granting this agency predictable
mandatory funding but eventually the decision to site a
repository will be inherently political, and we all understand
that. That said, outside of funding, how could this independent
agency be able to overcome the political hurdles with any
greater efficiency than the Department of Energy?
Mr. Gaffigan. We had two lessons learned, and that is part
of it. That is sort of the first lesson that perhaps some
consistent leadership policy on where we are going would be a
mechanism to get there, overcoming the many factors including
public acceptance, which is recognized by many as a hurdle that
should be addressed, just as well as the technical and safety
issues. The key to those sorts of things is transparency,
education, economic incentives. Those are some of the tools
that have been used in other countries to gain acceptance for
such a site.
Mr. Butterfield. You talked about greater transparency in
the process. Where do you see historical transparency gaps and
how might they be closed?
Mr. Gaffigan. It goes back to the 1960s when they looked at
a facility in Kansas. There was, you know, a feeling on the
part of the folks that were out there that there wasn't full
disclosure of what the information was. Even in the process of
Yucca Mountain, there has been some complaints about not full
disclosure of the different issues out there, and I think DOE
to its credit has worked on that and tried to establish some
credibility but it still has a ways to go, particularly in the
eyes of the folks from Nevada.
Mr. Butterfield. The American people may not take notice of
this issue based upon the spent fuel issue alone but I
guarantee you that they will notice when the cost of not
completing the project becomes known.
Mr. Friedman, to you, sir, in your testimony, I am told by
my staff that you stated that the U.S. spent nuclear fuel
litigation liability is approximately $15 billion. If the Yucca
project is completely scuttled and no clear path is
established, when will the government have to make these
payments and to whom?
Mr. Friedman. I don't know the answer to your question, Mr.
Butterfield. I can't give you a precise date. But there will be
payments that will have to be made, there is no doubt, and our
view is that it is likely that there will be a significant
increase in the gross amount of the payments.
Mr. Butterfield. And will my constituents and the
chairman's constituents and all of our constituents ever see
any refund of the money that they have contributed to this
date?
Mr. Friedman. Well, that is not for me to say. I mean, if
this project actually comes to a close, if there is a
legislative fix or amendment or series of amendments or new
legislation, then it wouldn't surprise me that there would be
some attempt to try to reimburse those who have made those
contributions only to see them go for naught.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. My time is expired. Thank you.
Mr. Gardner. The chair recognizes Mr. Bass from New
Hampshire for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bass. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
The answer to Mr. Butterfield's question is that the only
way you are going to get their money back is to open this
project.
Lots of questions have been asked today, and Dr. Lyons, I
have to say I almost feel sorry for you. You know what is going
on here. Everybody in the audience knows what is going on here.
The Democrats, Mr. Inslee, Mr. Green, all the Republicans know
what is going on here, and it is unfortunate that we even have
to have this hearing. The process of debating what to do with
high-level and low-level nuclear waste began when I was a State
rep in New Hampshire in the early 1980s and I believe there was
a site in New Hampshire that was under consideration in some of
the earlier rounds. We have gone through an excruciatingly
detailed and complete analysis. We passed legislation. There
have been battles that have occurred, as we have heard, through
different Administrations, different parties have been in
charge, it has been bipartisan, and we have come to as good a
conclusion as we could possibly come to to solve this issue,
which is of grave national importance.
And then the Energy Secretary and the President and perhaps
others that have a political interest in this issue stopped the
project, potentially incurred expensive legislation, waste $10
billion and possibly $25 billion of taxpayers' money on the
basis of undefined technical criteria and social acceptance,
which is an interesting comment, deferring everything to a Blue
Ribbon Commission that can't consider any sites. In essence,
what we are proposing here is that the clock be wound back to
the early 1980s again and we begin this process over again.
Now, Dr. Lyons, you are the Under Secretary for Nuclear
Energy so you are pretty high up in this organization but you
can't make any comments. Can you define social acceptance, what
it is? And again, I feel sorry for you because I know you can't
answer these questions because there are no answers to the
questions because there aren't any really valid criteria for
doing what you are doing, but give it a try.
Mr. Lyons. I am the Assistant Secretary, sir, not the Under
Secretary.
I grew up in Nevada. I visited Nevada. I worked in Nevada.
I saw the opposition in Nevada growing. I saw it as it was
created. I have watched over many, many years while Nevada has
progressively blocked each of the various initiatives that was
attempted with regard to Yucca. In my view, there are many,
many steps that remain before Yucca Mountain could ever be
opened. The views in Nevada for which I am using the buzzword
of public acceptance or social acceptance, that opposition that
has been spawned in Nevada I believe will continue to block
progress towards opening Yucca Mountain.
Mr. Bass. Not one single member of this subcommittee that I
have seen has come out and shared your view, neither Republican
or Democratic, and I understand that there are no members from
Nevada here. Is there any place in the United States where you
could build this without local opposition, in your opinion?
Mr. Lyons. Well, I have used the example several times
today about the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant in New Mexico that
enjoys very, very strong local and regional support, and the
way that process developed as well as the way repositories have
been sited in other countries, which is what the BRC is
evaluating, I think provides extremely important lessons as to
how to do this job right and get the public education, general
the public acceptance which I am convinced can be achieved.
Mr. Bass. I beg to differ with you. I think that it has
been pretty clear that the GAO, the Inspector General, we will
hear a later panel that this project was ready to go. The
taxpayers have funded it. The taxpayers are going to be on the
hook for billions and billions of dollars more if we don't
proceed, and the justification for its hopefully suspension,
not termination, as of yet undefined technical criteria, social
acceptance criteria, and what is not mentioned is political
criteria.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Gardner. The gentleman yields back.
That concludes the testimony of our first panel, and thank
you very much for your time and commitment to be here today and
for bearing with us through the votes. Thank you.
We will stand in recess subject to the call of the chair.
We have got a 4:00 markup beginning, and we will give you as
much information when we will reconvene.
[Recess.]
Mr. Shimkus. Welcome to the second panel. There was
clapping as I was coming down the hallway and I thought, oh,
man, people must love me. No, they just wanted to get the
hearing back going on. So we will start. I will call the
hearing to order, and we want to welcome our second panel, and
we apologize but actually I am very excited to have the second
panel here. In order, again, I will go from left to right, your
right to left, we have on panel two Mr. Charles Hollis,
Chairman of Nye County Board of County Commissioners, Nye
County, Nevada. Good to see you again, sir. Mr. Martin Malsch,
Partner, Egan, Fitzpatrick, Malsch and Lawrence, on behalf of
the State of Nevada, welcome, sir. Mr. Greg White,
Commissioner, Michigan Public Services Commission, and Mr.
Christopher Kouts, former acting director of DOE's Office for
Civilian Radioactive Waste Management.
Again, your full statement will be submitted for the
record. You have 5 minutes, and we will start with you, Mr.
Hollis. Welcome.

STATEMENTS OF CHARLES GARY HOLLIS, CHAIRMAN, NYE COUNTY BOARD
OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS, NYE COUNTY, NEVADA; MARTIN G. MALSCH,
PARTNER, EGAN, FITZPATRICK, MALSCH AND LAWRENCE, ON BEHALF OF
THE STATE OF NEVADA; GREG R. WHITE, COMMISSIONER, MICHIGAN
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION; AND CHRISTOPHER A. KOUTS, FORMER
ACTING DIRECTOR OF DOE'S OFFICE OF CIVILIAN RADIOACTIVE WASTE
MANAGEMENT

STATEMENT OF CHARLES GARY HOLLIS

Mr. Hollis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee. Thank you again for the opportunity to testify about
local support in Nevada for Yucca Mountain. I am Gary Hollis
and I am the Chairman of the Nye County Board of Commissioners,
the State of Nevada.
As you know, Mr. Chairman, Yucca Mountain is located
entirely within Nye County. While this testimony is mine, I
want you to know that it reflects the views of the other four
county commissioners as well, and as well as views of many
political and local leaders in rural Nevada.
Mr. Chairman, we deeply appreciate that you and Congressmen
Green and Burgess took the time to visit Yucca Mountain and to
meet local people in Nevada. As you learned, there many of us
who live next to Yucca Mountain who support the completion of
the licensing process. Most of us who live in the vicinity
believe that the decision on Yucca Mountain should be made
based on sound science, and this can only happen by full review
by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. If the NRC determines
that the repository is safe, I favor its construction.
As I am sure you can understand, no one is more concerned
about the safety and welfare of the citizens of Nye County than
me and the other four commissioners. It is my community. My
family, my friends live and work here. I would never accept a
federal facility to be located in my county if I thought it was
unsafe, no matter what the economic benefits were attached to
it. Frankly, I resent suggestions that any of the five Nye
County commissioners would jeopardize the heath and safety of
our citizens for any sum of money. That would not happen on my
watch.
When Congress passed the 1987 amendment to the Nuclear
Waste Policy Act, it provided money for local communities
impacted by Yucca Mountain to fund oversight activities. Nye
County used that money to create an independent science
program. We had unbiased scientists to conduct the work. After
years of effort, they found no reason to believe that the
repository could not be built and operated safely. We have
provided that information to the Department of Energy and the
public. Our work was top quality and the results were available
to everyone.
But to get the full picture, we need to see all the
evidence from every source. That includes information from Nye
County, DOE, NRC staff and the State of Nevada. We want every
piece of evidence to be reviewed so a final determination of
the safety of Yucca Mountain can be made. That determination
can only happen if the licensing process is complete.
Mr. Chairman, if the NRC determines that the repository
cannot be built and operated safely, I would be the first
person to object to its construction. I only ask that all of
the facts and the science are reviewed by the NRC and that the
legal process established by the Nuclear Waste Policy Act is
carried out. Let the facts dictate the result, not politics.
My views are shared by leaders of other rural Nevada
counties. Upon being elected last year, Nye County Commissioner
Dan Chinhofen initiated a resolution of support for the
licensing application and worked with Esmeralda, Mineral,
Lander, Churchill and Lincoln counties to do the same. Thus,
these six rural counties that would see the most impacts from
Yucca Mountain called on the DOE and the NRC to complete the
licensing process. We are willing to live by the results of a
fair, scientific review process. I ask permission to put all
six resolutions in the record, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. Is there objection? Hearing none, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Hollis. Beyond the political leaders of those other
counties, a majority of the residents of the county support the
license application.
Mr. Chairman, let me point out that all five current Nye
county commissioners expressed their support for Yucca Mountain
and all were elected or reelected by our citizens. Therefore,
it is not accurate to say there is no local support for Yucca
Mountain. The people that live in the neighborhood do support
completion of the licensing process.
Thank you. I am available to answer any questions you may
have. I am here with two of the county's technical
professionals, and they are available to answer questions as
well. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hollis follows:]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Hollis.
And now I would like to recognize Mr. Malsch. Sir, you are
recognized for 5 minutes, and your full statement is in the
record.

STATEMENT OF MARTIN G. MALSCH

Mr. Malsch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony
on behalf of the State of Nevada at this hearing today. My name
is Martin Malsch. I have practiced law in the nuclear energy
field and nuclear waste field for over 40 years in both the
public and private sectors, and I am Special Deputy Attorney
General for the State of Nevada.
The failure of the Yucca Mountain repository program is a
direct result of decisions taken beginning almost 25 years ago.
A decent respect for history would have suggested that those
decisions created a very high risk of program failure but the
lessons of history were disregarded.
The original 1982 Nuclear Waste Policy Act foresaw many of
the problems that now afflict the Yucca Mountain program. Among
other things, it sought fairness and redundancy by requiring
multiple sites from which to choose, ultimate locations for
repositories and it strove for regional equity by setting up
site selection programs for two facilities, one in the West and
one in the East.
However, all this was scrapped in 1987. Congress decreed
that all repository development efforts must focus now on just
one site in Nevada, and it did so notwithstanding incomplete
scientific information and the fact that now spent reactor fuel
and high-level waste from every region in the country would now
be sent to a single Western State with no nuclear power plants
or high-level waste-generating facilities.
After 1987, there was only one possible site, and
inevitably as more and more dollars were spent, it became
progressively more difficult to admit that the selection of
Yucca Mountain had been a mistake. But we know now things we
did not know in 1987. We now know that groundwater will reach
the waste at the site in about 50 years, not the hundreds or
thousands of years that had been originally thought. We now
know that Yucca Mountain is not dry. Total water seepage into
the tunnels where the waste will be located will be as much as
130,000 kilograms per year. These and other serious problems
led to even more exotic and doubtful engineering fixes.
When it appeared likely that the Yucca Mountain site could
not satisfy certain EPA and NRC licensing requirements, the
requirements were simply eliminated. These actions by Congress
and then by EPA, DOE and NRC destroyed the credibility of the
program. Public opinion in Nevada which until 1987 had been
mixed with regard to Yucca Mountain now solidified into strong,
consistent, across-the-board opposition, and by annual surveys
done between 1989 and 2010, opposition to the project has
remained constant at between 63 and over 70 percent.
While there has been and continues to be some support for
the project in small rural counties surrounding the site, such
support cannot be extrapolated to the wider Nevada population.
Taken together, the six counties sometimes cited as evincing
some level of support for DOE's program comprise only a tiny
fraction of the State's population.
In 2002, Nevada carefully evaluated the effects of a
prospective Yucca repository on the State, its communities and
the economy, and that report documents the potential, among
other things, for significant risks to Nevada's unique tourism-
based economy and property value losses and health effects
associated with transportation.
While it can be difficult to terminate a federal project
when large amounts of money has been spent, there is no sense
now in spending good money after bad. DOE's finding that Yucca
Mountain is unworkable, the decision to seek withdrawal of the
license application and the establishment of the Blue Ribbon
Commission to look for alternatives for the management and
storage of spent fuel were all the right and lawful things to
do. They had the potential to put the country on a path to a
safer, more cost-effective and expeditious solution to managing
spent fuel and high-level waste.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That concludes my remarks, and I
would be pleased to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Malsch follows:]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Malsch.
The chair now recognizes Mr. White. Again, your full
statement is in the record and you have 5 minutes. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF GREG R. WHITE

Mr. White. Thank you, Chairman Shimkus, and I would like to
thank you for your leadership on this issue.
As you know, my name is Greg White and I am Commissioner
for the Michigan Public Service Commission. I am appearing
today on behalf of the Public Service Commission in Michigan,
electricity ratepayers and the National Association of
Regulatory Utility Commissioners.
I have been involved with this issue, the disposal of spent
nuclear fuel from commercial reactors, since shortly after the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act passed in 1983, which established the
policy that the Federal Government has the responsibility for
the safe and permanent disposal of government and commercial
nuclear waste in a geologic repository, and that the customers
that benefit from electricity generated from nuclear power pay
for the commercial share of the disposal costs. That was the
deal, and we agreed to that deal. The fee payments to the
nuclear waste fund began in June of 1983 as required by the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act. I am here to tell you that the is the
only component of that program that has ever worked as
intended. Nearly 30 years later, the Federal Government has our
money; we have their waste.
When the Department of Energy submitted a license
application to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in June of
2008, we knew that it could take 3 to 4 years to carefully
review the safety and other aspects of this first-of-a-kind
facility. We were not prepared to learn that after more than 20
years of study and nearly $15 billion that a different
Secretary of Energy would withdraw the license application with
prejudice in March of 2010 with no indication that the site is
unsafe or that the application is flawed. Instead, the motion
to withdraw cited only that Yucca Mountain is considered not a
workable option.
The Department of Energy took other steps to terminate the
Yucca Mountain project that are documented in the April report
of the GAO including disbanding of the Office of Civilian
Radioactive Waste Management that had managed the program. Like
others, we have questioned the legal and administrative
authority of the Department of Energy to disband this office.
As you know, the Department of Energy requested no
appropriations for the waste program for fiscal year 2011 or
2012 except for support for the Blue Ribbon Commission on
America's Nuclear Future. Yet when the Nuclear Energy Institute
and the National Association of Regulatory Utility
Commissioners suggested that the Secretary of Energy suspend
fee payments by utilities to the nuclear waste fund in 2009,
that was denied with an unconvincing pronouncement that all
fees are essential. NARUC and the NEI have appealed that
decision to the Federal Court of Appeals, which is pending.
We can only speculate how much time and money it will take
the United States to be ready to accept spent nuclear fuel for
disposal if it is other than Yucca Mountain but it is likely to
be decades. It seems essential then we seek our and develop one
or more central interim storage facilities to take used fuel
from the nine sites where reactors are currently shut down and
the property cannot be decommissioned returned to other
productive uses because the waste remains such as the former
Big Rock nuclear power plant in Michigan.
Regardless of what storage, transportation or disposal
solutions the Blue Ribbon Commission may recommend, they will
need certain and reliable financing support. Concerning the
financial impacts of terminating Yucca Mountain, a more
predictable funding mechanism would certainly enhance future
waste management. Also, an independent organization outside of
the Department of Energy could be more effective in siting and
developing a permanent repository.
If Yucca Mountain's termination is sustained, it means
starting over to find and develop repositories since there is
clear consensus that least one site is needed in all scenarios.
Unfortunately, there are too many unknowns to begin to forecast
how long it would take to authorize, search and select, fully
evaluate, license, design, construct and be ready to begin
deposits in a new repository yet another 20 years seem to be
highly conservative.
With that, I would conclude my testimony and make myself
available for questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. White follows:]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Now the chair would like to recognize Mr. Kouts for 5
minutes. Again, your full statement is in the record, and
welcome.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER KOUTS

Mr. Kouts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
subcommittee. I am Christopher Kouts, former principal deputy
director of the Department of Energy's now-defunct Office of
Civilian Radioactive Waste Management. I appreciate the
invitation to appear before the subcommittee. I will focus my
remarks on the recently released GAO report that was discussed
earlier by Mr. Gaffigan and the Administration's decision to
terminate the Yucca Mountain project.
As background, for 25 years I served in various technical
and management positions in virtually every program area within
the office. I became the principal deputy director of the
program in 2007 and was the acting director from January 2009
until I retired in early 2010 after 35 years of federal
service. While serving in the program, I was reminded on a
daily basis of the formidable challenges that were given to the
program by the Nuclear Waste Policy Act. As impatient as those
who followed the program have been over the years with its
progress, I believe that any new attempt to establish disposal
or interim storage facilities outside the confines of the act
will be met by many new and likely more vexing challenges
regardless of the organization or entity that is established to
administer the effort.
Now, why will any new effort be more problematic? The
answer to that question lies partly in the advance that society
has experienced in instant communication and information flow.
When the program proceeded through the facility siting process
in 1980s for two repositories and an interim storage facility,
the Internet was not in place. E-mail was not available to the
general public, nor did the social media of today exist. The
24/7 news cycle we now live in will create many opportunities
for those opposed to such facilities to spread rumors and
disinformation. As a result, the credibility of any new process
will be severely challenged from its inception.
In addition, the State of Nevada has given a clear
blueprint to those opposed to such facilities: delay, delay,
delay. And it should be noted that I do not in any way begrudge
the lawsuits or other actions the State has taken over the
years to attempt to impede the project. It was certainly their
right to do so, and I fully respect that. But accordingly, the
time frame of decades noted in the GAO report for a new
repository is nothing more than notional and does not appear to
stem from a comprehensive evaluation of the program's past
experience nor the changes that have occurred since the 1980s.
The report suggests that an independent entity outside of
the Federal Government could be more successful. The ``grass is
always greener'' rules here. It is also my belief that Congress
should have the final word on facility siting and that
ultimately any siting decision will be a political decision,
informed by thorough technical evaluation, just as in the case
of Yucca Mountain.
It is difficult to understand the GAO report's so-called
benefit of terminating the Yucca Mountain Project to afford DOE
the opportunity to explore other approaches. DOE has no
authority to undertake new approaches outside the confines of
the Act, and history has shown that the consensus needed to
develop a new policy path will not come easily or quickly.
Because the development of Yucca Mountain has been such a
contentious and protracted process, it is being suggested that
only consensual siting of these facilities should be pursued. I
would submit to the subcommittee that the U.S. and
international experience in this area proves otherwise. In my
discussions over the years with the directors of repository
programs abroad, they have consistently expressed their
concerns that, due to the very long timeframes repository
programs take to develop, any political consensus at the
beginning can evaporate with one election, just as it has in
the United States with Yucca Mountain. At the end of the day,
implementing a repository program requires steady, consistent,
national leadership.
In closing, beside its questioned legality, the
Administration's decision to terminate the Yucca Mountain
project is disturbing because Yucca Mountain has not failed any
technical or regulatory test. The thousands of scientists and
engineers and others that worked on the project over the years
believe, as I believe, that the site would meet the stringent
regulations of the EPA and the NRC and assure that these
materials would not adversely impact future generations and the
environment. Given the substantial investment this Nation has
made in the site and in the policy that has been supported by
every prior Administration since 1982, I believe the Nation
deserves a final and definitive answer regarding Yucca Mountain
from the NRC licensing process.
Thank you for this opportunity to discuss these issues, and
I would be pleased to answer any questions the subcommittee may
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kouts follows:]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Kouts, and I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes for the first round of questioning.
Again Mr. Hollis, I want to welcome you here, and I think
in my visit out there, which was my second visit, I think it
was even better that I drove because it gave you an idea of how
far the definition of local is. The size of the federal
property that consists and Yucca Mountain is inside, how big is
that land mass?
Mr. Hollis. Well, the county is around 18,000 square miles.
Mr. Shimkus. I was told that the federal property, the BLM,
the DOE, the nuclear test site is the size of the State of
Rhode Island. Is that correct?
Mr. Hollis. Well, the test site is just about the size of
the State of Rhode Island, but that doesn't account for the
Tonopah Test Range and the Nellis Bombing Range.
Mr. Shimkus. So it is a large site, and Yucca, the mountain
itself is not on the outskirts of this Federal Government land.
It is my recollection that we went through the gate, we still
drove 10 or 15 miles to get to Yucca Mountain. Is that true?
Mr. Kouts. If I could answer that question?
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, Mr. Kouts.
Mr. Kouts. Mr. Chairman, the site itself, basically half of
it is on the Nevada Test Site and the other half is on BLM
land. So----
Mr. Shimkus. And so from the security gate, that is how far
of a drive from the first--I mean----
Mr. Kouts. Well, if you entered around Mercury, since the
gate that we used to use is now closed, I mean, you probably
drove about 5 miles form that gate to try to get to a place
near the mountain.
Mr. Shimkus. So when we talk about local consideration,
what is your county seat? What is the city, the county seat?
Mr. Hollis. Tonopah, and from where I live, it is 165 miles
to the county seat.
Mr. Shimkus. And Pahrump, which is the town I visited, is
that the closest community of size?
Mr. Hollis. Yes, it is approximately 34,000.
Mr. Shimkus. Thirty-four thousand, and it is----
Mr. Hollis. The county is about 43,000.
Mr. Shimkus. So you are local in the region.
Mr. Hollis. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. So if we wanted to talk to local individuals--
now, in driving from Las Vegas, it is like--my hometown in
Collinsville, Illinois, and the State capital is a town called
Springfield, it is about 90 miles. Isn't that the distance?
Mr. Hollis. Actually it is probably 130 miles, 135 miles
from Las Vegas.
Mr. Shimkus. No one in Collinsville, Illinois, would say we
are local to Springfield and no one in Springfield, Illinois,
would say Collinsville is local. And so we appreciate your
being here and we appreciate a local voice in this debate on
what the local citizens want to do. And all you are asking is
for the NRC to make a decision?
Mr. Hollis. That is correct.
Mr. Shimkus. Because there is always a debate, and we had
the commissioners here, and this is not a hearing on the
commissioners but we feel that the NRC commissioners have
voted, and we would like to know what the result of that vote
is.
Mr. Hollis. Absolutely. That is what we want to know.
Mr. Shimkus. And so you are also speaking for other
counties that are closer in proximity to the city of Las Vegas?
Mr. Hollis. Well, I pretty well speak for all the counties
around Yucca Mountain that have impact to Yucca Mountain. Those
six counties that I am talking about and that I have
resolutions here in support of.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Mr. Kouts, you mentioned in your bio you were in the Office
of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management, correct?
Mr. Kouts. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. And that office was enacted by--what statute
gave that office the authority?
Mr. Kouts. The Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982.
Mr. Shimkus. And that law is still valid, correct?
Mr. Kouts. Yes, sir, it is.
Mr. Shimkus. And who is in charge of and how many people
are in the Civilian Radioactive Waste Management Office right
now?
Mr. Kouts. Zero.
Mr. Shimkus. And would it be your opinion that if there is
no one fulfilling the role that is under the law that someone
is not abiding by the law?
Mr. Kouts. Although I am not a lawyer, it would seem to me
the department is not following the law.
Mr. Shimkus. And I have 11 seconds. How would it would take
to reconstitute the office and finally reach an answer on how
much that will cost?
Mr. Kouts. Let me preface my estimate by saying that this
all presupposes that the department did not demolish the office
as it tried to demolish the licensing process with impunity
basically. The motion that they filed was with prejudice, which
meant that if indeed it was withdrawn from the NRC, it could
never be resubmitted. So if the department has treated the
office that way, then I think it will take many years. If the
records are in reasonable shape and if you can coax the staff--
and I am not talking about the federal staff, I am talking
about the contractor and scientific staff-back and you can get
the contractors in place, you are going to have to get a law
firm again. Having said that, it would probably take 2 to 3
years to reformulate the office and to get it in a position
where it could begin defend the license again, and from that
point, it will probably take, assuming the NRC has issued their
report or nearby close to that probably at least another 3
years to get a final answer out of the commission, so that will
probably be about a 5- to 6-year time period. That is my
estimate, assuming again they didn't terminate the office with
prejudice.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much. My time is expired.
I would like to recognize the vice chairman of the
committee, Mr. Murphy from Pennsylvania.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kouts, I wonder if you could tell me a little bit of
your background. You are an engineer by trade?
Mr. Kouts. Yes, sir. I have two degrees in engineering, and
I am also a licensed professional engineer.
Mr. Murphy. And you have worked with the Department of
Energy?
Mr. Kouts. I joined the Department of Energy back in 1978
and I joined the program in 1985.
Mr. Murphy. And you have been involved--when you say ``the
program,'' you mean the program with Yucca Mountain?
Mr. Kouts. The Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste
Management. I lived through just about all the siting
challenges, everything else through the act, and I lived in the
program or I was in the program during virtually its entire
existence.
Mr. Murphy. Are you familiar with the legislation that has
been passed and into law regarding Yucca Mountain?
Mr. Kouts. Very familiar.
Mr. Murphy. You have read it?
Mr. Kouts. Many times.
Mr. Murphy. Have you found anything in there which set a
standard in law which talked about social acceptance of sitings
of this?
Mr. Kouts. No, sir, I have read it many times, and I never
found anything like that in there.
Mr. Murphy. Are you familiar with the Department of Energy
or anybody involved with any of these projects ever using that
as a standard to override scientific or legal information?
Mr. Kouts. Only the current Secretary of Energy.
Mr. Murphy. You heard in the previous testimony multiple
times related to their counsel and their Secretary of Energy
saying that that was the standard they were going to use, and
it reminds me of other standards they used when the White House
talked about changing some of the other mandates and
regulations that come up, that they would look at some other
social aspects of this as well. But I am curious as we go
through this if you have any idea of any standard in
engineering at all where this is applied anywhere else in the
universe that we are familiar with.
Mr. Kouts. Well, no, sir, I am not, and I think the irony
of all this as the Nye County representative represented, there
is local support. There is acceptance of a repository there,
assuming--and I would say appropriate local support because I
think they are concerned about its safety. The bottom line is
that just as Dr. Lyons indicated that the local community
around Carlsbad would like it, well, I don't think the local
community around Nye County is any different in that regard
than Carlsbad. So again, I don't understand the standard, I
don't know how it was applied. I wasn't involved in those
conversations, so your guess is as good as mine.
Mr. Murphy. But you had made some reference before to the
term ``consensus.'' Certainly one can find someone in any
community that either the NIMBY principle applies or BANANA,
which means build absolutely nothing anywhere anything. I am
interested in the science and trying to find a safe place to
put nuclear fuel. It is safe where it is now but not long term,
if we are looking at long-term sites here too.
The Department of Energy describes Yucca as unworkable, and
it is a 25-year stalemate. Do you agree with those terms?
Mr. Kouts. I don't believe it has been a stalemate, sir. I
think it has been a very contentious process, and I would deny
that, but I don't believe it was at a stalemate.
Mr. Murphy. Those 25 years weren't spent with just people
wringing their hands, they were working on scientific
information.
Mr. Kouts. That is correct, sir, and we had a great victory
in submitting the license application back in 2008, so I
wouldn't look at that as a stalemate. Unfortunately, they
truncated the licensing process but as I indicated in my
testimony, I believe the Nation deserves an answer on Yucca
Mountain.
Mr. Murphy. And as far as you can tell through your
knowledge and experience, that answer has not been forthcoming
other to say they are looking for some consensus or social
aspects on this but no other. You heard in my previous
questioning of the DOE secretary that we have not seen any
scientific, legal, any information out there of any way, shape
or form which would contraindicate what has been forth as
licensure up to this time?
Mr. Kouts. The answer is no, and I will say that as long as
I was principal deputy and acting director in the program
during this Administration, I was never asked for any technical
information regarding the site, so my assumption was that
technical information was not part of the Secretary's decision-
making process, and had anyone else in my program been asked
for it, I would have known about it. So the bottom line is, to
my knowledge the Secretary's decision was not a technical one,
at least he didn't ask for any information from the program for
it, and he must have used other criteria which again since I
wasn't part of the decision-making process I can't comment on.
Mr. Murphy. I thank you.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The chair
recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Green from Texas.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate the patience. I apologize to our witnesses. We
actually had a markup of the full committee downstairs on a
bill I was working on and also I met with the chair on a little
pipeline from Canada legislation that we are working on, but I
appreciate it. Obviously energy is really important where I
came from, and I appreciate the opportunity a few weeks ago to
come out to Yucca Mountain. I have supported it for my whole
career in Congress, and it was good to see on the ground what
was happening.
Mr. Kouts, in your testimony you mentioned the potential
challenges with restarting the selection process for a nuclear
waste storage facility. I have concern about that process, as I
said with our earlier panel. You mentioned your disagreement
and GAO's recommendation or independent commission and Congress
should have final say. Do you also take issue with the Blue
Ribbon Commission and their potential recommendations?
Mr. Kouts. If you are asking my opinion about the
preliminary recommendations of the Blue Ribbon Commission, I
would use three words. I would say they are predictable. I
would say they are disturbing and I would also say they are
amusing, and let me try to explain why. Predictable in the
sense that if you read the President's Executive Order, it is
very clear that the President had made up his mind that Yucca
Mountain wasn't an option. He talked about in his order that
the last 25 years has basically been unworkable--not
unworkable, he used some other words--but it was a very clear
charge to the commission about what his views were. So what
came out of it was, Yucca Mountain obviously was not on the
table and they want to restart the whole process, and that is
the real troubling part of it because I don't think anyone at
the commission really understands what it will be like for this
country to go through another siting process for a repository.
It was a gut-wrenching, very, very difficult time, not only
inside the Department of Energy but outside the Department of
Energy, and now as I indicated with the social media that we
have and the opportunity for disinformation, it will be
magnitudes more challenging than it was back in the 1980s.
And let me just finish with the amusing aspect of the
preliminary recommendations is that it took so long for them to
come up with their predictable, disturbing conclusions.
Mr. Green. Mr. Hollis, thank you for being here today, and
again, thank you for your hospitality. We had a brief meeting
there. You mentioned your desire to see Yucca Mountain proceed
if the health and safety of individuals of the areas is
protected. You mentioned resolutions passed by Nye County and
other areas. Can you discuss the resolutions and further
explain the position of your county?
Mr. Hollis. Well, the six resolutions, they are just asking
the DOE, Department of Energy and the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission to finish the process, let us finish the license
application, and that is what we are supporting. We want them
to finish their job. We can't make evaluation of the safety of
Yucca Mountain without all the evidence, and we are asking for
all the evidence, and the evidence is that the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission has to follow the licensing application.
It has to be completed before we will know. If it is unsafe, I
will be the first one to stand up and say no. But if it safe, I
will be the first one to say let us build it.
Mr. Green. I typically go with the folks who live in the
neighborhood, and you are about as close as folks that live in
the neighborhood as you can get.
Mr. White, in your testimony, you discussed the need to
develop at least one interim storage facility, that these
potential facilities could be a net savings to the Federal
Government. You suggest one of nine potential locations where
reactors were shut down. Can you further in detail on this
suggestion and how could it help solve or ease the burden of
our nuclear storage dilemma?
Mr. White. Well, there is a couple different aspects to
that question. One of the things we are really concerned about
is the fact that the program has not performed at all, you
know, we have nothing, and we have nine sites around the
country where there are shutdown reactors and many of those
plants, for example, the Big Rock nuclear plant in Michigan,
they have decommissioned that site as much as they possibly
can. What is left on that 750-acre site is an independent spent
fuel storage facility. It is just the dry casks sitting in a
pit, so we cannot return that property to productive use, so we
think that there could be some lessons learned if we could
consolidate at least the fuel at those nine sites, those nine
shut-down sites, into one location, and it would achieve a
savings because currently the customers and the utilities that
own those sites are paying those costs continually despite the
fact that they are no longer generating electricity at that
site.
Mr. Green. You also discussed financing the disposal of
nuclear waste in the nuclear waste fund. If the nuclear waste
fund were not used for the purpose you discussed, what would
alternative means be for financing disposal of nuclear waste?
Because we know part of this came out of our ratepayers,
including my area, and part of it came from just general
revenue. Where would we the other funding?
Mr. White. Well, that is a good question, and I don't have
the answer to that. We agreed to what I call the deal where the
customers would pay the cost. The beneficiaries of nuclear
generation would pay the cost of the program. What we are
frustrated by is we have paid and paid and paid and we have
nothing to show for it, and I can argue that the customers paid
for the design of the spent fuel pools at the reactors. We have
paid for the reconsolidation when those pools filled because
the Federal Government hadn't taken the waste. We paid again
when that fuel was removed and put into dry casks. All the
while we are paying for a federal program with nothing to show
for it.
Mr. Green. I appreciate it. I know my time has run out. Mr.
Chairman, no matter what happens with Yucca Mountain, we still
need a nuclear waste disposal facility, and the President
supports investment in alternative energy, and Secretary Chu
actually gave testimony before our committee that we are unable
to meet the President's goals if we do not invest in nuclear
energy. Part of that is also finding a place to have a
permanent storage, and this means we need to have it stored
safely somewhere, and if not Yucca, then we don't want to have
Members of Congress 25 years from now like we are saying OK,
where are we going to put this, it is still sitting on these
sites all over the country. So thank you for the hearing.
Mr. Shimkus. I thank my colleague, and now I would like to
recognize Congressman Whitfield from Kentucky, who chairs the
Energy and Air Subcommittee, so he is very knowledgeable on
energy issues.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, I hope I can live up to your
expectations, John.
Mr. Shimkus. I hope you can too.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you all for being here. We really
appreciate it.
I think it is very difficult myself to come to any
conclusion except that this Administration is ignoring the law
because the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 did set this up.
In 2002, Yucca Mountain was approved as the site, and for this
Administration to pull back its application for construction,
authorization for construction before any decision has been
made, it seems to me is violation of the law. Would you agree
with that, Mr. Kouts?
Mr. Kouts. Let me preface by saying I am an engineer who
has read the act very many times but I tend to agree with the
administrative law judges at the NRC who when they read the act
could not find any basis for the Secretary to withdraw the
application in section 214, which is the same section that
tells them to submit it. If there was a flaw in the license
application, then I think the Secretary could pull it back and
fix it and then resubmit it, but just to withdraw it with
prejudice, in other words saying that it is never going to be
submitted again, I certainly don't see that authority in the
act.
Mr. Whitfield. And then obviously the NRC's construction
authorization board agreed with that because they refused to
allow them to withdraw the application, and that was in June of
2010, and so we have had one year for the commissioners to take
this issue up and make some decision, and I think that anyone
who has heard Chairman Jaczko testify would certainly walk away
with the conclusion that he is simply dragging his feet,
because one of the commissioners whose term is going to be
expire maybe the end of this month and he knows that the
appointment of the next commissioner will be voting with him,
and yet to do that is violating the policy act.
So it appears, even a reasonable interpretation is, this is
nothing but politics. And then I heard you answer Mr. Murphy
and say you were the acting director of the Office of Civilian
Radioactive Waste Management. So if the Secretary was going to
withdraw this application, it would appear that he would come
to you for some technical information and yet you testified he
did not do so. Is that correct?
Mr. Kouts. That is correct, sir. He did not.
Mr. Whitfield. And so if he didn't want technical
information in making a decision to withdraw, what kind of
information would he need to make a decision like that?
Mr. Kouts. Well, if I could just give you my experience
with the program, having been in it for 25 years, and again, I
was a career SES, I was an acting director, and over the years
I have been involved in lots of meetings and been told not to
attend lots of meetings, and the ones I have been told not to
attend are typically those that are among political appointees
where they are going to discuss political issues. So my
assumption was, since I was not involved in the decision-making
process, that those types of discussions were going on. And we
did not have a political for the program. There was not one
appointed. So therefore there was no one from the program
politically appointed by the President in those meetings but
that is what my assumption was because I wasn't involved.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, I think the logical conclusion is that
it was political. It was done to help Harry Reid. And the
American people are the ones that are going to suffer from
this. Over $15 billion has been invested already. Ratepayers
for utilities are paying fees for this. Taxpayers are now
legally liable to pay over $15 billion in judgments against the
Federal Government because they cannot live up to the
responsibilities of the policy act of 1982.
So it seems to me--and then you take the six counties
closest to the repository, as Mr. Hollis has testified,
actually support the Nuclear Regulatory Commission at least
going through the process and making some final decision and
have adopted resolutions basically to that effect. So I don't
think there is any question that this is bad news for the
American people, it is costly to the American people,
taxpayers, and it is probably a violation of the Nuclear Waste
Policy Act of 1982.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Kouts, I appreciate your testimony. I think the GAO
analysis kind of supports your assertion. Yucca Mountain is the
most studied place on the planet, and I think you were there
for most of the studying.
I just want to remind the second panel that the record will
remain open for 10 days. This hearing may be followed up by
individual questions by my colleagues, so if you could then
answer those and get those back to us as expeditiously as
possible, we would appreciate it.
We will continue to move forward on addressing these
disconcerting events that many of us question the legality of,
and look forward to moving types of legislation that will help
enter another voice of what the vast majority of
representatives of this constitutional republic would like to
do based on previous agreements and laws passed.
So we thank you for your testimony and appreciate your
time. Members have 10 days to submit questions for the record.
And with that, this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:00 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]


