- FISCAL YEAR 2012 HHS BUDGET AND THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PUBLIC LAWS 111- 148 AND 111-152

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FISCAL YEAR 2012 HHS BUDGET AND THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PUBLIC LAWS 111-
148 AND 111-152

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 3, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-14

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-590                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan          HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman                 Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas                    JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
Chairman Emeritus                  EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MARY BONO MACK, California           ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  GENE GREEN, Texas
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                LOIS CAPPS, California
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chair                         JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JAY INSLEE, Washington
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       JIM MATHESON, Utah
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN BARROW, Georgia
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

________________________________________________________________

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  officio)
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Frank Pallone Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     3
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     7
Hon. John D. Dingell, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Michigan, prepared statement................................   127
Hon. Edolphus Towns, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New York, prepared statement................................   128

Witnesses

Kathleen Sebelius, Secretary, Department of Health and Human
Services.......................................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Answers to submitted questions...............................   145

Submitted Material

Letter, undated, from Jay Clary, Acting Associate Commissioner,
Office of Labor-Management and Employee Relations, to James E.
Marshall, Spokesperson, SSA/AFGE General Committee, submitted
by Mr. Waxman..................................................    19
Democratic Staff Memorandum of March 2, 2011, submitted by Mr.
Waxman.........................................................    21
``Medicaid Formula: Differences in Funding Ability Among States
Often Are Widened,'' GAO report dated July 2003, submitted by
Mr. Cassidy....................................................    58
``The Medicaid Commission Report: A Dissent'' by Robert B. Helms
of the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy
Research, dated January 2007, submitted by Mr. Cassidy.........   109
Letter of February 11, 2011, from Mr. Burgess to Ms. Sebelius....   125
``Medicaid Long-term Care: The ticking time bomb,'' undated
Deloitte Center for Health Solutions report, submitted by Mr.
Cassidy........................................................   130

FISCAL YEAR 2012 HHS BUDGET AND THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PUBLIC LAWS 111-
148 AND 111-152

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 3, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:31 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R.
Pitts (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Pitts, Burgess, Whitfield, Shimkus,
Murphy, Blackburn, Gingrey, Latta, McMorris Rodgers, Lance,
Cassidy, Guthrie, Barton, Upton (ex officio), Pallone, Dingell,
Towns, Engel, Capps, Schakowsky, Gonzalez, Baldwin, Weiner, and
Waxman (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Green.
Staff present: Ryan Long, Chief Counsel; Howard Cohen,
Chief Counsel; Clay Alspach, Counsel; Marty Dannenfelser,
Senior Advisor; Julie Goon, Health Policy Advisor; Brenda
Destro, Professional Staff; Paul Edattel, Professional Staff;
John O'Shea, Professional Staff; Monica Popp, Professional
Staff; Heidi Stirrup, Health Policy Coordinator; Jimmy Widmer,
Health Intern; Alex Yergin, Legislative Clerk; Phil Barnett,
Democratic Staff Director; Stephen Cha, Democratic Senior
Professional Staff Member; Alli Corr, Democratic Policy
Analyst; Tim Gronniger, Democratic Senior Professional Staff
Member; Purvee Kempf, Democratic Senior Counsel; Karen
Lightfoot, Democratic Communications Director, and Senior
Policy Advisor; Karen Nelson, Democratic Deputy Committee Staff
Director for Health; Rachel Sher, Democratic Senior Counsel;
and Mitch Smiley, Democratic Assistant Clerk.
Mr. Pitts. This subcommittee will come to order. In light
of the interest in hearing from our distinguished witness
today, and so that every member of this subcommittee may have
time to answer questions, we will be strict in enforcing our
time limits today. That is 5 minutes for questioning and that
is questioning and answers. So don't ask a 5 minute question
and then ask the Secretary to then try to respond in the
remaining seconds. And we have agreed to 3 minute opening
statements. And Chair will recognize himself for an opening
statement. It is 3 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Pitts. I would like to welcome our distinguished
witness today, the Honorable Kathleen Sebelius, Secretary of
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Madame
Secretary, thank you for your time and your testimony today.
The Department of Health and Human Services is a large
department with broad authority and jurisdiction. With the
enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act,
PPACA, we have found that there are several sections of this
new law that require mandatory funding, hence bypassing the
normal appropriations process.
Today's hearing will give us a chance to examine these
provisions and consider the budgetary implications for
implementation and administration of this new law. One aspect
that I am concerned with is the Office of Consumer Information
and Insurance Oversight, OCIIO. Less than a month after PPACA
passed last year, the Department moved regulation of health
insurance from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
where it had been for years to a new office OCIIO which reports
directly to the Secretary. Then in January of this year, the
Secretary announced that OCIIO would be moving and would now be
housed at CMS. This is interesting because OCIIO implements and
regulates many of the new healthcare's private insurance
provisions and CMS runs the Nation's public health programs.
The office has been in the news lately for granting over 900
waivers to private health plans unable to meet various
standards set by Obamacare. It is important to note that the
OCIIO was not authorized nor even mentioned in Obamacare, yet
the President's budget request includes a $1 billion increase
for program management discretionary administration at CMS. It
appears that this additional $1 billion will be funding OCIIO.
I will be interested in learning more about this new office and
the role it plays. And I look forward to seeing more
transparency in the Department's budget. And for my remaining
time I yield to the gentlelady from Tennessee, Ms. Blackburn.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

I would like to welcome our distinguished witness today,
the Honorable Kathleen Sebelius, Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. Madame Secretary,
thank you for your time and testimony.
The Department of Health and Human Services is a large
department with broad authority and jurisdiction. With the
enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
(PPACA), we have found there are several sections of this new
law that require mandatory funding - hence, bypassing the
normal appropriations process.
Today's hearing will give us a chance to examine these
provisions and consider the budgetary implications for
implementation and administration of this new law.
One aspect I am concerned with is the Office of Consumer
Information and Insurance Oversight (OCIIO).
Less than a month after PPACA passed last year, the
Department moved regulation of health insurance from the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), where it had
been for years, to a new office, OCIIO, which reports directly
to the Secretary.
Then, in January of this year, the Secretary announced that
OCIIO would be moving and would now be housed at CMS.
This is interesting because OCIIO implements and regulates
many of Obamacare's private insurance provisions, and CMS runs
the Nation's public health programs.
The Office has been in the news lately for granting over
900 waivers to private health plans unable to meet various
standards set by Obamacare.
It is important to note that the OCIIO was not authorized
nor even mentioned in Obamacare, yet the President's budget
request includes a $1billion increase for "program management
discretionary administration" at CMS. It appears that this
additional $1 billion dollars will be funding OCIIO.
I will be interested in learning more about this new Office
and the role it plays. I look forward to seeing more
transparency in the Department's budget.
I yield to the gentlelady from Tennessee, Mrs. Blackburn.
Thank you.

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I do welcome
the Secretary and I will pick up right where Mr. Chairman left
off with transparency. And I think what is astounding to many
is the lack of transparency in this process and the difficulty
with getting information. We know that our States have fought
the battle indeed; not only companies, but States are receiving
waivers. What we see in front of us, Madame Secretary, seems to
be a confused process. Our States are frustrated. We have heard
from State Legislators, from Governors--they are all beginning
to agree with your former colleague Governor Bredesen who
called this the mother of all unfunded mandates and with others
who said, you know, it is too expensive to afford and this is
something that would bankrupt the States. There is just truly a
dissatisfaction, and one of the things I will highlight with
you today and question with you is my concern over lack of
response and in the adequate response to questions. Yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks gentlelady and yields to the
ranking member, Mr. Pallone, for 3 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Pitts, and I want to
welcome Secretary Sebelius. In these tough economic times I
recognize how difficult budgetary and spending decisions are
for the President and this Congress. I commend the President
for his responsible budget. I only hope that we can work
together to move this country forward to create jobs and to
foster economic growth.
And I want to commend Secretary Sebelius for your agency's
hard work this past year to implement the Affordable Care Act.
I will continue to fight against the Republican efforts to
defund this important landmark law. I can't agree more with
President Obama that as we continue to work our way out of the
recession towards a thriving economy that offers economic
opportunities for all Americans that we must out-innovate, out-
educate, and out-build the rest of the world. And to do that I
believe the Federal Government has a vital role to play.
At the core of innovation is research and development. It
is R&D that propels the science and the business of healthcare.
In fact, a recent report show that healthcare R&D supports
211,000 jobs, and $60 billion in economic activity in my State
of New Jersey. But R&D requires resources. Investments made by
Government can help research projects get off the ground and
leverage resources off the private sector and academia. And
that is why I was very pleased to see that the President's
budget includes Government investments and healthcare R&D. His
budget recognizes that key agencies like NIH and FDA are
essential to facilitate an environment where Americans can
continue to innovate.
I did want to mention, however, my disappointment in one
program. That is the termination of the Children's Hospital
Graduate Medical Education Program. This has reverse declines
in pediatric training programs that had threatened the
stability of the pediatric work force and the small class of
hospitals that receive this funding which includes the
Children's Specialized Hospital in my district represents about
one percent of hospitals nationwide, but trains approximately
40 percent of all pediatricians. Eliminating this program would
have a major negative impact on access to primary care and
impact access to specialty care for children. But--and I wanted
to mention that I am committed to reauthorizing and funding
this program and introducing a bill to do that soon.
But really, I wanted to stress, Madame Secretary, that I
really do think that as we move forward with the Affordable
Care Act, I know the anniversary is coming up I believe on
March 23, just in a couple of weeks. Already, there are so many
of my constituents and so many people that I talk to that talk
about the benefits of, you know, eliminating pre-existing
conditions, of being able to put their children on the
policies, what we have done for seniors in terms of cutting
back on and eventually eliminating the doughnut hole,
eliminating co-pays for preventative care. People are very much
aware of the benefits of this and more and more, I think, as it
continues to be implemented will be. And I am very much opposed
to any efforts to defund the program particularly since we see
the positive benefits from it. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. Chair thanks gentleman and yields 3
minutes to the chair of the committee, Mr. Upton.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Two days ago, we heard
from the--some of the Nation's Governors on the negative impact
that the new law will have on their States in quality of
healthcare. What we heard is similar to what most members
hear--anytime they speak with their Governor, they express
their concern that the mandates and requirements coming out of
D.C. are hindering to deal with the State's problems.
The President did offer, I think, some flexibility on
Monday by declaring that the States could opt out of certain
aspects of the health reform law a few years early as long as
they met every one of the goals. Well, I am concerned that the
States will only be allowed to take advantage of the so-called
flexibility if they construct a program that looks almost
exactly like the system that was set up in the healthcare law.
States need real flexibility without all the strings and
caveats attached.
The President did call on the Governors to come up with a
bipartisan proposal on Medicaid. Dozens of Governors have
already asked for relief from maintenance of effort
requirements so that they can direct Medicaid funds to those
most in need and meet their constitutional responsibility to
balance their State budgets. If States are instead enforced to
impose steep reductions out of payments to providers, they will
likely drive more doctors and other providers out of the
Medicaid program and in some cases out of the practice of
medicine altogether. I believe that is detrimental to both
patients and to the quality of care that they can expect to
receive. If the President wants a bipartisan Medicaid proposal,
then we need to repeal the maintenance of effort is the place
to start, and I hope that the Administration will work with
members of this committee to expeditiously repeal those
requirements.
I would also like to hear from the Secretary what programs
at HHS she believes are redundant and duplicative. With Federal
deficits as far as the eye can see, $1.6 trillion in the
President's budget for 2012, we must go through the budget with
a fine tooth comb. As yesterday's report from the GAO revealed
that the Subcommittee on Oversight Investigations, the Federal
Government is wasting tens of billions of dollars on
duplication, overlap, and fragmented programs. We cannot simply
fund programs because what we did last year or the year before.
Every program has to be scrutinized and I look forward to
working with you, and I yield the balance of my time to Mr.
Cassidy from Louisiana.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing today. I
remember back almost two years ago when the Secretary was asked
to testify on the House health care bill, the Committee was
told by the Chairman at the time that it would be unfair to ask
her to testify on the specifics of the bill because she had not
had time to read it. The House bill was eventually scrapped and
the Senate bill became law. So this Committee never had an
opportunity pose questions to the Secretary on the House bill
or have any type of hearing on the bill that became law.
Although this hearing should have happened a year and half
ago, it is important that we hear from the Secretary on her
Department's efforts to implement the new health law. A quick
search of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, known
as PPACA, shows the phrase ``the Secretary shall'' 1,051 times.
That does not include the additional 24 times that phrase
appears in the companion Reconciliation bill.
To be fair, the Secretary will not be making all of these
determinations. In fact, many of the decisions will be
delegated to unelected bureaucrats who will now be in charge of
every facet of our nation's health care system. Regardless,
Washington will determine what benefits are included in your
insurance and what benefits you will be forced to pay for.
Washington will determine if your doctor or hospital provides
quality care and if in their determination they do not, then
you may not be able to see them.
Section 1311 of PPACA actually has a provision that
provides the Secretary the ability to spend an unlimited amount
of money purportedly on State exchange grants without the need
for Congressional approval or oversight. This point needs
emphasis because it is unprecedented, that Congress would
provide the Secretary a direct tap on the Treasury that is
completely at her discretion to determine how much money she
wants to spend. Americans wanted to keep their quality health
care but lower the costs. Instead they got Washington control
and multibillion dollar slush funds.
The Democrats want the American public to believe this law
is about ten pages long. They talk about taking care of people
with pre-existing conditions; they talk about ensuring that
Americans will not have their insurance taken away when they
get sick; and they talk about letting young adults up to age 26
stay on their parents' plan. These are all things Republicans
have stated a desire to work with the Democrats on. If this was
the goal of health reform, there would not have been a need for
secret deals or a year and a half wasted debating the issue.
Instead, the Democrats tacked on another 2,890 pages filled
with an unconstitutional mandate, an unsustainable ponzi
scheme, a thousand ``Secretary shalls,'' two new, massive
unaffordable entitlement programs, numerous job-destroying
mandates, and $800 billion in new taxes that will make health
care more expensive and jobs harder to come by.
The President has said he doesn't want to relitigate the
past and I don't either. We could talk about Cornhusker
kickerbacks and multi-million dollar earmarks that were used to
get the bill through, but I want to talk about how this law
will bankrupt our States and our country. I think it is
important to examine why all independent analysts believe this
bill will hurt job and wage growth. I want to talk about how
companies are afraid to invest in new employees because of the
uncertainty surrounding this law, and I think all Americans
should understand how this bill will dramatically harm the
quality of health care in this country. I do not think that is
relitigating the past;I think we owe the American people an
open debate about how to preserve this country's future.
Two days ago we heard from some of the Nation's Governors
on the negative impact the new law will have on their States
and the quality of health care. What we heard two days ago is
similar to what most members hear anytime they speak with the
Governor of their State. They express their concern that the
mandates and requirements coming out of Washington are
hindering their ability to deal with their State's problems.
The President offered a fig leaf of flexibility on Monday
by declaring States could opt out of certain aspects of the
health reform law a few years early as long as they meet every
one of his goals. This patriarchal perspective is somewhat
condescending toward the States. In essence, the Administration
is treating the States like the 16-year-old whose parents offer
to buy him a new car. Parents tell their teenager they can have
any car they want - the only catch is that it must meet every
one of the parents' stringent requirements. Low and behold the
only car that fits the bill is the family's 15-year-old station
wagon. So much for choice.
It sounds a lot like one of the promises that was central
to PPACA: if you liked your insurance, you could keep it. Once
Americans read the fine print, they realized you could keep
your plan if you liked it but only if the Secretary feels it
meets her requirements. It makes me think there was an
important caveat to the President's campaign slogan. It seems
"yes we can" really meant, "yes, we can if and only if
Washington and its bureaucrats believe it is best for you."
The President did call on Governors to come up with a
bipartisan proposal on Medicaid. Dozens of Governors have
already asked for relief from maintenance of effort
requirements so that they can direct Medicaid funds to those
most in need and meet their constitutional responsibility to
balance their State budgets. If States are instead forced to
impose steep reductions in payments to providers, they will
likely drive more doctors and other providers out of the
Medicaid program and, in some cases, out of the practice of
medicine altogether. This will be detrimental to patients and
to the quality of care they can expect to receive. If the
President wants a bipartisan Medicaid proposal then repealing
the MoE is the place to start, and I hope the Administration
will work with members of this committee to expeditiously
repeal the maintenance-of-effort requirements.
PPACA established permanent cuts to Medicare providers like
hospitals in order to create new entitlement programs. During
the debate many questioned the wisdom of taking hundreds of
billions of dollars out of the Medicare program while failing
to address its long-term fiscal issues, not to mention the
short-term need to find hundreds of billions of dollars to
reform the Medicare physician payment system to ensure that
doctors continue to see seniors.
The president now proposes a two-year physician payment
fix. I agree that we must fix the Medicare physician payment
system, but I am deeply disappointed with those that stated
they supported the same goal but then raided the program to
establish new entitlements we cannot afford.
The approaches taken by the Democrats last Congress still
confound me. Medicaid is bankrupting the States so Congress
voted to expand it. Medicare cannot pay doctors so they raided
the program to fund new entitlements. Health care is too
expensive so they taxed it and increased the cost. Businesses
are not hiring so they placed more mandates on them to make it
more difficult to create jobs. All the while they ignored that
the fact that most American liked their insurance but they
wanted to find ways to make it less expensive. We can and
should do better.

Mr. Cassidy. Governor Duval Patrick testified Tuesday, that
Massachusetts developed the model for Obamacare and that
Massachusetts gives a vision of our future. I agree. We were
told almost everything else he said, though, was false. We were
told that because of this model that ER visits are down. They
are not. As it turns out, throughout--significantly according
to the Urban Institute and 20 percent in western Massachusetts.
We were told that the private insurance market is unaffected.
Actually, fewer businesses are offering insurance and premiums
are up above the national average. We were told that a cost is
an issue that is being addressed and access is expanding.
Actually, according to the Globe and the National Journal,
people are being disenrolled and ``dental benefits are being
slashed to hundreds of thousands threatening their access to
their dentist.'' Indeed the Democratic State Treasurer said if
the United States implements a plan like Massachusetts, we will
go bankrupt. Now the question before us today is whether we
believe the vision of which we were told, or the vision that we
see. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. Yields 3 minutes
to the ranking chair of the committee, Mr. Waxman.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Madame Secretary, it is a pleasure to welcome
you back to our committee. First, I want to commend you on the
work you are doing to implement the Affordable Care Act. That
is the name of the law. The job you were given by Congress and
the President is imposing but you have met it with leadership
and steadfast commitment. Today's hearing is meant to address
the President's budget proposal for HHS for fiscal year 2012.
You wouldn't know it from the opening statements. But fiscal
year 2012 seems very far away at this point. I am much more
focused on the threats from the continuing resolution passed by
the House. I believe the cuts proposed by the Republican budget
would be just devastating to the mission of your department.
The Republican proposal would cut 23 percent from the Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid services. Well, this will devastate
the ability of the agency to maintain its basic functions like
paying Medicare claims, cracking down on fraud, and funding
health programs through Medicaid and the Children's Health
Insurance Program.
The FDA would see cuts of 17 percent with enforcement of
the new food safety law gutted. The Centers for Disease Control
would be cut by 37 percent leaving Americans more exposed to
viruses and illnesses. The Community Health Centers Program
which has strong bipartisan support would be cut by $1 billion
closing 127 health centers and cutting off 11 million patients
from care they need. Cuts of this magnitude are not belt
tightening or doing more with less. They go to the heart of the
core mission of the agencies that comprise HHS, jeopardize
access to healthcare, research, and the safety of our food and
pharmaceuticals. I agree with President Obama's guidance to us
yesterday in discussing a final CR for this fiscal year.
Disagreements should be bipartisan. They should be free of any
party's social or political agenda, and it should be reached
without delay. Thank you, Madame Secretary, for being here
today and I urge you to continue to work diligently to
implement the essential protections of the Affordable Care Act.
And I would be pleased to yield to any of my colleagues on the
Democratic side. Mr. Engel, I yield to you the rest of my time.
Mr. Engel. Yes, I want to second what Mr. Waxman has just
said. When we look at the Republican budget we see things cut
out that are really just unimaginable. You know, we heard the
Governors and I know, Madame Secretary, you are a former
Governor. We heard the Republican Governors come here and
basically say they don't like the healthcare law. They want
Government to get out of people's lives. You know if Governor
Barbour is happy with Mississippi always being 49th and 50th in
education and healthcare, then I suppose he will be happy with
it. But some of us do feel that healthcare, affordable
healthcare is a right and that is what we tried to do. And the
negativity boggles my mind.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman and at this time will
go to our witness. I would like to introduce our witness, the
Secretary of Health and Human Services, Kathleen Sebelius.
Secretary Sebelius was first elected to the Kansas House of
Representatives in 1986. In 1994, Secretary Sebelius was
elected State Insurance Commissioner for the State of Kansas
and in 2002, she was elected to be the State's Governor. Madame
Secretary, we welcome you to the committee. We look forward to
your testimony.

STATEMENT OF KATHLEEN SEBELIUS, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
AND HUMAN SERVICES

Ms. Sebelius. Thank you very much, Chairman Pitts, Ranking
Member Pallone, and members of the committee. Thank you for
inviting me here today to discuss the 2012 budget for the
Department of Health and Human Services.
In the President's State of the Union Address, he outlined
his vision for how the United States can win the future by out-
educating, out-building, and out-innovating the world so we can
give every family and business the chance to thrive. And I
think our 2012 budget is a blueprint for putting a portion of
that vision into action. It makes investments for the future so
that we grow our economy and create jobs.
But we also recognize that we can't build lasting
prosperity on a mountain of debt. Years of deficits have put us
in a position where we need to make tough choices. In order to
invest for the future we need to live within our means. So in
developing the budget we looked closely at every program in our
department, and when we found waste we cut it. And when
programs weren't working well we redesigned them to put a new
focus on results. And in some cases we cut programs we wouldn't
have cut in better fiscal times. And I look forward to
answering your questions, but Mr. Chairman, I would like to
start with just sharing some highlights.
Over the last 11 months we have worked around the clock
with our partners in Congress and States to deliver on the
promise of the Affordable Care Act. Thanks to the law, children
are no longer denied coverage because of their preexisting
health conditions. Families have protections in the new
Patient's Bill of Rights. Businesses are getting relief from
the soaring healthcare costs and seniors have lower cost access
to prescription drugs and preventive care.
This budget builds on the progress by supporting innovative
new models of care that will improve patient's safety and
quality while reducing the rising burden of health costs on
families, businesses, cities, and States. We make new
investments in our healthcare workforce and community health
centers to make quality affordable care available to millions
more Americans, and create hundreds of thousands of new jobs
across the country.
At the same time the budget includes additional proposals
that strengthen program integrity in Medicare, promote lower
medicine costs, improve Medicare program operations, and reform
the quality improvement organizations which help providers
improve care. The budget also includes saving proposals to
strengthen Medicaid. It includes funding for the Transitional
Medical Assistants Program and Medicare Part B premium
assistance for low income beneficiaries, programs which help
keep health costs down for low income individuals and help them
keep their vital coverage.
To make sure America continues to lead the world in
innovation, our budget includes funding increases for the
National Institutes of Health. New frontiers of research like
cell-based therapies and genomics have the promise to unlock
transformative treatments and cures for diseases ranging from
Alzheimer's to cancer to autism. And our budget will allow the
world's leading scientists to continue to pursue discoveries
while keeping America at the forefront of biomedical research.
And because we know there is nothing more important to our
future than the healthy development of our children, our budget
includes significant increases in funding for childcare and
Head Start.
Science shows that success in school is significantly
enhanced by high quality, early learning opportunities. These
investments are some of the wisest that we can make in our
future. But our budget does more than provide additional
resources. It also aims to raise the bar on quality in
childcare programs supporting key reforms to transform the
Nation's childcare system into one that fosters healthy
development and gets children ready for school; proposes a new
early learning challenge fund, a partnership with the
Department of Education that promotes State innovation in early
education; and these initiatives combined with the quality
efforts already underway in Head Start are an important part of
the President's education agenda to help every child reach his
or her academic potential and make our Nation more competitive.
The budget also promotes strong family relationships. It
supports a child-support-and-fatherhood initiative that
encourages fathers to take responsibility for their children;
changes policies so that more of that support reaches the
children; and maintains a commitment to vigorous enforcement
promoting healthy relationships between fathers and their
children. We also fund new performance driven incentives for
States to improve outcomes for children in foster care such as
reducing long term foster stays and the reoccurrence of child
maltreatment. These children also need to be part of our better
future.
Our budget recognizes that at a time when so many Americans
are making every dollar count, we need to do the same. That is
why the budget provides new support for President Obama's
unprecedented push to stamp out waste, fraud, and abuse in our
healthcare system, an effort that more than pays for itself
returning a record of $4 billion to taxpayers last year alone.
In addition the budget includes a robust package of
administrative improvements for Medicare and Medicaid. The
proposals include prepayment scrutiny, expanded auditing,
increased penalties for improper actions, and strengthens CMS's
ability to implement corrective actions and address State
activities that increase Federal spending. Over 10 years on a
conservative estimate they should deliver over $32 billion in
savings.
Across our department we have made eliminating waste,
fraud, and abuse a top priority but we know that isn't enough.
So over the last few months we have also gone through the
Department's budget, program by program, to find additional
savings and opportunities where we can make our resources go
further.
In 2009, Congress created a grant program to help States
expand healthcare coverage and we have eliminated that program
because it is duplicative. CDC funding has been helping States
reduce chronic diseases but the funding was split between
different diseases: one grant for heart disease, another for
diabetes. We thought it didn't make sense since a lot of those
conditions have the same risk factors like obesity and smoking.
And now States will get one comprehensive grant that allows
them more flexibility to address chronic disease in their home
territories more effectively.
The 2012 budget we are releasing today makes tough choices
and smart targeted investments today so we have a stronger,
healthy and more competitive America tomorrow. That is what it
will take to win the future and that is what we are determined
to do. So thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sebelius follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.002

Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentlelady and recognizes
himself for 5 minutes for questions. Madame Secretary, Section
4002 of the PPACA created a fund to provide funding for
programs authorized by the Public Health Service Act for
prevention, wellness, and public health activities. From the
period fiscal year 2012 to fiscal year 2021, there will be
$17.75 billion deposited in fund. My question is who has the
authority to determine how these funds are spent?
Ms. Sebelius. Mr. Chairman, our department in consultation
with Congress we--presents a spending plan for the prevention
fund a year at a time.
Mr. Pitts. Follow-up on that. Are you authorized to spend
this money without any further Congressional action?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, we are.
Mr. Pitts. Are you authorized to add funds to a program
above and beyond what Congress appropriated for that program in
a given year?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, yes, sir.
Mr. Pitts. Madame Secretary, like most States nationally,
my State is struggling with a major projected shortfall in its
coming budget. The maintenance of effort provision in PPACA for
the Medicaid program is removing a major lever for them to
consider as they try to balance the budget. Can you give me a
yes or no answer as to whether there will be an opportunity to
waive that provision to help Pennsylvania and other States
close their budget holes?
Ms. Sebelius. Mr. Chairman, the question doesn't lend
itself to yes or no. We are--have the ability to grant 1115
waivers to States that improve the Medicaid Program and we are
working very actively with Governors across the country. I have
met with all the new Governors. We have been in 19 States so
far. We are working a budget at a time to look at the
flexibility that Governors are requesting.
Mr. Pitts. Given that the Supreme Court will be looking at
this new law in the coming months or years, we as a Congress
have to prepare for the possibility that a portion of PPACA
might be invalidated while other parts remain. If the
individual mandate were set aside and the remaining portions of
the bill were left intact, what would be the impact in the
total number of uninsured and assuming that number would grow
would the administration seek to find a new way to cover these
folks through Medicaid?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Mr. Chairman, we are confident that the
personal responsibility portion will be upheld. There are 12
judges who have dismissed cases so far: three Federal judges
including one as recently as last week who have held the entire
law constitutional; one Judge in Virginia who found a portion,
the individual responsibility portion, unconstitutional, but
declared it severable and refused to grant an injunction; and a
Florida judge who has ruled another way. So our team is
confident at the end of the day that the law will be held
constitutional. We are looking at a variety of options and
those were examined as the Affordable Care Act was being
considered about the best way--if you eliminate preexisting
conditions to make sure that you have a stable and secure
insurance pool--as you know the personal responsibility section
actually came from the insurance industry, from the American
Association of Health Insurance Plans who felt that the way to
have a solvent pool in an insurance market is to make sure that
you can balance the risk. And that proposal really comes from
the insurance industry.
Mr. Pitts. If you could give me a yes or no--will you
approve of Medicaid Block Grant Program?
Ms. Sebelius. Mr. Chairman, there isn't a block grant
program that is being suggested at this point. But I know that
there is some interest in that. I can't tell you what the
parameters might be. I think a block grant has the real danger
of shifting enormous burdens onto already strapped States.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. I will yield the balance of my time
to Dr. Cassidy.
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you, Ms. Secretary. One of my concerns
is how the State Medicaid budgets are going to be supplemented.
Mr. Waxman the other day spoke about currently there appear to
be discrepancies how much a State should get and how much they
do get. Frankly, his State, California, suffers under this. It
is important because Jonathan Gruber, I think one of your
consultants published an article that says in his State about
1.7 million people will be added to Medicaid, so--under this
plan--so it is going to stress it further. Do you see concerns
with how the current FMAP, SMAP is constructed equity issues
regarding States? I say that because Vermont, although a lower
FMAP, gets about $7,500 permanent resident beneficiary and
Mississippi gets--with a higher FMAP, about $3,000 per
beneficiary. Any thoughts about that?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, I know there are constant concerns
about the formula that is the allocation formula for FMAP.
Mississippi actually has the highest match rate of any State.
Mr. Cassidy. But they only get $3,000 from the Federal
Government. So they have an 83 percent FMAP, but they only get
$3,000 per beneficiary.
Ms. Sebelius. And I won't dispute that. I don't know the
numbers. I do know they have the highest FMAP rate in the
country. I think that there is a constant analysis of changing
demographics, changing populations. I know in your State of
Louisiana it became an issue after Katrina in New Orleans and
the changing demographics of that city changed dramatically
their share of the Federal budget. So there have been concerns
over the past and we would work with Congress to look at
updating the FMAP on a regular basis.
Mr. Pitts. My time is expired. Yield 5 minutes to the
Ranking Member, Mr. Pallone.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would mention to
you that if you would entertain the possibility of upping F map
or doing more with F map I would be glad to oblige. Just so you
had any doubt about where I stand on that issue--would be more
than willing to do another F map bill and increase the F map
funding.
I wanted to ask about innovation, Madame Secretary.
America's competitiveness depends on our ability to innovate
and keep America number one but instead the Republicans
included over a billion dollars in cuts to NIH and over 240
million to the Food and Drug Administration in their 2011 CR,
and I believe this represents a significant setback because key
agencies like NIH and FDA are essential to facilitating an
environment where Americans can continue to innovate. For
instance, at a medical device hearing last week we heard about
CDRH's newly announced medical device innovation initiative and
this is a new Voluntary Priority Review Program by FDA for new
breakthrough medical devices to help innovator companies bring
their products to market. But in the cuts, if the cuts in the
Republican's CR are enacted, FDA did not think they would have
the funds to implement this initiative. And this is just an
example of the dangerous impacts we would see if FDA's budget
is cut by over $240 million. So Madame Secretary, I believe a
cut of 17 percent will slow the approvals for devices, drugs,
and other innovative products, isn't that correct? I mean,
isn't that what we are going to face with the FDA if this CR
becomes law?
Ms. Sebelius. Well I think, Congressman, the President
shares your belief that investments in both the Food and Drug
Administration and in the National Institutes of Health are
wise and strategic investments for the safety and security of
our food supply, and our acceleration of devices and drugs
getting to the market, and to keep America at the forefront of
the biomedical industry which we have been for decades. So he
has made recommendations about investments, enhancements to
both the National Institutes of Health budget and for the Food
and Drug Administration and believes strongly that that is
really keeping a commitment with the--not only the American
public, but growing jobs in the economy that we desperately
need. And that the failure to fund those agencies to the full
extent both jeopardize some of the important responsibilities
they have as well as threaten--I think the last detail I saw
from Dr. Collins at NIH is that for every dollar in research
grants, seven dollars is generated in a local community. So
that it has an enormous ripple effect when research grants are
put out in university communities across this country as well
as the life saving cure possibility that results.
Mr. Pallone. And I mean, the same is true--I mean, the CR
with the NIH, the CR proposes over a billion dollars in cuts to
the NIH budget. For innovation the CR is worse. It appears the
majority of the cuts will come out of the small percent of the
budget for new NIH grants--about 640 million from the budget of
3.9 billion. That would mean thousands of fewer NIH awards this
year. Again, I mean, the cut to the NIH would be devastating on
the cutting-edge research into new cures and treatments for
diseases. If you would just comment on that briefly, because
then I do want to ask about the Children's Graduate Medical
Education.
Ms. Sebelius. Well, as you know, Congressman, the NIH
budget had a dramatic increase in funding thanks to the
investment in the Recovery Act, feeling that scientific
investment was a major innovation effort for the United States.
So they are already struggling with that grant funding which is
coming to an end. And I can tell you it will have a very
chilling impact on research grants across this country if
indeed the NIH budget is not adequately funded in 2012.
Mr. Pallone. All right, let me ask you this about the
Children's Graduate Medical Education because the President has
budget zeroed that out. In my home State of New Jersey, we have
the highest rate of autism in the country, one in 94 children.
In my district, Children Specialized Hospital provides services
to children with disabilities and clinical services to like
4,000 kids. My concern is that you know we have very few
subspecialties in pediatrics right now and in the budget, the
President's budget, it basically justifies zeroing it out by
saying that they want to focus on primary care. But we actually
need more subspecialists, not you know more so by every, you
know, physician's group. So how do you justify that? I mean, it
seems to not make sense to me.
Ms. Sebelius. Well, I would say, Mr. Chairman, I--your
concern about this program we have heard from a number of
people and I can assure you in any different budget time this
would not have been one of the recommendations. The goal was to
try and focus as many GME dollars as possible into the work
force for primary care, gerontology, and to put it into the
programs where the vast majority is training primary care
doctors. But this trade-off is very difficult.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Thank you, Madame Secretary. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Gentleman's time has expired. Recognizes the
chairman of the full committee, Mr. Upton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to just start
off initially by following up on a question that you asked
regarding the maintenance of effort. Now, the President said
earlier this week that if the States could present a bipartisan
proposal on Medicaid that he would like to support it and if
there is broad bipartisan support to repeal the maintenance of
effort, would that be something that you would like to work
with us on to see it happen?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, the President has directed me, Chairman
Upton, to work with the Governors around this proposal, so I
will be very actively involved. And he is eager to see their
ideas. I think what we are eager to do and have pointed out to
a number of Governors is the focus of the--a lot of the cost
drivers is the so-called dual-eligible, which is why at--
Congress was wise enough to include a new office of dual-
eligibles as part of the Affordable Care Act structure. It is
about 15 percent of the population of Medicaid beneficiaries
and over close to 40 percent of the cost nationwide. So we are
really eager to work on those issues.
Mr. Upton. Now, I know that the President--this happened
earlier this week so there has not been a lot of time, but have
you identified a subset of Republican and Democratic Governors
that will be the lead that you are going to work with yet?
Ms. Sebelius. That is not--believe me, I am very
deferential to my former colleagues.
Mr. Upton. I know you are.
Ms. Sebelius. The National Governors Association, Governor
Gregoire chairs it and Governor Heineman from Nebraska is the
vice chair this year. They have been asked to put together a
Governor's group.
Mr. Upton. OK. Let me ask you. In your testimony you
discussed the State-based health insurance exchanges that were
created by the new law. As noted in your budget you are
provided a mandatory appropriation, not simply an authorization
of such sums as necessary to issue grants to States. Is there
any monetary limitations to the grant making authority?
Ms. Sebelius. No, sir.
Mr. Upton. The----
Ms. Sebelius. With the exception that the exchanges have a
series of legal parameters that have to be met in order to draw
down funds.
Mr. Upton. Under Section 1311H, it authorizes your
department to force doctors, hospitals, and other providers to
meet new quality requirements or face expulsion from
contracting with any qualified health plans offered in the
exchange. Has HHS started to draft any regulations yet on
that--those provisions that you are aware of?
Ms. Sebelius. Mr. Chairman, I am not aware of any mandatory
provider provisions or expulsion. I will be glad to answer that
question in writing. I don't--I am not familiar with the
section that you are speaking of off the top of my head----
Mr. Upton. OK.
Ms. Sebelius. I am sorry.
Mr. Upton. Before the House Budget Committee two weeks ago,
I want to say a Richard Foster CMS was asked about two of the
main claims that the supporters of PPACA talked about. First he
was asked about whether the claim that the law would hold down
cost--whether it was true or false. He said false more so than
true. And second, he was asked whether Americans, whether they
could keep their health care plans if they like them and he
indicated that it was not true in all cases. So those are his
words. Do you agree or disagree with some of the things that he
said?
Ms. Sebelius. Mr. Chairman, I have read Mr. Foster's
testimony and I think that what he has indicated is that he
does not feel it is likely that Congress follow the outlines of
the law. I--if indeed the law has changed there will be a
different result. We believe the Congressional Budget Office
analysis that--which was updated just I think 10 days ago--that
$230 billion would be saved over the next 10 years and a
trillion dollars over the two decades is an accurate
assessment. If indeed the laws change there needs to be a
different assessment.
Mr. Upton. Last question I have is regarding the
grandfather status on the healthcare plans. By some estimates
provided in your department's rule anywhere between 87 million
and 117 million Americans will not be able to keep their
healthcare plan. Does the Administration continue to claim that
the healthcare law will in fact allow their plan--allow
Americans to keep their plan if they like it?
Ms. Sebelius. Mr. Chairman, the law is built around the
private insurance market and as you know employers voluntarily
enter that market and make decisions a year at a time on plan
design, on provider issues, on network issues. The grandfather
clause is designed to make sure that as much as possible,
without shifting major financial burdens onto consumers or
dramatically changing benefits, that plans can indeed keep
exactly the plan moving forward, making adjustments in premiums
as they go along. But nothing precludes what has been part of a
dynamic market in the private sector all along which is that
employers choose year in and year out, moving in and out of a
marketplace.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time has expired. Chair
recognizes the Ranking Member of the Full Committee, Mr.
Waxman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madame Secretary, as I
mentioned in my opening statement I am deeply concerned about
the cuts proposed by the Republicans for the remaining seven
months of this fiscal year and their continuing resolution H.R.
1. I have a letter, Mr. Chairman, I would like to insert in the
record by unanimous consent from the Social Security
Administration to its employees.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.003

Mr. Waxman. This letter states that the Social Security
Administration may have to initiate furloughs if the budget
cuts being considered by the House become law. Why would that
matter to Medicare, Madame Secretary?
Ms. Sebelius. That the Social Security Administration?
Mr. Waxman. Right, well the Social Security Administration
processes the new enrollments into Medicare. Furloughs at the
Social Security Administration would lead to backlogs in
processing new enrollment and gaps in coverage for nearly half
a million new Medicare beneficiaries. So that should be of
concern not just for Social Security, but for the Medicare
Program.
Ms. Sebelius. Well, and Mr. Waxman, as you know the first
of the baby boomers became Medicare eligible so we are seeing
an expanded Medicare beneficiary class this year and every year
of the immediate future. So enrolling people in a timely and
accurate fashion is hugely important.
Mr. Waxman. So that would really bop the baby boomers who
are becoming Medicare----
Ms. Sebelius. 2011 is the first baby boomer Medicare-
eligible class.
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Chairman, I have an analysis from the
Democratic Staff that I would like to ask for unanimous consent
to insert into the record.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.013

Mr. Waxman. This memo documents the size of the cuts
proposed by the Republicans--funding for CMS, the agency that
runs the Medicare, Medicaid, and the Children's Health
Insurance Program by 23 percent once you consider the fact that
the year is almost halfway finished. This is not a little
haircut or matter of finding some efficiencies. That kind of a
cut could prevent CMS from performing its core duties, paying
for the healthcare needs of seniors, persons with disabilities,
mothers, and kids in Medicare, Medicaid, and CHIP. Madame
Secretary, would you be concerned about the impact on Medicare
beneficiaries of a proposed 23 percent cut combined with delays
in processing the new enrollments?
Ms. Sebelius. Mr. Chair--I mean, yes, Congressman. It would
be very difficult to continue the services to the American
people. As you know, the administrative costs for Medicare in
the budget year 2010 included no Affordable Care Act
implementation because there was no Affordable Care Act. So
what we are talking about is an enormous reduction in the
overall ability to administer Medicare, Medicaid, the
Children's Insurance Program at a time when there are
significantly more beneficiaries in each of those programs
around the country.
Mr. Waxman. And it is not limited to CMS across your
department. Vital public health, vital public safety functions
would be jeopardized. For instance, FDA would be cut and face
an effective cut of 17 percent for the remainder of this year.
Wouldn't this be a cut of that--wouldn't a cut of this
magnitude seriously undermine FDA's responsibilities to rapidly
identify and respond to food related health threats and its
mission to protect patients from faulty or substandard drugs or
devices?
Ms. Sebelius. Well Congressman, the President has
recommended about a 31 percent increase in the Food and Drug
Administration because of the new responsibilities with the
Historic Food Safety Act and public initiatives.
Mr. Waxman. But he didn't anticipate this kind of a cut in
this year. He was proposing more----
Ms. Sebelius. No, sir.
Mr. Waxman [continuing]. Money for next year. The
Republicans are proposing to cut a billion dollars in funding
to the community health centers as part of a shocking nearly 50
percent reduction for programs administered by the Health
Resources and Services Administration, HRSA. That cut to health
centers could result in the closure--no, would result in the
closure of 127 health centers and countless layoffs. Wouldn't
that jeopardize access to patient care?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, community health centers have long been
a bipartisan effort to build a public health infrastructure
delivering low-cost, high-quality preventive care around the
country, and that would seriously impact people's health
services.
Mr. Waxman. And for my last question about Medicaid, every
State has a different Medicaid Program. There is flexibility
already in that program. At Tuesday's hearing Governor Barbour
and Herbert asserted the need for total flexibility. Governor
Barbour said the problem is Federal regulations don't allow
for--allow a provider to deny services to an individual on the
basis of the individual's ability to pay. In addition, no cost
sharing measures can be imposed on many Medicaid enrollees
including children. Madame Secretary, can you talk about the
flexibility that is already in the system and how that is
balanced against the minimal levels of beneficiary and provider
protections with regard to cost sharing access to providers and
more?
Ms. Sebelius. The Medicaid Program as you say is a Federal/
State partnership and the program does look different in States
around the country. The program already has enormous
flexibility in the Affordable Care Act gives even more
significant flexibility designing benefit packages, designing
for some of the upper income beneficiaries cost sharing, making
sure that optional services in some States are part of the
package and other States they are not. So there is a wide
variety of program designs. Some are entirely in managed care.
Others are not. We are working actively--as you know, the
Nation has a host of brand-new Governors and working actively
with each of those States to not only give them a snapshot of
what their program looks like but also the strategies that have
been implemented in other parts of the country that have been
very effective in delivering care and saving costs.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. The gentleman's time is expired and
will yield 5 minutes to the vice chairman of the committee, Dr.
Burgess.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I don't want to
take up too much time, but I would just point out to the
Ranking Member of the Full Committee that the Democrats did
have an entire year with which to come up with their budget and
their appropriations. And it is only because they failed to do
their work that we are doing the CR right now. Let me direct
your attention once again----
Mr. Pallone. The House asked that the Senate and public had
stopped it----
Mr. Burgess. I know Chairman gets--the time--reclaiming my
time. Chairman Pitts referenced Judge Vinson's ruling in
Florida from earlier in February and I sent you a letter on
February 10 asking you about the implementation plans of HHS to
which I have not yet received an answer. My concern is Judge
Vinson in his ruling said that a declaratory judgment is the
functional equivalent of an injunction and he went on to say
that officials of the executive branch will adhere to the law
as declared by the court.
As a result the declaratory judgment is a functionally
equivalent--a declaratory judgment is the functional equivalent
of an injunction. There is no reason to conclude that this
presumption should not apply here. You apparently feel
differently and we heard from our Governors earlier this week
that they are in fact feel like they are on--I think Governor
Herbert said shifting sands. You feel that ultimately the
individual mandate will be upheld as constitutional by the
Supreme Court. Judge Vinson felt otherwise. We are in a period
where I wish we could accelerate or expedite the Supreme Court,
but apparently I don't get my wish.
The Supreme Court will likely rule in June 2012 and that is
a long time for the States to look at this and wonder which
direction do we go. You could certainly provide some guidance
and some help by saying you know we are going to look seriously
at what Dr.--at what Judge Vinson said. So I still await a
response from your letter but could you briefly give me some
comfort that you are going to comply with the judge's order?
Ms. Sebelius. Congressman, I think it is far from clear
what Judge Vinson's order indicates, so the Justice Department
has gone back to the judge to ask him for a clarification of
his order that----
Mr. Burgess. Yes, reclaiming my time. Again, I think he
stated it as clearly as he could. He is going to restate that
and I look forward to his decision as well. But honestly, the
decision of a member of the executive branch not to adhere to
the directive of the court is--I think troubling.
Ms. Sebelius. He did not file an injunction, as you know,
which is the standard procedure if we have asked him----
Mr. Burgess. But attorneys----
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. To clarify and look forward to
his----
Mr. Burgess. But Governors all across this country right
now including my State of Texas and I know Attorney General
Greg Abbott is very concerned about what do--you know, what do
we do now because we don't know. Let me----
Ms. Sebelius. But there isn't anything now that is being
done with the individual responsibility portion.
Mr. Burgess. Well, I look forward to your written response
to the letter I sent you a month ago and I hope that you will
provide that for us.
Ms. Sebelius. We will.
Mr. Burgess. We heard some of the questions have already
centered around some of the issues of mandatory funding within
the law that was signed last year and I am particularly
concerned about Section 4101 both A and B. 4101A provides
mandatory spending for the construction and only the
construction of school clinics. 4101B creates new discretionary
funding for paying the doctor and nurses who are going to work
in those school clinics. So I guess the question is why is the
construction mandatory and paying the staff discretionary?
Ms. Sebelius. That is the way the bill was constructed by
members of Congress.
Mr. Burgess. By members of the Senate Finance Committee
Staff. And to take up where Chairman Upton was talking just a
moment ago I would draw your attention in the law to Section
1311. It is on page 79, 78 of my copy of the law where under
Enhancing Patient Safety beginning on January 1, 2015, a
qualified health plan may contract with part B, a healthcare
provider only if such provider implements such mechanisms to
improve healthcare quality as the Secretary may by regulation
require. I mean that is pretty specific, too. So where are you
going with this? What have you directed your staff to look at?
I mean again, providers all over the country are asking me what
does this mean for us. Well, again, perhaps I could get that
response in writing.
Ms. Sebelius. I am----
Mr. Burgess. But you know I think--look, we switched sides
here in January and the reason we switched sides was because of
this law. It is precisely because of this type of language in
this law that the American people looked at this and rejected
the notion of what was forced upon them last year. There is
unprecedented power now that goes to your office, unprecedented
spending that goes to your office. These are decisions that are
made exclusively by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
At no other time in our history has so much power gone to one
Federal agency. Can you understand why the American people are
understandably concerned by what has happened to them?
Ms. Sebelius. Congressman, I think that the American public
should be alarmed if we are paying taxpayer dollars to any
provider or a hospital bed of over 50 which doesn't have a
quality system in play. I----
Mr. Burgess. But quality determined by the Secretary.
Quality determined by the Secretary and no other--no right of
appeal, no secondary motion may be made--only by the Secretary.
That is what is affecting----
Ms. Sebelius. It would be in the CMS guidelines in terms of
payments for Medicare, payments that, when that rule is
promulgated, there will be plenty of public input. But again, I
think it would be alarming if we paid taxpayer dollars without
the quality measurement.
Mr. Burgess. May I just add, the 10 rules have gone without
public comment. Ten rules have gone into action.
Mr. Pitts. Gentleman's time is expired. Yield 5 minutes to
the Ranking Member Emeritus, Mr. Dingell.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you for you courtesy. Welcome Madame
Secretary. It is a pleasure to see you here.
Ms. Sebelius. Sir.
Mr. Dingell. Your old dad who served on this committee with
me and worked in this room would be very proud of what you are
doing. Thank you. Questions with regard to the Affordable Care
Act, the continuing resolution H.R. 1 makes a number of blunt,
reckless cuts in programs that are critical to the health and
wellbeing of the American people. At the same time, the
Affordable Care Act has begun implementing historic consumer
protections including insuring coverage for children with pre-
existing conditions, prohibiting rescissions on coverage by
insurance companies, allowing children up to 26 to stay on
their parents' insurance, amongst others. Under H.R. 1, CMS
would receive a cut of 458 million or more than 23 percent of
that agency's 2010 budget. Will H.R. 1 delay or impede the
implementation of the consumer protection provisions of the
health reform act, yes or no?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Madame Secretary, would you please give us for
the record a statement as to how and where these cuts will come
and what will be the affect on the programs involved? Madame
Secretary, the Affordable Care Act provides seniors on Medicare
with a 50 percent discount on brand name drugs, a critical step
towards increasing the coverage under Medicare Part D. Will
H.R. 1 delay or prevent the seniors from receiving this
discount, yes or no?
Ms. Sebelius. Mr. Chairman, the cuts to Medicare services
will----
Mr. Dingell. But it is a danger?
Ms. Sebelius. Pardon me?
Mr. Dingell. But it is a danger that it will affect those
provisions?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir, yes sir.
Mr. Dingell. All right, Madame Secretary, just yesterday we
heard from Medicare Program Integrity Group Director John
Spiegel regarding the anti-fraud efforts at CMS including the
new tools provided by ACA to prevent fraud before it occurs.
Will H.R. 1 delay or harm efforts to prevent fraud, waste, and
abuse in Medicaid or Medicare, yes or no?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Would you submit for the record a statement as
to how and why?
Ms. Sebelius. I will.
Mr. Dingell. Madame Secretary, with regard to food safety
as you know another important undertaking is the implementation
of FDA Food Safety Modernization Act. This legislation made
historic investments in our food safety system and provided new
authorities to help FDA to prevent food safety programs before
they occur throughout the food supply. H.R. 1 included $241
million in cuts from the FDA. Will this cut or these cuts
impede FDA's ability to implement the Food Safety Modernization
Act, yes or no?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir, they will.
Mr. Dingell. Would you please explain that for the record
if you please, Madame Secretary?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Madame Secretary, last Congress I enjoined
with my colleagues Mr. Waxman, Mr. Pallone, and Mr. Stupak to
introduce drug safety legislation that would give the FDA the
authorities and resources it needs to adequately protect
consumers from unsafe drugs and to monitor our food safety or
rather the safety of our drug supply. Will H.R. 1 impede FDA
center for drug evaluation and research from evaluating and
monitoring drugs for safety and effectiveness, yes or no?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Madame would you submit an explanation as to
why that is so? Madame Secretary, the FDA is consistently and
chronically underfunded and I continue to hope that FDA will
get needed registration fees to help fully implement the food
safety law. I note that those fees would have--were approved by
and supported by the industry. Do you believe that registration
fees are necessary to implementing the Food Safety
Modernization Act, yes or no?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Madame Secretary, you have been requested or
the department has been requested to produce documents of the
benefit of this committee. I would note Madame Secretary that
HHS has produced over 50,000 documents I note a significant
expense in response to the committee's requests related to the
waiver process and the creation of CCIO. Would you submit to
the statement or rather submit to the committee a statement as
to how you have complied with that request for papers and
documents and what seem to be the problems if any that exist
with regard to the committee's requests for information?
Ms. Sebelius. I would be happy to submit that.
Mr. Dingell. Madame Secretary, we have completed our
business with 11 seconds. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired and Chair
recognizes chair emeritus of the committee, Mr. Barton.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Secretary--
Madame Secretary. Congratulations to your Jayhawks for beating
my Texas Aggies last night in basketball. I hated to see it,
but you all were the better team.
I think Dr. Burgess asked this question, but I am going
to--I may ask it in a little bit different way. I think you are
very well aware that a Federal court has recently ruled that
the healthcare law that became law last year is
unconstitutional. As the Chief Administrative Executive in
charge of implementing that law what is your position on
agreeing to the court order and ceasing to implement the new
law? Do you intend to agree with it? Are you going to ignore
it? Or are you going to appeal it? Could you enlighten us as to
what your position is on this recent court ruling?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Congressman Barton, thank you on behalf
of the Hawks. We have sought a clarification from Judge Vinson
about the implication both for the plaintiff States as well as
the membership of the NFIB which is one of the plaintiffs in
the Florida case. Once we get that clarification we intend then
to take next steps. In the meantime we are actively
implementing the law because, as you know, Judge Vinson is now
an outlier in terms of what the other Federal judges--the four
other judges who have ruled, have ruled very differently than
the judge. So we are seeking clarification and continuing to
move ahead.
Mr. Barton. What is your timeline on that?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, the plaintiffs and the--we expect to
hear back from the judge soon. The DOJ has filed their
clarification request. The plaintiffs have responded this week,
and the judge indicated that he would rule very quickly.
Mr. Barton. Is it once that information is received from
the judge is--whose decision is it? Is it your decision? Is it
the Attorney General's decision? Is it the President's decision
or all of the above on how to proceed?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, our legal team is led by the Department
of Justice so we defer to their legal counsel.
Mr. Barton. Do you have official input into the decision?
In other words----
Ms. Sebelius. Into the legal counsel's decision?
Mr. Barton. Well, you are the Secretary of Health and Human
Services.
Ms. Sebelius. I understand. I--our legal counsel is
involved with the justice team, but they are proceeding to have
this dialogue with the court.
Mr. Barton. OK. I would disagree with you that the judge's
decision was an outlier. My understanding is that if you are
keeping score it is 2 to 2. So I don't----
Ms. Sebelius. No, it is 3 to 2.
Mr. Barton. We had--have we had another one?
Ms. Sebelius. I have to keep an accurate score and as I say
there are 12 who have dismissed the case outright, so.
Mr. Barton. All right.
Ms. Sebelius. And Congressman, the clarification I would
make is that in the other decision which came out of a court in
Virginia where the judge found an individual responsibility to
be the one portion of the law that he found unconstitutional,
he disagreed with Judge Vinson's description that it was
essential to strike down the entire law and so that is what I
meant----
Mr. Barton. Yes, I am aware of that.
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. In terms of the outlier.
Mr. Barton. And I guess one more--one last question on
that. Is it conceivable that the Obama administration would
appeal directly if the decision is to appeal--would appeal
directly to the Supreme Court so that we get this thing solved
hopefully before the next presidential election?
Ms. Sebelius. Congressman, the Attorney General of the
State of Virginia has filed an expedited appeal to the United
States Supreme Court asking them to grant cert in the case in
Virginia. The Administration has opposed that decision to
expedite, but that is now before the court. So that is ripe and
the court will make a decision on whether or not they intend to
expedite this case.
Mr. Barton. My time has just about expired. I have got a
number of questions for the record I will submit in writing. My
final question is on NIH. Several years ago we passed an NIH
Reform bill through this committee that was signed into law.
That bill was a reauthorization bill. It lapsed several years
ago and it is up for renewal. I am going to encourage Chairman
Upton to have a hearing and hopefully do a reauthorization on
that later this year or next year, but in that was the creation
of a Common Fund to try to get more cross-semination,
insemination between the various NIH organizations. Have you
followed that? And if so, could you give us an update on how
you believe that common fund is operating?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Mr. Chairman, I know that the new
director of the National Institutes of Health has taken a great
interest in the Common Fund and has actively involved in not
only seeking to fill gaps in research but directing it to the
most promising options he feels in the research field. So I
think it has been something that has been definitely a stream
of funding that has been very important and one that I would be
happy to get some detail from Dr. Collins on exactly where
those funds are being directed. But it is something that he
takes very seriously.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Madame Secretary. And thank you.
Mr. Pitts. Gentleman's time is expired. Chair yields 5
minutes to the gentleman from New York, Mr. Engel, for
questions.
Mr. Engel. Well, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You
know I have been listening to the whining and complaining on
the other side of the aisle and it just really boggles my mind,
Madame Secretary. But the bottom line is do we want to provide
American citizens with healthcare or don't we? I know there
hasn't been any enthusiasm for the Affordable Care Act on the
other side of the aisle, but you know let us try to improve it
rather than try to destroy it.
I noted with a bit of a chuckle the assault on the
Massachusetts law. The fact is that the Governor of
Massachusetts came here and said that the law is working and I
wonder if Governor Romney is going to run on his strong
implementation of that law in the Republican primaries when he
runs for president. Madame Secretary, what are the most
dangerous things in the Republican cuts as you see it from your
very important point of view of providing healthcare for
Americans and all the other things that are in the Republican
plans for funding the Government? What do you see as the most
draconian of the cuts and how would it affect the health of the
American people?
Ms. Sebelius. Congressman, the President feels strongly
that education, innovation, building are key blocks for the
future. So the investment in early childhood education, which
pays huge dividends down the road; the investment into
scientific research to keep us at the front of biomedical
innovation; the infrastructure for public health delivery with
community health centers; and funding the training of
providers--all of those are jeopardized without, you know,
having adequate funding in the future as well as essential
services. The centers for Medicare and Medicaid and--are
looking at increased beneficiaries in a very restrictive budget
and our efforts to have new fraud, waste, and abuse efforts
which are really paying off are very much in jeopardy.
Mr. Engel. You know what I see in terms of the Republican
for funding the Government, it is not a matter of the fact that
we need to cut to balance a budget. We do need to balance our
budget and I find it odd that we are giving these huge tax
breaks to wealthy people and that blows a hole in the budget.
And I find that very interesting, but it is an attempt as I can
see it to get rid of all the programs Republicans having liked
for all these years and to try to tie it in and kind of use the
budget problems to do that. You know we see it on a State level
in Wisconsin. We see it all over the country. And we see it on
a national level as well. We had Governor Barbour here and he
complained that he didn't like the Affordable Care Act and he
would agree to block a grant. Do you think the people of
Mississippi would be better off four years from now under
Governor Barbour's blocked grant program or under the
Affordable Care Act?
Ms. Sebelius. Congressman, I don't know a lot of the
details about the Mississippi healthcare situation. I do know
that they have a population that, by poverty level, qualifies
them for the highest FMAP rate. And one of the challenges of
any kind of block grant is if you would look at the recent
economic downturn when millions more Americans qualified for
Medicaid because they lost their jobs or their incomes took a
drastic downturn. No State would have any help from the Federal
Government in responding to that. It shifts huge burdens
frankly onto State bases and doesn't have a Federal partnership
moving forward.
Mr. Engel. Let me ask you this. There have been a number of
criticisms of the Pre-existing Condition Insurance Program and
I would like to just review the facts. First there was concern
over whether there won't be enough money for all the people
that will enroll. Then we heard that very few have enrolled and
both criticisms were asserted as failures. How many people have
enrolled and what changes have you made to the program in
response? And let me throw out another question tying in with
this. Governor Barbour at Tuesday's hearing asserted they were
unable to run the program. So were States given the opportunity
to run the program? Could they have run it in combination with
existing high risk pools in the States? And the irony as I see
it is that a high risk pool was essentially a tattered feature
in the Republican proposal for health reform debated right in
this very committee last year. So I wonder if you can comment
on those things.
Ms. Sebelius. Well, there are now approximately 12,000
people across this country who are enrolled in their State or
the Federal high risk pool and the enrollment increased by
about 50 percent over the last couple of months. Many States
are--finally got their program set up, are doing aggressive
outreach, are informing people but as you know there are some
pretty strict requirements. You have to be uninsured for six
months which is a barrier to a lot of folks. And the insurance,
even though it is capped at market rates is still not
inexpensive coverage. This was always designed as a bridge
strategy to try and get to 2014 when the market rules will
change and for the first time ever in the history of this
country we will have insurance available without regard to
people's pre-existing health condition. They will be able to
participate in a broad based pool.
Mr. Pitts. Gentleman's time has expired. Chair recognizes
the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madame Secretary,
welcome. We have been waiting to visit with you for a long
time. I would just--I would state that you know it is funny
that you mention that NFIB which is a National Federation of
Independent Businessmen were plaintiffs. When I thought they
got such great small business tax credits that I wouldn't
really expect them to be in opposition to this law. I--it is
just I am surprised to hear that. The other thing--you were a
Governor of a State and I would imagine that had you been
governing--did you ever pass--under governorship was budgets
passed? Did you pass budgets when you were Governor?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. Was the chambers held by just Democrats in the
Senate and the House or did you have----
Ms. Sebelius. Never.
Mr. Shimkus. What is that?
Ms. Sebelius. Never.
Mr. Shimkus. Never. And you passed budgets?
Ms. Sebelius. We did.
Mr. Shimkus. And then the last Congress we held--Democrats
held the House of Representatives. That is true, right?
Ms. Sebelius. And the house passed a budget.
Mr. Shimkus. And they also held the Senate.
Ms. Sebelius. They did.
Mr. Shimkus. And we have a Democratic President?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, we do.
Mr. Shimkus. And we didn't pass a budget?
Ms. Sebelius. I think the House passed a budget.
Mr. Shimkus. So I am--I guess I am trying to be a little
cute. The point is the Democratic attack on this CR is because
of their failure to pass a budget. So they can position all
they want, you know we are in the majority because they can't
pass a budget.
Mr. Pallone. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Shimkus. No, I will not. We are in the majority because
they passed this bill--became a law. We are in the majority
because they passed Cap and Trade. Our frustration is the last
time you visited this committee was February 4, 2010, the last
time. This bill was not even the law of the land. I became
Ranking Member of the Health Subcommittee. After that vote
Nathan Deal left and I think I asked the then-Chairmen Waxman
and Frank Pallone who really is a great friend 19 times to ask
you to come visit us. You never came. Why? Why didn't you come
after the law to help us understand the provisions and the
implementation of this law?
Ms. Sebelius. Congressman, I responded to the request that
I got.
Mr. Shimkus. So you are saying we never requested you to
come back?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. So Chairman Waxman did not ask you to come
back to help explain this law?
Mr. Pallone. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Shimkus. No, I will not.
Mr. Pallone. He is referencing the Chair and it is not
accurate.
Mr. Shimkus. No, I will not. I will not. Will you answer
the question, Madame Secretary? Chairman Waxman never asked
you----
Ms. Sebelius. Congressman, I will go back. I need to look
at the record.
Mr. Shimkus. OK.
Ms. Sebelius. All I can tell you is I respond to the----
Mr. Shimkus. Will you submit the answer for the record in
writing?
Ms. Sebelius. I will be happy to.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much. Let me go--this is really
a budget--our frustration is there are so many particular
problems and concerns we haven't had a chance to really talk to
you. This is a budget hearing so let us talk about a budget
issue. In that February 4, 2010, hearing I asked you a
question; it was kind of out of the same way. And then you
admitted that the $500 billion Medicare cuts, there were $500
billion in Medicare cuts. Is that correct?
Ms. Sebelius. No, sir, it is not correct. There were $500
billion in a slowdown in growth rate spending.
Mr. Shimkus. Well, I would refer--I am reclaiming my time.
I would refer you to the transcript.
Ms. Sebelius. Sir.
Mr. Shimkus. And I will read it if you want me to.
Ms. Sebelius. The growth rate was projected in Medicare to
be at 8 percent.
Mr. Shimkus. ``Mr. Shimkus: So the President supports
cutting $500 billion in Medicare, yes or no? Secretary
Sebelius: The President is supportive of the health reform
legislation. Is that a yes? Secretary Sebelius: I said yes,
sir.'' So our problem in this whole debate on Medicare cuts----
Ms. Sebelius. The health legislation doesn't include $500
million worth of cuts.
Mr. Shimkus. Ma'am, my concern--this is a budget hearing,
so there is a--there is an issue here on the budget because
your own actuary has said you can't double count. You can't
count 500--they are attacking Medicare on the CR when their
bill, your law cut $500 billion in Medicare. Then you are also
using the same $500 billion to what? Say you are funding
healthcare. Your own actuary says you can't do both. So my
simple question--I have 26 seconds left. What is the $500
billion cuts for: preserving Medicare or funding healthcare
law? Which is it?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, the Affordable Care Act adds 12 years to
the Medicare Trust Fund according to every actuary and the $500
billion represents a slowdown in the growth rate of Medicare
over 10 years from what was projected at 8 percent to a growth
rate of six----
Mr. Shimkus. So is it Medicare? Is he using it to save
Medicare or are you using it to fund healthcare reform? Which
one?
Ms. Sebelius. Both.
Mr. Shimkus. So you are double counting. I yield back my
time.
Mr. Pitts. Gentleman's time is expired. Chair recognizes
gentlelady from California, Mrs. Capps, for 5 minutes of
questions.
Mrs. Capps. I am pleased to yield 10 seconds to the ranking
member of the subcommittee.
Mr. Pallone. I just wanted to say, Mr. Shimkus, you
shouldn't be asking the Secretary about whether we invited her.
Fact of the matter is that Mr. Waxman and myself did not invite
her after the healthcare bill passed. And you can simply
address that to us and the answer is no, we didn't invite her.
So it is not that she failed to come, we did not invite her.
Ms. Sebelius. Thank you.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Pallone. Thank you for your
testimony, Madame Secretary, and welcome to our subcommittee. I
want to acknowledge and support the interest that was expressed
by former Chairman Barton in the Common Fund he was describing
and you answered how much the current Secretary of NIH or
Chairman of NIH is supporting it as well. It was his idea and
he got it funded in 2006 and point out to my colleagues that
H.R. 1, the continuing resolution, cuts $48.5 million from the
Common Fund. You know, these are tight fiscal times and I think
the President's budget identifies areas for smart investments
that will pay off both in improvements in the Nation's health
and economic stability. The President has called on our Nation
to come together to out-educate, out-innovate, and out-build
our competitors. I support this focus and I think the HHS is in
a strong position to help reach these goals. As nurse, I am
concerned about strengthening the health work force. We face a
primary care shortage now and as we move into implementation of
health reform we are going to need an even more robust
healthcare workforce. As you know, the Affordable Care Act lays
out a course for creating that workforce, creating a commission
to help guide analysis and recommendations of workforce
enhancement, providing primary care providers a pay increase
through both Medicare and Medicaid and providing enough
service--enough funding to more than triple the National Health
Service Corp. But we in Congress need to support these programs
for proper implementation. So I am very concerned that the
House continued resolution would cut workforce programs by
about $145 million from the fiscal year 2010 level, slashing
vital Title VII and Title VIII by nearly a third. I am
particularly worried about Title VIII programs which support
the education and training of nurses. We have a nursing
shortage. Last year over 50,000 qualified applicants were
turned away from nursing schools due to budget constraints and
the lack of faculty to train them. Madame Secretary, you
understand this. The President's budget provided an increase in
these same programs. Can you discuss the steps taken in the
budget to strengthen our healthcare workforce and increase the
numbers of jobs which will result from that?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Congresswoman, I think that there is no
doubt that the President shares your concern about the health
workforce of the future which is why he has made it a focus
each year in his budget and why I think the Affordable Care Act
also focused on workforce enhancements. So the budget would
include support as you say to train about 10,600 National
Health Service Corp providers; train an addition 4,000 new
primary care providers over the next five years. The Prevention
and Public Health Fund Allocation would also increase the
number of nurse practitioners. Six hundred nurse practitioners
would be trained. Six hundred new physician assistants across
the country would be available with the establishment of new
community health centers there would be providers available in
the most underserved areas, so there are a whole series of
workforce enhancements that would be jeopardized either by
defunding the Affordable Care Act or not passing the
recommended President's budget.
Mrs. Capps. And what concerns me is it the House Continuing
Resolution would be a reduction of 54 percent cutting our
workforce programs by more than half in all of the areas that
you specified. I think this is going to devastate our
healthcare workforce. And I hope you will quickly agree with
me.
Ms. Sebelius. Yes.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you. I needed that for the record. What
puzzles me is that I know my colleagues across the aisle have
expressed concerns that we don't have enough healthcare
workforce, but I shared their concern and this--the key to
addressing this problem is right in front of us and yet they
propose cuts that will make the situation worse. Their budget
will hamper efforts to fill the gaps that we have today and
just as the demand for healthcare professionals increases. In
my last minute, I would like to address something you mentioned
in your remarks which are the $4 billion in waste, fraud, and
abuse that HHS and the Department of Justice has recovered just
in this past year--$4 billion that was saved for American
taxpayers. When I am home meeting with my seniors in healthcare
advocates as well about how they can be active participants now
in looking for waste, fraud, and abuse. We want this to
continue. Some of it is in the Medicare payments. Would you
expand upon this $4 billion in savings and ways that we can
look to increase this amount over the future?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, the President's budget again has
requested additional resources. This is an enormous payoff----
Mrs. Capps. Yes.
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. In terms of dollars returned for
dollars spent. We are building new data systems that can allow
us to spot billing irregularities in a much more timely
fashion, recredentialling providers, putting in place strike
forces. We would like to expand those strike forces which have
been enormously helpful in the fraud hotspots. But this
collaborative effort with not only our partners at Justice, but
local Attorneys General and States has been enormously
effective so far and we hope to be able to expand and broaden
that outreach.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. Gentlelady's time is expired. Chair recognizes
the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.--Dr. Murphy for 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. And thank you, Madame Secretary.
Three things I think I am going to put out that we agree on.
First of all that first Pitt and Kansas both deserve to be in
the final four. A yes would be good. I will take that as a yes.
Ms. Sebelius. Yes.
Mr. Murphy. Thanks. Number two, this committee worked very
hard together and my friend and colleague Gene Green and I
worked together on and it passed the House 417 to one a bill to
allow doctors to volunteer at community health centers. Now, I
know the estimates are that huge numbers of more people will go
to community health centers. With the CBO analysis of this
however just said that using the Federal Torts Claim Act and
using only those numbers because that is all they are allowed
to look at, I think the cost over several years was 30 million.
But I am asking if your department could work with us in coming
up with a more detailed analysis if we allowed the doctors to
volunteer at community health centers what would the cost
savings be in terms of allowing more patients to go through
those centers. Is that something that you could help us come up
with an----
Ms. Sebelius. I would be glad to work with you on that.
Mr. Murphy. That would be extremely helpful because you
know we have huge rates for vacancies of jobs in those centers
and that would be very helpful. And I have no doubt that this
committee and this House will pass it again. Will you help the
nudge the Senators, help them understand the great value in
this as well? We don't try and put pressure on them, but
perhaps you could perhaps add some wisdom to them. Second
thing--or the third thing, in the National Child Traumatic
Stress Network--it is a group of academic and community based
centers that give--that disseminate standards in clinical
excellence and care of traumatized children. It is funded
through the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Act.
When I read your budget proposal, however, it seems like the
Administration--although you were supportive of the program
there were some cuts to the program. Actually it cut the
funding from 40 million to 10 million, but at the same time the
SAMSA budget is calling for major increases in spending in a
number of other areas such as increased spending for military
families initiatives for service grants, some things for
homeless--certainly you know that with regard to homelessness
there is a high correlation between childhood trauma and
homelessness. And in my own experience of working with
servicemen and women at Bethesda Naval Hospital, my own
clinical experience as a psychologist also tells me that there
is a higher risk for people for PTSD and homelessness and other
trauma if they themselves experience a great deal of trauma in
their lives when they were younger. And I think that you have
like 2.37 billion in homeless grants through HUD and other
things for veterans although I think the VA should be handling
some of this. Is this something you are able to relook at and
see that perhaps we should be spending more in the early
treatment and prevention, let the VA handle some of the other
things for veterans, but to revisit that so make sure we are
not cutting some of the treatment programs out of the childhood
treatment of trauma?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, I would be glad to have that discussion
with Pam Hyde, who is the Director of the Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services. I can tell you she is absolutely
committed to prevention as being the most effective treatment
possibility, so I will certainly circle back with her about
your concern about that particular program.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I know that the VA for example has
14 homeless programs and initiatives and although I do want to
support all of those I also recognize that we would do well to
prevent some of these problems for a lot of them, too. Finally
in the area of Medicare and Medicaid those programs were
designed in 1965 and I oftentimes liken it to none of us were
driving a 1965 car and if we had one we would put a lot of
patches and repairs to it over time. Whenever I talk to medical
subspecialties in a wide range of areas--cardiology being one,
I think 40 percent of our money is spent on cardiovascular
disease. I very often--when we ask the question if you were to
design Medicare today would it look anything like the Medicare
of 1965? And I am assuming you would agree, no. Could you tell
me what major initiatives you have in mind that really help us
perhaps even redesign this from the ground up particularly for
some of the major disease entities such as cardiovascular
disease, lung disease, cancer, et cetera?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Congressman, the Affordable Care Act
actually includes a major direction that the Medicare
incentives be redesigned and aligned with quality outcomes and
healthcare strategies that we know are not only more patient-
centered outcomes like medical home models and bundling care to
prevent unnecessary hospital readmissions, but the Medicare
incentives I would say are right now aligned to volume and not
value. So we are in the process through the centers for
innovation, through working with providers across this country
to try and capture the best possible patient practices and
implement those. Yes.
Mr. Murphy. I hope you will do that. I know my time is up,
but the academies and colleges of various specialties of
medicine have standards and protocols and I hope you will look
to them for some guidance on that.
Ms. Sebelius. We are working very closely with them. Thank
you.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Madame
Secretary.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks gentleman. The gentleman's time
has expired. Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Gonzalez, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Welcome,
Madame Secretary. I do want to address a comment that was made
by a fellow Texan that the uncertainty that is out there
regarding the constitutionality of the mandate and wondering
what the Texas Attorney General has to do and that he is
wondering what he has to do as well as our Governor Rick Perry.
Those two gentlemen also represent me and I do have a
suggestion as to what they could be doing in the meantime. They
could be coming up with a solution to make healthcare insurance
affordable for Texans so that employers have access to it at a
reasonable price to offer it to their employees, and that
Texas, its citizens have affordable insurance products
available to them so that we don't lead the Nation in the
uninsured. That is what they could be doing. That is just a
suggestion. I am sure they have thought of it.
We have heard that the American people want us to balance
the budget, reduce the national debt, and we all agree and I
think the President's fiscal year 2012 budget places us in a
good place to accomplish that. But I don't think the American
people said and while you are doing this expose us to dangerous
drugs, or continue a healthcare insurance industry that does
not provide us adequate, affordable, accessible coverage. I
don't think they said that. So I join you and I join the
administration and I believe that I join members on the other
side of the aisle in that objective. And we may have different
plans on how to get there, but the truth is nothing was done
until we passed the Affordable Care Act. The discussion is
ongoing and it will be a continuing debate, but the need still
exists, the problem still exists.
We can debate this thing and just continue to hemorrhage,
so I will ask you this, Madame Secretary. We hear so much about
market forces and just let the free markets take care of all of
this. And I think in large measure we all agree with that to a
point until the markets are dysfunctional, until the markets
don't deliver what is necessary without the incentives, and the
directions, sometimes and a push, and a shove, but mostly a
collaborative effort which I think is what the President is
seeking to do. When it comes to the FDA why not just let an
industry police itself. Why don't we just let them do that?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Mr. Congressman, we have seen I think
the results of a lack of regulation in way too many areas that
have just gone terribly awry. I think the FDA is certainly
seeking to make sure that the 25 cents of every consumer dollar
which comes in a product that is under the umbrella of that
agency, whether it is drugs and devices or our food supply, is
safe and secure. And frankly, I think in many cases the
industry is very supportive of those efforts in the food debate
for the new Food Safety bill that we just had, the industry
ultimately takes the economic hit from an unsafe product being
available to consumers. There is a huge ripple effect that ends
up penalizing the food industry. So they are eager for a
regulatory oversight and they are willing and able to actually
help finance that regulatory oversight.
Mr. Gonzalez. And I do believe it is a collaborative--it is
a partnership. But I think Government has a responsibility to
protect the welfare and safety and health of our constituents.
That is what we were hired to do and provide them with
opportunities. The last question is and I am very concerned
about NIH because I am having all of my universities, they are
all coming and these are Democrats and Republicans and they are
all have basically this same request. What is going to happen
to replace those particular funds that are so essential? Again
why is NIH so necessary? Why don't we just allow the public--
the private sector to make those funds available to our
universities?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Congressman, as you know one of the
areas that the United States leads the world is biomedical
research. And it has been an enormously important partnership
between the commercial industry and the research that goes on
in universities across the country funded in large part by NIH
which is why I think the President has recommended an increase
to the NIH budget which is already looking at a losing the two
years of enhanced funding from the Recovery Act and trying to
make sure that we continue those breakthroughs that are
happening all across this country.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
for your indulgence.
Mr. Pitts. Gentleman's time is expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentlelady from Tennessee, Mrs. Blackburn, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Madame Secretary for being with us. I found a--your opening
statement a little bit curious. You mentioned that you think
that it is the responsibility of the Administration to give
every family and business the chance to thrive while making the
investments that will grow our economy and create jobs. And I
just have to tell you being out there and holding listening
sessions in my district and with some of my colleagues the
American people do not want to be dependent on the Federal
Government for their cars, their loans, their home loans, their
housing, their education, and their healthcare. What they would
like to do is see the regulation reduced and to see the Federal
Government get out of the way. So I would ask you, do you have
any data that shows that businesses are actually getting relief
on the cost of the insurance that they are paying every year?
Do you have any data that is verified that this is lowering
costs? Because we are hearing the opposite and are actually
being shown bills and estimates for that.
Ms. Sebelius. Congresswoman, if you are talking about data
as a result of the Affordable Care Act----
Mrs. Blackburn. Yes, of Obamacare. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. As you know the law was signed
just about a year ago. What we have seen with the enhanced rate
regulation there are numbers of States that actually have used
those new tools to lower the impact of rate increases and that
is showing----
Mrs. Blackburn. Could you supply that because we are not
seeing that in Tennessee----
Ms. Sebelius. I would be happy to supply that.
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. And I know Tennessee had to
come to you for one of the 900 waivers. And I know they are
appreciative for that. Let me ask you about the 1115 waivers.
When you grant a waiver and it seem s like you all are doing
more of that, is that waiver--does that take the elected
officials in that State out of the decision-making equation? Is
that waiver granted to the Governor's office between CMS and
the Governor's office? Because that is the way TennCare was
done. We as State legislators were taken out of the equation.
Ms. Sebelius. Actually Congresswoman, the traditional 1115
waiver was a dialogue between CMS and the Governor's office.
The Affordable Care Act changes that provision so now there is
a notice requirement. There are public hearing requirements.
There is input opportunity, so the waiver process actually has
been amended by the Affordable Care Act to include far more
transparency.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. I would like to call to your attention
this is the reason it is so important to me. Today's Wall
Street Journal: Obama's health waiver gambit. And it talks
about Ms. Cutter and Ms. Deporal saying privately to our
liberal interest groups that this is a way to increase
centralization for instance with a State-based public option or
even single payer. And I tell you why this is of concern to me.
We had Governor Patrick in here this week and his Medicaid
State Director is on the record having said that when you look
at the way the market Medicaid works that he is beginning to
favor a single payer. And I would just submit to you that this
is not what the American people want. They do not want the
Federal Government that can't tend to the items that are on
their plate making the decisions for their healthcare and we
hear it from them every single day and ma'am, it is of concern.
If we have----
Ms. Sebelius. Congresswoman, that is not at all--first of
all we don't design any waiver. The State comes to us with a--
--
Mrs. Blackburn. I have seen the applications from my State
and I respect that and I understand that. We want to move on.
Ms. Sebelius. The rules aren't even developed for the
program you are referencing.
Mrs. Blackburn. I do want to move on. Fraud, you mentioned
fraud. We had a hearing on this this week. Are you able to
quantify the amount of fraud that is there in Medicare and
Medicare and then----
Ms. Sebelius. No, ma'am.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. So the four billion that you feel like
you saved you don't have a way to quantify what the problem is
and how widespread?
Ms. Sebelius. We don't know how--if we knew how big it was
we would hopefully shut it down.
Mrs. Blackburn. And what percentage of your energy this
year is going to go to addressing that fraud?
Ms. Sebelius. What percent of my energy?
Mrs. Blackburn. Yes, your resources and energy. I mean,
when we hear organized crime getting into Medicare and Medicaid
fraud I think it should cause us all--so if you could just let
us know your resources, what you plan to put into that.
Ms. Sebelius. There are significant new resources requested
in the budget for fraud and abuse.
Mrs. Blackburn. Another question I would like to--your
budget this year, your request is 891 billion. Your '08 budget
which we would love to return to those numbers was 708 billion
and you mentioned that you have cut in your testimony four
programs but or you list four programs that you cut. Are those
the only cuts that you all made or were there others?
Ms. Sebelius. No Congresswoman, there are about $5 billion
worth of cuts. Our budget proposal is below the 2010 levels.
Mrs. Blackburn. Do you mind submitting that list to us?
Ms. Sebelius. I would be happy to.
Mrs. Blackburn. That would be great. You are below 2010,
but not down to '08. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the----
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Pitts [continuing]. Gentlelady.
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Chairman, a point of personal privilege
here or whatever----
Mr. Pitts. Yes, let me just say----
Mr. Pallone. The Secretary should be allowed to answer the
question.
Mr. Pitts. That is correct. The gentlelady's time is
expired. Madame Secretary, do you wish to add additional
response? You may continue to respond in writing as well if you
feel like you have not adequately responded.
Ms. Sebelius. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from
Wisconsin, Ms. Baldwin, for 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Baldwin. Thank you. Thank you, Madame Secretary for
being here. Earlier I wanted to start by reacting to some of
the other comments that were made. I think it was Dr. Burgess
who noted that we switched sides and it was because of this law
referring to Affordable Care Act or Healthcare Reform. And I
disagree. I think the last election was about jobs, jobs, jobs.
But instead of focusing on jobs, the new majority has made
it their first order of business to repeal the Affordable Care
Act. That was one of the first votes we took this session which
is already in my community providing lifesaving coverage to
many who didn't have it before and improving their access and
the affordability of their healthcare. And instead of focusing
on jobs, the new majority has attempted also to deny funding to
continue implementing the Affordable Care Act, the Healthcare
Reform bill we passed last session.
Instead of focusing in on jobs, the new majority has
offered House Resolution 1 that Moody's earlier this week said
would lead to the loss of 700,000 jobs in the United States.
And instead of focusing in on jobs, some of our new Governors
are presenting budgets imbedded with policies that would gut
Medicaid and would thwart at the State level the implementation
of the Affordable Care Act. It is precisely what is happening
in my home State of Wisconsin which used to have a reputation
as being a leader in healthcare and a leader in preparation for
the implementation of the Affordable Care Act.
Now I don't envy you your job right now. It is working to
implement these vital, lifesaving, important reforms when so
many are working so hard to see that legislation thwarted,
roadblocks placed, et cetera. But I want to focus back on House
Resolution 1, the continuing resolution that passed in the
House a couple weeks ago.
I brought an amendment to the floor to restore funding to
the community health centers. My amendment was fully paid for
but unfortunately the Republicans barred me from offering that.
But H.R. 1 slashes over a billion dollars to community health
centers for the remaining seven months of this fiscal year. If
this ultimately is passed and becomes law I guess I would like
to hear from you how you even go about implementing that. How
does this impact the constituents that I represent that rely on
the wonderful community health centers that provide services in
my area? I have heard that this will impact coverage to
probably 11 million Americans. It will result in job losses and
closure of clinics. Do you drive--if you were forced to
implement such draconian cuts how would you go about that? What
would we see at the local level?
Ms. Sebelius. Well Congresswoman, I share your view that
the community health center footprint is incredibly important
and both with the Recovery Act and the budget investments and
the Affordable Care Act that footprint will double over the
period of the next five years serving closer to 40 million
people. We are already seeing that increase. There are about 10
million additional Americans served thanks to the Recovery Act
investments and they are in the most underserved areas. And
with those community health centers are providers and often
providing a host of community services.
So the effort to now deny care, fire healthcare providers
who would lose their jobs and restrict access in the most
underserved rural and urban communities to affordable available
healthcare would just put additional burdens on already
strapped city and State budgets. Those folks will come through
the doors of emergency rooms, enlarge our numbers. They will be
sicker on the job. They will be unable to take care of their
kids. There will be students who won't do as well in school
because their health needs won't be attended to. And I think
that has a serious impact not only in the health of this Nation
but on certainly the prosperity of the Nation.
Ms. Baldwin. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The gentlelady's time is expired. Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Dr. Gingrey, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Secretary Sebelius,
in testimony before this committee on January the 26 I asked
Mr. Cass Sunstein from the White House Office of Regulatory
Affairs if he knew who had the authority within your
administration to slip a Medicare end of life service rate into
a final rule without first allowing for public comment. And he
testified under oath that and I quote ``the Secretary of HHS
has considerable authority over her rules.'' Madame Secretary,
in--yes or no, did you make the decision to publish this end of
life payment rate without allowing for public comment?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, I appreciate your forthrightness on
that. I really do, but you know it flies in the face of the
comment, the response that you just gave to my colleague from
Tennessee regarding the 1115 Waiver Program and you described
how it formally worked between the department and directly with
the Governor's office in calling for more oversight and public
hearing and transparency. So would you agree that in the future
that rather than making that decision unilaterally even though
you have the power to do it, that maybe a little bit of time
for public comment would have been appropriate in regard to
that?
Ms. Sebelius. Congressman, the rule as you know was--
followed the outline that was directed in the Affordable Care
Act in terms of the provisions for a wellness visit. In
addition we looked at the original welcome--welcome to Medicare
visit and the one element that wasn't consistent was----
Mr. Gingrey. Yes, I wish I had enough time to listen to
your full answer but----
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. End of life--but--well, we did--
--
Mr. Gingrey [continuing]. If you could respond yes or no to
that? More transparency? More opportunity for public comment?
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. We got in fact--yes, sir. And
that is why it is not part of the final rule. We decided that
it was better to air it.
Mr. Gingrey. And I would hope that that is a yes answer.
Let me move on. In the President's fiscal year 2012 budget,
your department requested $93 million for information in
education in order to sign American workers up for the Class
Act. This is that same program that you just recently told
Senate Finance Committee I guess a few weeks ago that the
program was unsustainable. Now those are your words. Do you
believe it is appropriate for the Administration to solicit
money from American workers for a health program that is
``totally unsustainable''?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, my comment was that it was unsustainable
as the legislation was crafted, but I was given considerable
flexibility and we are in the process of making I think the
changes that will meet the criteria outlined in the law, which
is, that it be sustainable without taxpayer support.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, thank you. Given the current budget
crisis that we have in this country and I think everybody on
the dais and certainly you would agree with this we have a
tremendous budget crisis. And understanding that you are asking
for money to sign people up for a program that you say is
unsustainable, will you pledge here today to work with this
committee to ensure that the Class Program, the Class Act is
truly sustainable before the Administration proceeds with
program operations?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir, I would be happy to do that.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you, Madame Secretary. And the last
thing that I wanted to address with you and this is kind of a
follow on to Chairman Dingell's line of questioning earlier
regarding H.R. 1. And he asked you a number of yes or no
questions, and I think you responded to pretty much everyone of
them yes that H.R. 1 and the $61 billion worth of cuts would
hurt this program and that program and the other program. Do
you believe that we need to restore fiscal sanity to our
budget? Yes or no?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gingrey. Do you believe then that the $61 billion in
discretionary cuts in the CR for fiscal year 2011 contained in
H.R. 1 will help the Federal Government reduce its current
budgetary deficit? Yes or no?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, I believe that the President has put a
very responsible budget forward and it is one that----
Mr. Gingrey. I am not talking about 2012 now, Madame
Secretary. I am talking about H.R. 1, the CR and the $61
billion worth of cuts that Chairman--former Chairman Dingell
was attacking.
Ms. Sebelius. I support the President's notion that we have
to make smart and strategic cuts because we have got budget----
Mr. Gingrey. So the answer is yes. I thank you, Madame
Secretary. And Mr. Chairman, I will yield back my 13 seconds.
Ms. Sebelius. I don't think the answer was yes, but----
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman. Gentleman's time is
expired and the Chair recognizes the gentleman from New York,
Mr. Weiner, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Weiner. Thank you, Madame Secretary. Welcome. As to
this notion that we didn't invite you to come testify last year
after the passage of the bill, having heard these questions all
I have to say to you is you are welcome. I just wanted--
probably no member of the Government, maybe even in history,
has had to spend so much of her time swatting away lies. So let
me kind of run through some things. Maybe we can cover in four
minutes and 33 seconds to try to get some truth on some of the
big questions of the day.
First of all, this notion that if you give people a subsidy
and incentive to purchase health insurance somehow that they
are not going to want it, that this individual mandate is
somehow this huge burden. You might not be aware of this, but I
will tell you the number of people in Romney Care in
Massachusetts which also had a mandate that chose not to sign
up after they got the subsidy; chose instead to pay for the
penalty or the tax--whatever we are going to call it, was .65
percent. Meaning that when you offer the people to get
insurance for their families to get better healthcare and a
better life they take it.
So the idea that this mandate if it disappears will somehow
have a dramatic impact, maybe one percent of people would be
impacted. But just so we understand and you can clear it up for
us--the reason there is a requirement that people get insurance
when offered a subsidy and incentives to get it, it is because
if they don't get it and they are uninsured when they need
hospital care or healthcare costs, they pass it along to the
rest of society. Is that right?
Ms. Sebelius. That is correct. That is correct.
Mr. Weiner. The second thing is we have heard a lot of
the--in the repeal efforts this being called a job killing
bill. If we repeal the Healthcare bill would the subsidies
going to small businesses, the tax credits to provide
healthcare for their workers making those workers less
expensive, would those subsidies disappear if we repeal the
bill?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Weiner. Thank you. Next is this notion about Medicaid
providing this enormous unfunded liability in the out years. Is
it not true that under the bill any additional people covered
under Medicaid which are poor people but they are not going to
be as poor under the new bill since we are going to raise the
limit a bit--not to a lot, it is still--you have to have a
$30,000 family income for a family of four. It is not a lot of
money. That the--it provides no additional cost at all to the
States until at least the year 2017. Is that correct?
Ms. Sebelius. That is correct.
Mr. Weiner. And in the year 2018 when there is a marginal
difference, if the number of poor people in the States goes
down, meaning the economy has improved, meaning fewer people
are poor enough to be eligible for Medicaid, more people are
working, those costs could go down as well if there are fewer
people on Medicaid. Could there not?
Ms. Sebelius. That is correct.
Mr. Weiner. And I assume that all of us believe and we hope
that the economy is going to keep getting better. We have
Republican Governors here saying my costs are going to go
through the roof. Well, they only go through the roof if you
are a crummy Governor and your poverty in your State continues
to go up. Is that correct? Well, you--never mind, never mind,
never mind.
Ms. Sebelius. Thank you.
Mr. Weiner. You can leave off the crummy Governor part.
That is me editorializing. Finally, another thing my Republican
friends have said again and again is this is a trampling of
states' rights, that the most powerful Secretary is taking more
and more control. I am going to give you a couple of things
here. First of all, is it not true that the exchanges are going
to be run by the States?
Ms. Sebelius. If they choose to do so, absolutely.
Mr. Weiner. If they choose to do so. Is it not true that
the tort laws which are now States by States--there was a
decision made in this law by the people who wrote the law not
to trample on states' rights with tort laws but now the 50
States still have their Tort Laws in effect. Is that correct?
Ms. Sebelius. That is correct.
Mr. Weiner. Is it also not true that State insurance
commissioners and commissions and the State governance of
insurance was left intact?
Ms. Sebelius. At the State level with additional resources
for those States.
Mr. Weiner. Correct. We actually empowered them. They now
have the ability----
Ms. Sebelius. Correct.
Mr. Weiner [continuing]. To do things to hold down rates
and so forth. So much for this notion of we are centralizing
power in your office or centralizing the Federal Government. We
went in an opposite direction. We did not go the direction I
would have like to expanding Medicare which is a much better
idea by the way Madame Secretary--expanding Medicare little by
little. We went a different way.
And one final point on this notion of expanding the
office--your power of your office. These 1115 waivers that you
have been given are an effort each one is you saying we are
going to be flexible to allow to respond to your expression of
what is going on in the States, in the marketplace, at the
business so long as we get to the outcome we all aspire to
which is more people getting affordable coverage, reducing the
cost to people along the way. Isn't it the waivers makes the
point that this is not this intractable, inflexible,
centralized monolith, that it is a conversation that is going
on between States and businesses and your office to try to make
sure we get the outcomes we all want?
Ms. Sebelius. I think the bill recognizes the framework
that States know their markets best. They are the laboratories
of innovation, they work to provide a State----
Mr. Weiner. But on those waivers are an expression of that
as well, are they not?
Ms. Sebelius. Absolutely.
Mr. Weiner. OK. In 5 minutes we did one, two, three, four,
five, six, seven, eight, nine lies told by the Republicans.
Imagine if we had more time but we don't. Thank you, Madame.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary, thank
you very much for being with us today. And I am going to--I
would like to change track just a little bit and in reading
your testimony on page eight under the Advance the Health
Safety and Wellbeing of the American People it says child
support and fatherhood initiative. And the two sentences I am
interested in--the budget includes 305 million in fiscal year
2012 and 2.4 billion over 10 years for the child support and
fatherhood initiative.
This initiative is designed to promote strong family
relationships by encouraging fathers to take responsibility for
their children changing policies so that more of the father's
support reaches their children continuing a commitment to
vigorous enforcement. I guess my first question, Madame
Secretary, is where it states here that we are going to
encourage fathers to take responsibility for their children.
What encouragement are we going to be offering them?
Ms. Sebelius. I think it, Congressman, it refers to working
with States on a more effective and vigorous enforcement of
child support orders and seeking child support orders from the
outset, and making sure that there is a financial connection
between fathers and their children that they have borne.
Mr. Latta. OK. Let me follow up with that. And the reason I
ask--this really caught my attention because several lifetimes
ago I was in the Ohio Senate. I chaired the Senate Judiciary
Committee and we had a large bill that I had--that I sponsored
in dealing on especially juveniles and juvenile crime, et
cetera. And one of the judges that appeared before us during
about I think it was like 18 or 19 hearings on that piece of
legislation. That as we were going through it and we were
talking about parents it really came down to and I think this
one judge really caught the essence of the entire day. He said
it was really--and what we are looking at is an abdication of
parental responsibility. And I guess the next question would be
then is that do we have any current programs, models that we
can base the belief or successes that this is going to work
with?
Ms. Sebelius. I am sorry, sir. Do we have----
Mr. Latta. Do we have any current programs or any other
models out there that is going to show--you know if we are
going to spend 305 to 2.4 billion over 10 years do we have
anything out there that is going to show that this is going to
work?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, we have--I think this is part of the
TANF umbrella and I do think we have data that indicates there
are strategies that are more effective than others and what we
are trying to do is improve this effort along the way to make
sure that child support is not only effectively administered
but that more of these dollars will actually go to the children
and not be siphoned off along the way. So it is a double
improvement.
Mr. Latta. OK. And I guess the--you know it really comes
down to you know can Government really change some of these
folks out there, the way that they are parent--I would guess
you would say non-parenting right now?
Ms. Sebelius. Well----
Mr. Latta. And if I could just--and I am going to pose this
too even going back on a farther lifetime we used to have what
they called Bureau Support. And I remember when I was working
in the prosecutor's office many moon ago I asked one gentleman
if he wanted to go to jail for not paying his support and he
said I don't care. And those are the kind of----
Ms. Sebelius. Well, unfortunately, I wish there was a law
that you could pass that would do just what you are suggesting,
but at a minimum I think that what we can do is be effective in
terms of trying to make sure that children are not penalized
financially by a father who would walk away. But I think this
also includes fatherhood engagement increases, and increased
access in visitation. Often those two things are tied together.
If a father is really prohibited from connecting with his
children, he is less likely to be a financial provider. And so
I think it looks at the whole, the overall package of family.
Mr. Latta. And if I could just--my last minute here going
back to a question that has come up I know from Mr. Pallone, it
is a question of--it is in the page 3 the budget limited
subsidies to Children's Hospitals Graduate Medical Education.
And it says if--in focusing instead on targeting those
investments to increase the primary care work force. I know a
lot of the time when people are coming in from Children's
Hospitals from Ohio that they say that they are the step
children, that they are not getting the dollars. They are not
getting the dollars from NIH. What are we targeting then in
your testimony it says instead targeted investments to increase
primary care workforce?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, the--again, I don't think this is an
easy cut to put on the table and I can guarantee you that in a
budget that we had full resources this would not be a preferred
cut. The GME dollars are being redirected to, I think, programs
that have as an exclusive focus the sort of primary care
provider network recognizing that we are going to need
additional primary care docs looking forward.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time has expired and
I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Gentleman's time has expired. Chair recognizes
the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky for 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madame Secretary,
I want to thank you so much for being here today. We have asked
you to lead a historic effort and I can't think of anyone
better able to do that given your experience as an insurance
industry regulator and as a Governor. So clearly you have the
mindset of Governors as you go about your business.
We have asked you to reign in an out of control private
insurance industry that on a daily basis denies coverage and
benefits to healthcare consumers. I am interested that my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle seem more interested
in arranging your office structure than rooting out those
abuses. And I am interested that they have attacked the size of
the new Center for Consumer Information and Insurance
Oversight. By my calculation the 272 positions that you have
requested to staff CCHO is the equivalent of about 16 House
offices. I know our staffs work very hard just as your staff
does, but I don't think that is an enormous number of people
when we have tasked them with setting up the new standards and
structures created under the Affordable Care Act.
Let me also say you know that we heard from the other side
of the aisle this notion that all that Americans really want is
for government to get out of the way when it comes to their
healthcare. That is really not my impression in the least. We
certainly don't need more evidence than the popularity of
Medicare, the importance of Medicaid leaving the Affordable
Care Act aside. But is it your sense that what the American
people want is to reject help from the Government to cover
their healthcare----
Ms. Sebelius. Well, as you said, Congresswoman, I think
Medicare is----
Ms. Schakowsky [continuing]. To assure their coverage?
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. Enormously popular and I think
the--probably the second most popular insurance program may be
the Children's Health Insurance Program both of which are
Government-based programs delivering vital services to millions
and millions of Americans.
Ms. Schakowsky. And I think it is just important to say
over and over again that, far from being a Government takeover
of healthcare, that the Affordable Care Act, though some of us
felt perhaps it shouldn't be this way, relies entirely on the
private insurance companies with some help from the Government,
that this is a private-sector-based plan that we do--that we
are doing. So let me ask a few questions on behalf of my
constituents.
If you were denied funding to implement the Affordable Care
Act, the Affordable Care, will health insurance purchasers know
that at least 80 percent of their premium dollars will be spent
on medical care? Purchasers--will we have any guarantee that
that will happen?
Ms. Sebelius. It will be very difficult to implement the
medical loss ratio as you have described.
Ms. Schakowsky. In States like Illinois without any rate
approval requirements, how would rates that are out of line
even be enforced?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, again I think it would be--one of the
requirements is that we help to identify excessive rates and at
least post them so consumers have some way of judging. But that
would not be available to consumers.
Ms. Schakowsky. But with the Affordable Care Act, yes, I
think we would get some help in Illinois.
Ms. Sebelius. Right.
Ms. Schakowsky. But without it we are simply----
Ms. Sebelius. That is correct.
Ms. Schakowsky [continuing]. Totally at the mercy of the
insurance companies. What does it mean for seniors and people
with disabilities who are counting on the phase ``out of the
doughnut hole'' if the Affordable Care Act were ultimately
repealed?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, clearly those additional benefits to
seniors--which include, as you know, annual wellness visit, an
elimination of co-pays for preventive screenings and health
and, as you say, a gradual elimination of the doughnut hole
starting this year with a 50 percent discount--that would cease
to be a Medicare benefit.
Ms. Schakowsky. All those things just disappear. Let me
quickly say, I am wondering, because process has been attacked,
can you tell us briefly the process through which HHS adopted
the rules that deal with the 80 percent loss ratio?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Congresswoman, we were directed and
followed this very carefully working with the Nation's
insurance commissioners to ask for their input and advice on
the outline of a medical loss ratio--what portion, what element
should be included in the medical portion of the 80 percent and
what should be outside that. They made a unanimous
recommendation to our office.
This fall we adopted 100 percent of what they recommended
to us and that is the rule. So this is not an HHS rule in so
far as we did not design it. The Nation's 50 insurance
commissioners made the recommendation which we adopted.
Mr. Pitts. The gentlelady's time is expired and Chair
recognizes gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Lance, for 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning to
you, Madame Secretary.
Ms. Sebelius. Good morning.
Mr. Lance. I am new to the committee and I look forward to
working with you on issues of mutual concern. I have the honor
of representing a district that is arguably the medicine chest
of the Nation and I would like to think of the entire world.
And regarding the President's proposed budget there is a
suggestion that the data exclusivity be reduced from 12 years
to 7 years. I personally oppose that and I do not think it is
in the best interest of the Nation's health. There has been
extensive economic modeling on this at Duke University and the
modeling indicates that there is a range of between 12 and 16
years is the time needed to allow an innovator in bio-pharma to
recoup the amount spent in order to bring to market needed
medicines in this regard. And Madame Secretary, I would like
your comments regarding the suggested reduction in the fiscal
year 2012 budget on data exclusivity from 12 to 7 years.
Ms. Sebelius. Congressman, I think there is a great
importance in making sure that we continue to accelerate our
leading position in breakthrough science. And certainly your
State is renowned for being a great leader in that.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
Ms. Sebelius. I think the balance, as you recognize, is not
only making sure that companies can recoup their investment and
are profitable--because if they are not profitable, they are
not going to continue research--but that, as quickly as
possible, once that determination has been made, that
breakthrough medication is also widely available and affordable
to the population. And that is attention that I think continues
to exist.
The president believes that based on information--and I
know that there are competing experts on how long and----
Mr. Lance. Yes.
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. How much evergreening should go
beyond the patent protection, that seven years would indeed
accomplish the goals of both returning the profit and
continuing the research but also making the medication widely
available.
Mr. Lance. Thank you for your response. The last time this
committee examined this issue in an overwhelmingly bipartisan
fashion the committee chose to retain the 12 years and I look
forward to continuing discussions with your department on this
matter. Secondly, Madame Speaker, regarding PADUFA there is the
challenge now with its reauthorization and at the most recent
reauthorization there was included the REMS, the Risk
Management and Mitigation Strategies and at least in some
instances it is my judgment that this has been a challenge. For
example, Johnson and Johnson had a product on the market for
over 20 years and was required to submit a REMS that took over
22 months to resolve. Your comments, Madame Secretary regarding
this as we go about reauthorizing PADUFA over the next year?
Ms. Sebelius. Well again, I think it is an area where we
are mindful of time delays on behalf of not only companies but
certainly consumers--at the same time I think mindful of the
very important safety efforts and I look forward to working
with you on that striking the right balance.
Mr. Lance. Thank you and I appreciate your comments in both
of these important areas that I think go to the heart that we
have to work together in these areas as we make sure that the
Nation's health is protected and that we remain the medicine
chest of the entire world. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks gentleman and recognizes gentleman
from Louisiana, Dr. Cassidy, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Cassidy. Hey, Madame Secretary, I am not so hurried
now. First I want to thank Mr. Pallone because apparently he is
committed to working on equity for FMAP payments, or at least
Federal support of care for the poor, and I will submit two
articles for the record with unanimous consent: one from the
GAO, one from AEI talking about the current inequity in that
situation.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.071

Mr. Cassidy. Secondly, Madame Secretary, I have got young
children so what I am about to say just strikes me. Sometimes
it seems like opposite day. So here we have a report from
Chairman Bernanke saying that Medicaid among other entitlements
are driving long-term deficit spending. You in your opening
remarks mention how we, the Administration is concerned
regarding the deficit, and yet when I look at all the
literature given I see that here, according to CBO, Federal
spending on Medicaid will increase by $674 billion over the
next 10 years. I see from CMS actuaries that Federal--that
State spending will go up by 190 billion and if you include the
latest estimate from CBO that is probably more like 250 billion
over the next 10 years. Now, clearly you are concerned about
it.
I have a copy of your letter, which suggests to Governors a
way that they can do it. For example, you suggest they could
eliminate optional benefits like pharmacy coverage. And
Massachusetts is doing that sort of thing because, as their
budget chairman says, their current Medicaid growth is
unsustainable. Mr. Engel--I'm sorry he has left, but I have a
Deloitte Report which I will submit for the record that
estimates that under PPACA 50 percent of New York's State
budget may go to Medicaid by 2030. Now with all this said,
first, it does seem like opposite day. It does seem as if there
is concern for the deficit and yet we are driving the deficit
with this bill. And secondly, regarding maintenance of effort,
you mentioned your hands are kind of tied, if you will. Will
you commit to working with Congress, with us, to help the
Governors with this maintenance of effort so that they don't
have to necessarily slash dental benefits in Massachusetts or
something else in New York? I ask your thoughts.
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Congressman, I share your concerns
about healthcare costs driving the deficit and I don't think
there is any question that it is the number one cost driver. I
would suggest that what we have to do--and I am convinced we
have a new platform to work on this--is actually also look at
the underlying cost drivers with which rather--whether you are
talking about the public programs, Medicare or Medicaid, or the
private sector trying to provide healthcare, we have a
trajectory on healthcare costs that is simply unsustainable.
Mr. Cassidy. Can I--just because I have limited time and I
want your thoughts. Massachusetts, as the Governor said, is
certainly the harbinger of how things are going to come. I see
over the last 10 years their State budget going towards
healthcare expenses has gone from 21 percent to 37 percent.
That is why they are now slashing benefits. So it seems like,
if this is going to control costs, when does it begin?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, I think that the Massachusetts program
is a great example. And I think it is a great example of what
is possible on the exchange side and with coverage which
Congressman Weiner mentioned. But it also had a missing
component. Governor Romney and certainly Governor Patrick would
be the first to tell you that when Massachusetts designed their
program they focused on access and not on cost containment
and----
Mr. Cassidy. Now if I can----
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. They are revisiting the cost
containment phase.
Mr. Cassidy. I am with you on that and when I look at what
they--I am--just know and I have limited time. When I look at
what they are proposing, none of which has been proven to
control costs, it is all theoretical but it has not actually
been proven. I think the Governor at one point proposed
provider fee--freezing provider fees and that was thrown out by
a judge. So it really seems as if the cost control mechanisms
which again is similarly in PPACA have not been established to
control costs.
Ms. Sebelius. Well, I think the Affordable Care Act has as
an underlying premise a huge number of underlying cost control,
both delivery system changes but I think more importantly--and
unfortunately the Congressional Budget Office hasn't scored
this--but the effort to look at the drivers of chronic disease,
which is where we spend about 75 cents of every heath dollar,
obesity and smoking can have the most enormous effect on your
children's health care.
Mr. Cassidy. I wish I had 5 more minutes. Let me interrupt.
Let me ask one more thing because I am out of time. You
mentioned that the CLASS Act, you are kind of concerned about
it. It is $75 billion scored by CBO towards the credit side of
PPACA. On the other hand, you mentioned that it is
unsustainable. It seems a little disingenuous for something
which really long term is not really sustainable to then claim
it as kind of a credit in terms of proving the costworthiness
of a bill.
Ms. Sebelius. The Deficit Commission recommendations were
that we either should look at repealing the CLASS Act or
reforming it, and we have the flexibility administratively to
do the latter. That is exactly what we intend to do, and I look
forward to visiting with this committee, as I pledge to do, to
tell you the outlines of what we think will be a sustainable
program.
Mr. Cassidy. And could I ask you the one question I asked
at the beginning. Would you pledge to work with us on helping
the States on a bipartisan basis for their maintenance of
effort?
Ms. Sebelius. We are in the process of doing that right
now. Yes.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time has expired.
Chair recognizes gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie, for
5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you Madame
Secretary. I think I may be the last one on the panel, so
hopefully we are moving forward. One thing that Mr. Weiner
brought up if you expand Medicaid to 100 to 133 percent you are
going to bring on children and the parents but you also are
going to bring on the disabled and the elderly in big
proportions. And if the economy does grow as Governors are
looking if you think we can just grow out of it the most
expensive people who participate in Medicaid are the disabled
and elderly which are more not as elastic to getting jobs if
the economy moves forward. They are still going to be with us.
So the fact that we can just grow out of this is not really
necessary. I just want to make that point.
And when you made your opening remarks you listed a lot of
the things that people have been listening that people like
about the healthcare act: preexisting conditions for children,
26-year-olds you can stay on, and you also said--and I think I
will quote ``businesses are getting relieved. They are also--
business are getting relieved from rising healthcare costs.''
And I can tell you from businesses I know that because of the
new benefits that are mandated premiums are rising as they have
already started rising. So I just--the evidence that business
costs are decreasing--I--we haven't seen that. Hopefully you
have and I can share it with businesses and see what they need
to do differently.
Ms. Sebelius. Well, short term, Congressman, as you know,
small business owners are eligible for a tax credit which helps
provide some relief to the costs of covering their employees.
And what I hear from small business owners across the country
is that is often their biggest bottom line cost and the way
they lose their best employees to their larger competitors. So
that provides some short term relief. Long term relief comes in
2014 with a new market where they will finally have the
leverage buying power that their large competitors have.
Businesses on average, small business owners, spend about
25 percent more on exactly the same coverage as does someone
with market power, and in 2014 those rates--and, again, CBO and
other actuaries have said--those rates will come down fairly
dramatically.
Mr. Guthrie. But medium-sized businesses are seeing--I know
businesses with 400 employees and they have seen an increase
because of the new mandated benefits. I mean that I moving
forward already reflecting--because you can increase benefits.
But if you are going to increase benefits you are also going
to--there is a cost to that and it is reflected in the premiums
businesses are paying.
Ms. Sebelius. Well again, the actuarial reports that I have
seen indicate that there is a relatively insignificant impact
at this point on the kinds of benefits going forward. And as
you know we are trying to--the Waiver Program that has been
mentioned a number of times which dealt with one feature of the
bill, the Annual Limit, was designed to try and insulate
businesses in the short term from the kind of rate shock that
they may see. So we are in a balancing act getting between now
and 2014.
Mr. Guthrie. So we need to be mindful--obviously businesses
plan for their long term success, too. And I don't--you
understand that. I know we need to work together. I had a
couple of physicians. One that wanted about a minute. Can I
give you a minute and him a minute? Yield a minute to the
gentleman from Texas.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you. Madame Secretary, again thank you
for being here and you know where we are. Don't make yourself
so scarce. Going back to 4101A and B for just a moment: the
mandatory funding for the construction of the clinics, the
discretionary funding for the staffing of the clinics. There
was no request in the budget for the discretionary money for
the funding of the clinics. So are we likely to be left with a
situation where we are required to build them under mandatory
funding but no one to staff them under discretionary funding?
These are the school clinics under 4101A and B?
Ms. Sebelius. Congressman, all I can tell you is the budget
does include in the Health Resources and Services
Administration a request for increased funding with regard to
community health centers for the workforce for new National
Health Service Corps providers and new primary care providers.
Mr. Burgess. It is specifically the school-based clinic.
Ms. Sebelius. But I--those are part of the----
Mr. Burgess. Maybe you could get that answer back to me in
writing.
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, that is fine.
Mr. Burgess. I yield back to the gentleman from Kentucky.
Mr. Guthrie. I want to yield the remainder to the gentleman
from Louisiana.
Mr. Cassidy. Just one more question, Madame Secretary. I am
sorry.
Ms. Sebelius. OK.
Mr. Cassidy. To follow up on Congresswoman Schakowsky's--
since it is my understanding that we are raising Medicare
premiums to close that doughnut hole, what will the seniors do
if they are able to keep their own money as opposed to closing
the doughnut hole? And of course----
Ms. Sebelius. I am sorry. We are raising Medicare premiums?
Mr. Cassidy. It is my understanding that Medicare Part D
premiums are going up to close that doughnut hole. Is that not
true?
Ms. Sebelius. No, sir, I don't think that is accurate.
Mr. Cassidy. Well, then I will follow up with that at a
later date.
Ms. Sebelius. OK.
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. Will you yield to me?
Mr. Cassidy. Yes, I yield to the Texan from Texas.
Mr. Burgess. We haven't yet talked about the sustainable
growth rate formula and that was one of the big omissions from
PPACA. All of the money taken out of Medicare and not a single
dime for a down payment for buying us out of the SGR
reductions. What are your plans for getting us out of the SGR?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, as you know, Congressman, the SGR dates
back to 2002 and has been an issue that has not been
effectively dealt with. This President since his first budget
has recommended a long term fix. He has proposed in this year's
budget not only working with Congress for a 10 year resolution,
but also put more than two years of funding into the budget. So
we would look forward to working with this committee to find a
long term fix. I agree with you it is probably the single most
threatening issue to Medicare beneficiaries on the horizon.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. Chair
recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. Towns for 5
minutes.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Secretary
Sebelius, thank you so much for testifying before the
committee--subcommittee. I know your time is valuable, so I
will be brief with my questions.
First, I should note that I am pleased to see the direction
that the Administration has taken on the budget requests. I am
concerned that should the cuts proposed by H.R. 1 pass, HHS
would not be able to deliver on key services and programs that
benefit the public. Let me--an area that I am very concerned
about is the community health centers. They provide an
extremely valuable service in my district as I imagine they do
for many members on both sides of the aisle, even though some
might not admit it. I understand that the proposed cuts in H.R.
1 would have a devastating impact on community health centers,
possibly closing up to 127 health centers and cutting off 11
million patients over the next year. In contrast, how has the
HHS budget request dealt with these very valuable centers?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Congressman, I share your appreciation
for the critical services that health centers provide in our
most underserved areas. And between the investment of the
Recovery Act, the President's budgets, and the Affordable Care
Act, the goal is to really double the number of Americans who
have access to those vital high quality, lower cost, preventive
services. And the President has made a budget request for an
increased support for community health centers including for
providers who serve in that--in those centers, training 15,000
new providers over the course of the next five years and having
those folks available. Absent that expanded footprint, we will
have far more people accessing healthcare in the least
expensive--I mean, the most expensive, least effective way
through the doors of emergency rooms or just not getting the
health care at all.
Mr. Towns. Let me say I was watching this hearing on TV
earlier and I saw a member raising a booklet saying this is why
you are in the minority--and I hope that you know you are not
affected by that in any way because you know sometimes, you
know it takes some people a little longer to figure out what is
going on. And I think that we need to just move forward because
I think that there is no question in my mind that this is going
to save a lot of lives and eventually we are going to save a
lot of money. There is no question about it.
So I am hoping that, you know you don't let this deter you
in any way. You continue to move forward. Let that encourage
you because let us face it, eventually they will get the
message as well. So I want to thank you very, very much for the
work that you are doing and we look forward to continuing to
work with you.
I think the only thing I would hoped that we would be able
to put together some more private and public partnerships maybe
even around the community health centers to see in terms of
what we might be able to do to sort of keep them open because
they provide such a valuable service in many, many
neighborhoods.
Ms. Sebelius. Well Congressman, every place I go I try to
visit the community health center that is closest and I have
seen some extraordinary providers across this country who not
only are providing life saving medical care, but incredible
family support. And I don't disagree that it is proven over and
over again to be not only very high quality care but at a far
lower cost than any variety of options. So I would look forward
to looking for you to make sure that this incredibly important
public support stays in place.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much and on that I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks gentleman. The gentleman from
Kentucky, Mr. Whitfield, is recognized for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Secretary
Sebelius, thank you for being with us today. One comment that I
just wanted to make which probably doesn't have to be made but
I am sure you have felt a lot of animosity, even a lot of
frustration over this whole healthcare bill as many in America
has felt. And one of the reasons that people have felt that way
is that they brought a 2,400 page bill to the House floor last
year and we were not able to offer one amendment on the House
floor.
And I don't think the American people appreciate bills of
that magnitude having the impact on this country and the
legislative body not being able to offer one amendment on the
House floor. It is certainly not your fault. You were not the
Speaker, but from that background and because of that process
there is still very strong feelings about the issue.
But one of the questions I would like to just ask you, many
members of Congress to be honest did not have much of an idea
of what was even in the bill when we voted on it. And as
Secretary of HHS I am assumed that in the process of developing
the bill you must have at least been consulted. You were
hopefully able to suggest ideas and have some input into the
process.
So my first question would be did you have an opportunity
to have input into the process?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, Congressman, I did and as you know there
were five committees, three in the House and two in the Senate.
There were numerous hearings and yes----
Mr. Whitfield. No, I know that now. Just a minute----
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. I did----
Mr. Whitfield. We, in fact, we adopted eight amendments in
the Energy and Commerce Committee. All of them were stripped
out before it went to the floor and Democrats and Republicans
adopted those amendments. They all were stripped about and we
were not offered--able to offer one amendment on the floor. But
here is the question I have. We know that there is going to be
about 20 million more people on the Medicaid program according
to all of the numbers that we have seen by the year 2014 or
whatever. And every Governor that I talk to both Democrat and
Republican say that one of the reasons they are having
financial difficulty in these States--not the only reason, but
one is the fact of the cost of the Medicaid program. Now, the
States are having great financial difficulty. The Federal
Government goes without saying. We have a $14 trillion Federal
debt. How is it concluded that the Federal Government would
pick up 100 percent of the cost of those additional 20 million
people on Medicaid?
Now I have heard some comment, well, the States are not
going to be hit with this additional cost. Well, the reason
they are not going to be hit with it is because the Federal
Government is. So my question would be, how was it determined
that the Federal Government should do that when we are in worse
shape at the Federal level than some of the States are at the
State level?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Congressman, I think it was seen as a
way to have a partnership going forward and, for the first time
ever, have a benefit level that, regardless of where you lived
in this country, you were eligible for health insurance so that
uniformly now, across the country, at--families at 133 percent
of poverty or less would qualify and for that additional
population some States are well above that right now, some
States are well below it. But for the additional population, at
least for the first three years, it was seen that the Federal
Government should pick up the lion's share and then gradually
the State would participate.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, I--I mean if I had been there I think
I would have disagreed with that but nevertheless that is what
it is. But the thing that really bothers me--when you talk to
primary care physicians today they are already upset about the
low reimbursement rates for Medicaid patients and I don't think
I am exaggerating we have two doctors here and maybe some over
there. Most of the primary care physicians I talk to say we are
not going to take any more Medicaid patients. So if you put a
20 million more people on there, they are going to go right
back to the emergency room.
Ms. Sebelius. Well, I--at least the doctors who I talk to
across the country, and I do visit with a lot of them, are not
happy with the Medicaid reimbursement rates. But the vast
majority of the people we are talking about have no
reimbursement rates, are not seeing a doctor, are using the
healthcare system in a very inefficient way. I think one of the
reasons that, again, the Affordable Care Act suggests that
Medicaid doctors for at least the first several years will be
paid at Medicare rates is a recognition that the Medicaid rates
across the country are insufficiently low. And that is again
part of the Affordable Care Act's structure.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. We have one
other member who is not a member of the subcommittee. He is a
member of the Full Committee. He has waited patiently all
hearing at our times past. Would you stay for 5 minutes?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, and the Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and I appreciate the
courtesy. Let me waive on. This is my first term on the Energy
and Commerce Committee. I haven't been on the Health
Subcommittee and so I appreciate the chance to be here. Welcome
Madame Secretary.
Ms. Sebelius. Thank you.
Mr. Green. And I just want to remind folks the Medicaid
reimbursement rates are set by the States.
Ms. Sebelius. That is correct.
Mr. Green. And we had three Governors here yesterday or a
couple days ago with our oversight and investigation and they
wanted more flexibility and they have a lot of flexibility now
in reimbursement rates. And there are some decisions that can
be made because--and I think we are right. We understand that
doctors Medicaid pays less than Medicare. Frankly, in my part
of the country, TriCare pays less than Medicare. So you know,
although in the Houston area where I am from we don't have a
big base, so a lot of physicians won't take TriCare because it
is so--but that is a State issue. We don't want--we definitely
don't want the State--Federal Government to set Medicaid rates
because we would have more Governors up here complaining.
But the other issue I want to ask is on the Healthcare
Reform bill, the impact on the teaching health centers, our
medical schools and that are associated, what is the impact
that you are seeing on our teaching health centers because we
are fortunate at least in the Houston area to have three that
serve our metropolitan area. And my goal is to encourage them
to get out to our community based health centers and partner
with them because that way I also want those residents to
understand they can make a good living in a community based
health center.
Ms. Sebelius. Well, recently I had the chance to visit
again with the head of the Association of Academic Health
Centers and he joined a group of providers talking about what
he sees as an enormously important opportunity to begin to
transform healthcare delivery with the Affordable Care Act.
That the patient-centered, provider-centered opportunities with
the kind of payment models that are a part of the Affordable
Care Act, everything from primary medical home models which
actually reimburse physicians for keeping their patients
healthy in the first place and you don't have to wait until
they go to the hospital to get paid, to bundling care, to using
the most innovative strategies they see as a wonderful
opportunity. And, as you say, in many areas already there is a
lot of discussion with academic health centers and community
health centers about becoming Accountable Care Organizations
and combining those strategies to deliver better care to more
people.
Mr. Green. OK. I know that H.R. 1 cut or proposed to cut
1.3 billion from the health centers program and I understand
the Health Centers Services Resource Administration has
announced its intention to award new access points, new health
centers and new sites of existing centers. And as you know this
funding opportunity to facilitate health centers expansion made
possible by provisions in the Health Reform Law and the
President's request. And frankly I worked with the
Administration under President Bush many times expanding health
centers funding. Can you tell us how many applications for new
health centers HRSA has received and how many awards HRSA
intends to fund, and how many of the awards would HRSA make if
H.R. 1 if was enacted and 1.3 billion were cut? I know that may
not be possible now.
Ms. Sebelius. Congressman, I would love to get you those
specifics----
Mr. Green. OK.
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. In writing, but suffice it to
say that the loss of the investment in anticipated would
severely curtail this program.
Mr. Green. You have better information than I do, but we
were understood that there were about 800 applications for 350
possible awards. But again, you have the exact numbers. That is
what we have heard. So Mr. Chairman, I know I have a little bit
left. It is well documented health centers provide high cost
effective and high quality patient directed care and reduces
overall costs in the healthcare system. Can you describe the
overarching impact of the healthcare system and the continued
healthcare expansion outlined in President's fiscal year 2012
budget request?
Ms. Sebelius. Well I think, Congressman, the anticipation
is that we would be able to gradually move from serving 20
million Americans to 40 million Americans. And as you know the
Health Services Resource Administration maps pretty carefully
where is the underserved need, where are the access points that
need to be filled. Some are in very rural areas, some are in
very urban areas and that expansion has provided enormously
important care to families across this country.
Mr. Green. Thank you and I appreciate it. And I know I am
almost out of time, but in the Houston area we got--we started
on community health centers much later than most parts of the
country so we are considered I think an under-underserved area.
But----
Ms. Sebelius. You putting in a pitch?
Mr. Green [continuing]. But also the community health
centers are not refusing Medicaid patients.
Ms. Sebelius. That is correct.
Mr. Green. So doctors cannot afford in their practice to
take them that is why we need expansion of community health
centers.
Ms. Sebelius. Some are uninsured, some are Medicaid, but a
number of people are fully insured and choose a community
health center as their health home.
Mr. Pitts. Gentleman's time----
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts [continuing]. Is expired. In conclusion, I would
like to thank Secretary Sebelius and the members for
participating in today's hearing. I remind members that they
have 10 business days to submit questions for the record and I
ask Secretary Sebelius to respond promptly to the questions.
Ms. Sebelius. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Members should submit their questions by the
close of business on March 17.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Chairman, would you yield for a moment for
a unanimous consent request?
Mr. Pitts. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. I have a unanimous consent to add the letter
that I wrote to Secretary Sebelius on February 10 to the
record.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection it will be entered into the
record.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.072

Mr. Pitts. If there is nothing further before the
committee, this subcommittee hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:11 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7590.155


