- THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 18: A FOCUS ON LEGISLATIVE RESPONSES TO RISING GASOLINE PRICES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 18: A FOCUS ON LEGISLATIVE
RESPONSES TO RISING GASOLINE PRICES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 28, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-133

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

78-365 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JIM MATHESON, Utah
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JOHN BARROW, Georgia
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             GENE GREEN, Texas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   LOIS CAPPS, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio)
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illiniois, opening statement................................    20
Hon. Cory Gardner, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Colorado, opening statement....................................    21
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................    22
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    23

Witnesses

Regina A. McCarthy, Assistant Administrator, Office of Air and
Radiation, Environmental Protection Agency.....................    25
Prepared statement...........................................    27
Answers to submitted questions...............................   270
Christopher Smith, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Oil and Natural
Gas, Office of Fossil Energy, Department of Energy.............    37
Prepared statement...........................................    39
Answers to submitted questions...............................   275
Robert V. Abbey, Director, Bureau of Land Management, Department
of the Interior................................................    47
Prepared statement...........................................    49
James Burkhard, Managing Director, Global Oil Group, IHS
Cambridge Energy Research Associates...........................   128
Prepared statement...........................................   131
Joseph Romm, Senior Fellow, Center for American Progress Action
Fund...........................................................   136
Prepared statement...........................................   138
W. Jackson Coleman, Managing Partner and General Counsel,
EnergyNorthAmerica, LLC........................................   148
Prepared statement...........................................   150
Matt Smorch, Vice President, Strategy, CountryMark Cooperative...   168
Prepared statement...........................................   170
Robert J. Meyers, Senior Counsel, Crowell & Moring, LLC..........   183
Prepared statement...........................................   186
Niger Innis, Co-Chairman, Affordable Power Alliance, National
Spokesman, Congress of Racial Equality.........................   203
Prepared statement...........................................   205
George R. Schink, Managing Director and Principal, Navigant
Economics, on behalf of Emissions Control Technology
Association....................................................   209
Prepared statement...........................................   211
Answers to submitted questions...............................   277

Submitted Material

Discussion Draft, ``Strategic Energy Production Act of 2012,''
submitted by Mr. Whitfield.....................................     7
Discussion Draft, ``Gasoline Regulations Act of 2012,'' submitted
by Mr. Whitfield...............................................    11
Letter, dated February 29, 2012, from Mr. Burgess to President
Barack Obama, submitted by Mr. Burgess.........................    71
Article, dated November 2, 2008, ``Audio: Obama Tells SF
Chronicle He Will Bankrupt Coal Industry,'' posted at
newsbusters.org, submitted by Mr. Shimkus......................    74
Report, dated January 30, 2012, ``The Impact of Decreased and
Delayed Drilling Permit Approvals on Gulf of Mexico
Businesses,'' Greater New Orleans, Inc., submitted by Mr.
Scalise........................................................    98
Letter, dated June 25, 2008, from C. Stephen Allred, Assistant
Secretary, Land and Minerals Management, Department of the
Interior, to Hon. Don Young, Ranking Member, House Committee on
Natural Resources, submitted by Mr. Shimkus....................   223
Report, dated March 2012, ``Addendum to Potential Supply and Cost
Impacts of Lower Sulfur, Lower RVP Gasoline,'' Baker & O'Brien,
Inc., for American Petroleum Institute, submitted by Mr.
Shimkus........................................................   234
Letter, dated March 27, 2012, from Charles T. Drevna, President,
American Fuel & Petrochemical Manufacturers, to Mr. Whitfield
and Mr. Rush, submitted by Mr. Shimkus.........................   252
Letter, dated March 26, 2012, from Anne Steckel, Vice President
of Federal Affairs, National Biodiesel Board, to Mr. Whitfield,
submitted by Mr. Shimkus.......................................   254
Letter, dated March 28, 2012, from Shannon Baker-Branstetter,
Consumers Union, and Sally Greenberg, National Consumers
League, to committe and subcommittee leadership, submitted by
Mr. Sarbanes...................................................   260
Letter, dated March 28, 2012, from Center for Biological
Diversity et al. to Mr. Whitfield, submitted by Mr. Sarbanes...   262

THE AMERICAN ENERGY INITIATIVE, PART 18: A FOCUS ON LEGISLATIVE
RESPONSES TO RISING GASOLINE PRICES

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 28, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:54 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed
Whitfield (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Shimkus, Terry,
Burgess, Bilbray, Scalise, McMorris Rodgers, Olson, McKinley,
Gardner, Pompeo, Griffith, Barton, Rush, Castor, Sarbanes,
Markey, Green, Capps, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Gary Andres, Staff Director; Maryam Brown,
Chief Counsel, Energy and Power; Allison Busbee, Legislative
Clerk; Garret Golding, Professional Staff Member, Energy and
Power; Cory Hicks, Policy Coordinator, Energy and Power; Heidi
King, Chief Economist; Ben Lieberman, Counsel, Energy and
Power; Mary Neumayr, Senior Energy Counsel; Andrew Powaleny,
Deputy Press Secretary; Alison Cassady, Democratic Senior
Professional Staff Member; Jacqueline Cohen, Democratic
Counsel; Greg Dotson, Democratic Energy and Environment Staff
Director; Caitlin Haberman, Democratic Policy Analyst; and
Alexandra Teitz, Democratic Senior Counsel, Environment and
Energy.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call this hearing to order.
Today's hearing will be the 18th day of hearings on what we
refer to as the American Energy Initiative. Today we are going
to be focusing primarily on the Gasoline Regulations Act of
2012, which is--simply requires an interagency committee
chaired by the Secretary of Energy to analyze the cumulative
impacts of particular regulations on gas and diesel, and the
impacts that that has on fuel prices and jobs.
And then the second bill that we are going to be
considering is the Strategic Energy Production Act of 2012,
which simply would require the Secretary of Energy in response
to any ``SPRO'' drawdown to develop a plan with other Federal
departments to open additional Federal lands for oil and gas
exploration and production to replace the oil in the drawdown.
Now, I want to take just a few minutes today--start my time
there--take a few minutes today to make a few comments about
the proposed regulation of EPA to regulate greenhouse gases,
which was announced yesterday. Now, I am genuinely concerned
about this for a lot of different reasons.
First of all, it is my genuine belief that EPA has not been
totally straightforward with the American people on some of its
regulations recently. Specifically I am talking about the
Utility MACT, is one I will discuss first. The Utility MACT was
sold to the American people as necessary to reduce mercury
emissions, and the impression was that the benefits of the
Utility MACT would come from reducing mercury emissions.
And yet the data and the statistics and the analysis of EPA
show quite clearly that any benefits from reducing mercury were
negligible. The primary benefits would come only from reduction
of particulate matter, which is already regulated under the
Clean Air Act.
In addition to that, there were no accurate or
comprehensive analysis of the total cost of the Utility MACT.
Now, we know that the purpose of it is to reduce production of
electricity by using coal, but once again, I would say that I
don't think that EPA was totally straightforward with the
American people on that issue.
Now, on the greenhouse gas regulation, proposed regulation,
Congress on three separation occasions has said no to
regulating greenhouse gas under the Clean Air Act. Two-hundred
and twenty-one members of Congress sent a letter to OMB, to
Jeffrey Zients, asking that they delay any proposed regulation
on greenhouse gas.
Not only did they not reply in any way, did not respond by
letter, by phone call, or anything else, totally disregarded
any input from 221 members of Congress. Now, I recognize this
is a proposed regulation. But if this regulation is adopted,
there will not be another coal power plant built in America
without carbon capture and sequestration, because there is no
other way to meet the standard. And we know that there is no
commercially viable carbon capture and sequestration applicable
to any coal-powered, that a coal-powered plant could use today
to meet that requirement.
And we are also concerned that under new source review, if
you modify an existing coal-powered plant to meet existing
environmental regulations, that that might be, claim to be a
new plant, and therefore, you have got to meet this new
requirement.
Now, I know that there is an exception that says that is
not the case, but we also know that historically lawsuits have
been filed, and there have been all sorts of unintended
consequences as a result.
And so if a lawsuit were filed against some company trying
to modify an existing plant to meet existing regulations and a
decision was made that, oh, this is a new plant, then we would
have a catastrophic result, I believe, in America for meeting
our electricity needs.
So I would simply want to express my genuine concern about
the way we are going on these regulations.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. And at this time I would like to recognize
the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Rush, for a 5-minute opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, we are here today, holding yet another
hearing on high gas prices, much like we have done numerous
times in the past and will continue to do many more times in
the future unless we make up our minds to fundamentally change
our dependence on oil.
Mr. Chairman, I support President Obama's All of the Above
energy approach, which encompasses increased oil and gas
production here in the U.S., additional conservation, and
energy efficiency measures, as well as a move towards cleaner
and renewable sources of energy.
These gas price hearings may play well in the media and may
make it appear as though Congress is actually busy doing
something to address rising fuel prices. But the fact of the
matter is that there is nothing that Congress or the
administration can do to address the way to reduce gas prices
in the immediate future.
We all know, Mr. Chairman, that fuel prices are set by
global supply and demand, and as long as we continue to rely so
heavily on oil, especially for powering our vehicles, then we
will continue to be at the mercy of OPEC and surging fuel
prices driven by the insatiable demand for oil led by the
emergence of India and China.
Mr. Chairman, while attacking EPA regulations and shouting
bumper sticker slogans such as, ``Drill, baby, drill,'' may be
enough to fire up a small percentage of the American public.
Those simplistic solutions do nothing to really address the
issue before us and the issue before the American people.
We must strategically wean ourselves away from oil, from
our oil reliance, especially in the transportation sector. That
is the only way we can ever steer clear of fluctuating gasoline
prices that are set on the global market. And neither of the
bills before us today will do anything to get at the heart of
the problem. Surprise. Surprise.
Republicans in Congress are once, again, attacking the EPA
and blaming the Clean Air Act as the cause for all of the
problems we face in our Nation today, and now that also
includes rising gasoline prices. In fact, the draft legislation
before us seems to directly contradict the Supreme Court's
unanimous 2001, ruling that cost could not be considered in
establishing standards, whose primary objective is to protect
America's children, America's families, and the public health
of all Americans.
And despite the howls and despite the protests of the Tea
Party faithful, most Americans do not blame the EPA for high
gas prices but rather blame major oil companies who made $137
billion in profits last year and that they have more to do with
the recent wild increases in gasoline prices. Don't blame the
EPA. Blame the oil companies.
Maybe this stems from the fact that for every additional
penny that the average American pays at the pump, big oil
profits go up another $2 million. In light of this fact, Mr.
Chairman, I would submit along with my March 15 letter
requesting a hearing on speculation in the oil market, this
subcommittee should also look into the impact that rising
gasoline prices have on big oil profits as compared to the
pocketbooks of ordinary American families.
At least then, Mr. Chairman, at that hearing we would be
actually looking into the practices that the American people
really do believe are behind the rising fuel prices.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Rush. At this time I
recognize the gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Gardner, who is the
author of our Strategic Energy Production Act of 2012, for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CORY GARDNER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing today.
Our country runs on abundant affordable energy. It is the
energy that fuels our factories, our farms, and ultimately
drives our economy forward. Each of us here today understands
that rising gas prices are impeding the growth of our economy.
Without lower gas prices, families, businesses will spend more
and more of their income filling up with a tank of gas instead
of investing into our economy.
So I don't think it is an overstatement to say that the
country's economic recovery is at risk if we continue with the
status quo, which brings me to the subject at hand: Why we need
to develop energy on Federal lands and why the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve, or ``SPRO'', should not be drawn down when
there are many longer-term, more lasting ways to address the
problem of higher gas prices.
Mr. Chairman, many in this administration and beyond have
suggested that tapping the ``SPRO'' was the way to bring down
prices. While this may be politically expedient during an
election year, no one can argue with the fact that it is a one-
time, short-term political fix to an enduring problem. The
``SPRO'' is intended to be used during times of severe energy
disruptions like shutdowns or major natural disasters, and I
think we can all agree that fortunately we don't find ourselves
having to deal with either of those situations today.
What we are experiencing, however, is extraordinarily high
gas prices, and we need real solutions in order to bring them
down. What baffles me is that the Federal Government has
resources to alleviate the problem, but it refuses to use them.
While production on the whole is up, production on Federal
lands is down. In fact, only 3 percent of all public land is
now leased for oil and gas production. The vast amounts of oil
that we are unable to access are lying fallow until we allow
energy production, energy production companies to develop them.
The Strategic Energy Production Act in front of us today
provides that if the President decides to draw down oil from
the SPR, a plan must be in place to increase leases on Federal
lands. It is as simple as that. If there is a supply shortage
severe enough to warrant tapping our reserves, then we should
do all we can to address it. Why not make more lands available
for production or streamline procedures by which we can access
Federal land of production? Why address this problem with a
short-term fix when we all know it is a long-term problem?
We should address this problem with a good policy, not
quick-fix politics. It is time we take some proactive steps in
promoting domestic energy production and stop playing politics
with an issue as serious as this.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield the balance of my time
to Mr. Barton.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Barton. Thank you, Congressman. I want to associate
myself with what you just said, and I also want to associate
myself with what Chairman Whitfield just said about the recent
issuance of regulations regarding emissions of coal-fired power
plants. Chairman Whitfield couldn't be more right in his
concern about that.
Today is the 18th hearing in a day about America's energy
policy. I understand that because of jurisdictional issues the
Energy and Commerce Committee can't be involved in every
legislative issue regarding energy, but I would like to put
before the committee for its consideration a plan that I think
would address the high gasoline prices over time.
I think the first thing that we would have to do is reform
Federal land permitting issues. When it takes the Texas
Railroad Commission days to issue a permit and it takes the
various Federal agencies years, that is a problem, and it is
not that Texas is too fast. It is that the Federal Government
drags its feet. The Obama administration has shown repeatedly
that they really do not want, in spite of the rhetoric, to
encourage domestic oil and gas production anywhere in America
on Federal lands. We need to take a look at those permitting
practices, and I think legislatively address them.
As Chairman Whitfield and Mr. Gardner just pointed out, we
also need to look at the various environmental regulations and
how they impact the energy production and energy use. Chairman
Whitfield's draft bill is a step in the right direction. It may
not be the end all, be all, but at least it is an attempt to
look at some of those negative regulatory impacts.
Something that really hasn't been mentioned but needs to be
is we need to encourage the use of more natural gas for
transportation uses. There is absolutely no reason when natural
gas is $2.30 mcf and oil is over $100 a barrel that we can't
find a way to use more natural gas for transportation issues.
Finally, we need to encourage the use of new technologies
for oil and gas production in America. Hydraulic fracturing,
horizontal drilling, and CO2 injection into depleted fields all
have potential to increase domestic energy production in the
mid term. We are currently producing about eight million
barrels of oil. We could, I think, produce double that amount
in the next 10 years if we use those technologies in an
environmentally-safe fashion.
There is absolutely no reason that America can't be energy
independent, Mr. Chairman, if we want to and with your
leadership and Chairman Upton's leadership and the leadership
of the Republican Majority in the House, I think we can work at
the rest of this Congress to begin to make that a potential
reality in the near term.
With that I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. At this time I would recognize
the gentleman from California, Mr. Waxman, for a 5-minute
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I want to welcome back to our committee a
previous member and now again a member, Congressman Sarbanes
from the State of Maryland. He was a very energetic member
before, and I am sure he will be a real--make a real
contribution now that he is back on our committee.
Now, if I could get the clock, I will start my opening
statement.
I want to comment on the Chairman's statement about EPA's
regulation. I want to congratulate EPA on the carbon power
plant regulation. It is required by the law, and it is a good
regulation, and I think it makes a lot of sense to protect our
environment and for our economy.
Today we are examining the Republicans' response to
gasoline prices. It is not an encouraging occasion for
America's families who are faced with rising costs at the pump.
The discussion drafts before us are not based in economic
principle or sound policy. The policies haven't been publicly
recommended to us by any knowledgeable or authoritative body.
These bills are a package of half-baked ideas and giveaways to
the oil industry.
They are based on false premises. These are not solutions
to the real problems that Americans are struggling with. The
Republicans' have two answers to gasoline prices at $4 a
gallon. First, they propose drilling for more oil, yet every
economist and oil market expert tells us that this will have no
meaningful impact on oil prices which are set on a global
market. Just look north to Canada. Canadians drill plenty of
oil. They are energy independent, and they export to us, but
this doesn't bring them lower prices. In fact, their gasoline
prices are higher than ours due to taxes.
We will also hear today that Republicans can bring down
gasoline prices by blocking the environmental regulations that
protect Americans from dangerous air pollution. No one should
be fooled by this argument. Under Republican leadership this
body has become the most anti-environmental Congress in
history. Since January, 2011, the House Republicans have voted
more than 200 times to undermine the Clean Air Act, the Clean
Water Act, and other environmental laws.
The premise of this legislation is, that we are going to
have before us today, that high gas prices are caused by EPA
regulations that haven't even been proposed. That is a complete
fantasy. High gasoline prices are being caused by rising global
demand, tensions in the Middle East, and tight supplies.
Americans want clean air. They don't want this committee to
use high gasoline prices as an excuse for blocking regulations
to reduce toxic emissions from oil refineries. Americans want
cars that can go further on a gallon of gasoline. This is
especially important when fuel prices are high. They don't want
us to use high gasoline prices as a pretext for blocking clean
fuel regulations that the auto companies need to make cleaner,
more efficient vehicles. But that is exactly what the
legislation does.
Even worse, one of the bills before us contains the Latta
Amendment. That is a proposal that will cut the heart out of
the Clean Air Act. It would overturn a unanimous 2001, Supreme
Court case and repel a 40-year-old law that says the goal of
the Clean Air Act is to achieve air quality that is safe for
Americans to breathe.
On our first panel today we will hear from the
administration on gas prices. There is no silver bullet to
gasoline prices, but the actions Federal agencies are taking
show that President Obama is charting the course for an economy
that is built to last. EPA will tell us how they have adopted
rules that save consumers money at the pump and decrease the
Nation's oil demands. The Department of Interior will tell us
how American oil production has increased to levels we haven't
seen in recent memory, and the Department of Energy will
explain how they are researching and developing the clean
energy options that will lessen our dependence on oil and our
vulnerability to price spikes going forward.
Instead of supporting these valuable initiatives, the
Republican-controlled House has done everything possible to
frustrate them. The House has passed partisan legislation to
prevent the administration from cutting tailpipe emissions and
making vehicles more efficient. The Republican budget could
decimate the funding for clean energy, and House Republicans
have even opposed efforts to penalize oil companies that sit on
oil leases and refuse to produce any oil until prices go
higher.
If you really cared about helping the country become more
resilient to gasoline price volatility, you would be working
with the administration instead of trying to block President
Obama's every initiative.
But this hearing isn't about understanding and addressing
gasoline prices. It is about using high gasoline prices as yet
another rationale for advancing a profoundly anti-environmental
agenda. Oil companies will surely benefit if these bills are
enacted, and just as surely American families will suffer.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Waxman.
That concludes opening statements, and so I would like to
welcome the members of the first panel. We appreciate your
being here very much, and we look forward to your testimony
about these pieces of legislation as well as other issues.
We have with us this morning the Honorable Gina McCarthy,
who is no stranger to the subcommittee. She is the Assistant
Administrator of Air and Regulation at the United States
Environmental Protection Agency. We have Mr. Christopher Smith,
who is the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Oil and Natural Gas,
Office of Fossil Energy, at the U.S. Department of Energy, and
then we have Mr. Robert Abbey, who is the Director of Bureau of
Land Management, U.S. Department of Interior.
And each one of you will be given 5 minutes to make an
opening statement, and Ms. McCarthy, I will recognize you for 5
minutes to begin.

STATEMENTS OF REGINA MCCARTHY, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE
OF AIR AND RADIATION, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY;
CHRISTOPHER SMITH, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR OIL AND
NATURAL GAS, OFFICE OF FOSSIL ENERGY, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY; AND
ROBERT V. ABBEY, DIRECTOR, BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT,
DEPARTMENT OF INTERIOR

STATEMENT OF REGINA MCCARTHY

Ms. McCarthy. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member
Rush, members of the committee, I appreciate the opportunity to
be back before you today.
Many families are hard hit by today's high gas prices. They
deserve and they need real solutions. Unfortunately, the
Gasoline Act of 2012 doesn't offer real solutions. It uses high
gas prices as a reason to roll back fundamental public health
protections that have nothing to do with high gas prices.
This bill would fundamentally change the cornerstone of the
Clean Air Act, the requirement that EPA set air quality
standards for smog at the level that the science advises us is
necessary to protect public health.
Let me be clear. Programs to protect public health and to
provide American families with scientifically-credible
information about the health of the air in their communities
are not the cause of high gas prices. In contrast, EPA's
actions ensure that we travel farther on each gallon of
gasoline than we--that we consume. In partnership with NHTSA,
we have issued a set of proposed and final greenhouse gas
pollution and fuel economy standards for model years 2011, to
2025, vehicles that will save approximately 12 billion barrels
of oil over the life of those vehicles. That is equivalent to
the past 6 years of imported oil from OPEC countries.
Consumers are already saving money at the pump as a result
of these rules. In model year 2025, vehicles will save their
owners $3,000 to $4,400 over the life of that vehicle. EPA and
NHTSA's recent standards for trucks and buses will also save
money. For example, a long-haul trucker would save a net of
$73,000 over the life of a model year 2018, truck.
In addition, EPA's Renewable Fuels Program, when fully
implemented, will displace about 7 percent of expected annual
U.S. gasoline and diesel consumption in 2022.
The Gasoline Regulation Act of 2012 would not reduce gas
prices, but it would waste government resources and taxpayer
dollars. It would unnecessarily delay EPA rules that would
protect public health in cost effective ways in order to allow
a new interagency committee to conduct cumulative analysis of
rules, only it is not clear how the committee would analyze
rules that haven't even been proposed or how the public could
comment on that analysis in an informed way. And this analysis
is simply not needed to ensure that EPA analyzes the effects of
our rules on gas prices. We do that already.
Most troubling, however, is the provision unrelated to gas
prices. Section 6 would roll back one of the key public health
protections in the Clean Air Act. It would fundamentally alter
the way that EPA would set the National Ambient Air Quality
Standard for ozone or smog.
For many people, including one out of every ten school-aged
children, elevated ozone levels can make it harder to breathe.
Ozone exacerbates the suffering of asthmatics, causing more
frequent and severe asthma attacks.
So people with compromised health conditions like asthma
have come to rely on EPA's Daily Air Quality Index to help them
manage their lives. The elderly skip their morning walk on bad
air days, and mothers keep their kids indoors when the air is
not sufficiently protected for their children to breath. What
will happen if this bill should pass, and we have to do what
Section 6 tells us to do? We would no longer rely on the
science to identify bad air days, and instead we would have to
decide what level of smog is protective of public health based
on what is cost effective and feasible to address.
Again, let me be clear. I am not saying that we should not
take cost and feasibility into consideration when we determine
the most appropriate actions to take to achieve health-based
standards like smog. We do, but I am saying that we should not
let our economists weigh in on what is and is not healthy air.
That is the job of scientists and health experts, and I for one
would like to keep it that way.
In conclusion, the draft bill would do nothing to address
high gas prices, but it would delay significant cost effective
health protections required under the Clean Air Act and
undermine EPA's authority to protect public health and the
environment by rolling back a fundamental Clean Air Act public
health protections.
Lastly, Mr. Chairman, I heard your concerns about the
recent announcement by EPA on carbon pollution standards for
future power plants. I am more than happy to come and return at
a time when you might have a hearing on that or to answer any
questions you may have today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. McCarthy follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
At this time I recognize Mr. Smith for a 5-minute opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER SMITH

Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Chairman
Whitfield, Ranking Member Rush, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
Department of Energy's perspective on these two legislative
proposals.
We share the concern of members regarding the burden that
rising gasoline prices place on U.S. families and businesses.
For decades, volatile energy prices have threatened the
economic security for millions of American households, hitting
consumers hard and straining budgets for millions of American
families.
The American people understand that there is no silver
bullet for meeting our energy needs and bringing down the price
of gasoline in the short term. In the long term, though, we can
work to protect America from the ups and downs of the global
market by pursuing a sustained, all-of-the-above approach to
American energy that will reduce oil imports, save families and
businesses money at the pump, and position the United States as
the leader in clean energy alternatives.
As part of this comprehensive energy strategy, the United
States is expanding oil production here at home, increasing the
efficiency of the vehicles that we drive, and investing in
advanced technologies that will diversify our transportation
sector.
The Obama administration is committed to expanding the safe
and responsible production of America's energy resources, which
is one reason why the U.S. production has increased each year
the President has been in office. Domestic oil production is
currently at an 8-year high, and there are more oil rigs
operating now in the United States than in the rest of the
world combined.
At the same time, America's dependence on foreign oil has
been going down over the last several years. In 2010, imported
oil accounted for less than 50 percent of the oil consumed here
in the United States for the first time in 13 years.
But exploration alone will not solve our energy challenges.
That is why the administration is working to improve vehicle
efficiency. The administration has announced historic standards
that will nearly double the fuel economy of the vehicles we
drive, saving families approximately $1.7 trillion at the pump
and cutting oil consumption by 12 billion barrels. The
administration is also investing in advanced vehicles and
fuels, including targeted investments in electric and natural
gas vehicles, advanced combustion engines, biofuels and fuel
blends, and advanced and lighter materials for vehicles that
will help reduce the amount of gas American families will need
to buy.
Domestic natural gas also has the potential as an
alternative transportation fuel, especially for long-haul
trucks. At the Department of Energy we are investing in
research into natural gas-powered vehicles to further reduce
our dependence on imported oil.
The Department of Energy has serious concerns about the
legislation being discussed today. These bills would do little
or nothing to address the current situation facing American
families and businesses, and in fact, could potentially make
the tools that we do have available to protect U.S. energy
security less effective.
Drawdown to the Strategic Petroleum Reserve have been used
in the past to offset the loss of crude oil supplies and
mitigate the impact to the Nation of oil supply interruptions
and the resulting price spikes. The Strategic Energy Production
Act of 2012, if enacted, will make it more difficult for the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve to achieve its mission to respond
promptly to supply interruptions with emergency crude oil.
Draw downs are already a complicated process, involving
coordination with a variety of local, regional, and
international entities. Imposing a requirement to coordinate
future increases in leased Federal lands as a consequence of
releasing crude oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve would
require a significant expansion of the resources at the
Department of Energy and other departments and would have a
negative impact on the decision-making process to employ the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve, which should be based solely on
protecting the United States from the consequences of severe
supply interruptions.
Similarly, the other piece of legislation being discussed
today, the discussion draft of the Gas Regulations Act of 2012,
would require a large investment of resources from the
Department of Energy and other Federal agencies participating
on the committee and would be exceedingly difficult, if not
impossible, to accomplish in the timeframe mandated in the
legislation.
The administration shares this committee's concern about
the burden caused by high gasoline prices. However, we do not
believe that the bills we are discussing today would help
achieve the intended purpose. Creating more bureaucratic
structures and complicating the government's decision-making
processes are not the means of best responding to spikes in
gasoline prices and reducing our dependence on imported oil. We
remain committed to working with Congress on ways to
constructively address our Nation's energy challenges.
Thank you, again, for having me here today, and I look
forward to addressing any questions that the committee might
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Smith, and Mr. Abbey, you are
recognized for a 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT V. ABBEY

Mr. Abbey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
subcommittee, for the opportunity to appear before you this
morning to discuss the Department of Interior's role in the
administration's plan for our domestic energy future.
We understand that this subcommittee is considering a
discussion draft of legislation which would link oil and gas
leasing on Federal lands and waters to the authorization by the
President of a drawdown of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. And
while we defer to the Energy Department, which is the lead
agency on this issue, for a position on the legislation, the
planning and leasing processes currently in place at the
Department of the Interior are already resulting in a broad
energy strategy that is reducing our dependence on foreign oil.
We know the prices at the pump are high and that there is
no simple solution to bring down that price. This is why the
President and the Department of Interior has continued to
promote and implement an all-of-the-above approach to American
energy.
The BLM is responsible for managing our National System of
Public Lands, which are located primarily in 12 western States,
including Alaska. The BLM administers over 245 million surface
acres, more than any other Federal agency, and approximately
700 million acres of onshore subsurface mineral estate
throughout the Nation.
The Bureau of Land Management plays an important role in
advancing domestic energy production on these America's public
lands. Domestic oil and gas production from the public lands
remain critical to our energy supply.
We are also expanding development of renewable energy
sources like wind and solar and geothermal production that will
help diversify our Nation's energy portfolio. Onshore there are
now over 38 million acres under lease for oil and gas, but less
than one-third, about 32 percent of that acreage is currently
in production.
Companies also continue to hold thousands of approved but
unused permits to drill on our public lands. Expanding safe and
responsible oil and gas production from the Outer Continental
Shelf is a key component of the President's Blueprint for a
secure energy future and will help us continue to reduce our
dependence on foreign oil and create jobs here at home.
The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management or BOEM manages the
Nation's offshore energy and mineral resources in a balanced
way that promotes efficient and environmentally responsible oil
and gas and renewable energy development and a commitment to
rigorous, science-based environmental review and study.
The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management's Five-Year Oil and
Gas Leasing Program is a key element in managing our offshore
oil and gas assets. Under these statutory requirements, the
Department prepares a long-range program that specifies the
size, timing, and location of areas to be considered for
Federal offshore oil and gas leasing.
The proposed Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Leasing
Program for 2012 through 2017 includes substantial acreage for
lease in regions with known potential for oil and gas
development. This plan makes areas containing more than 75
percent of undiscovered technically-recoverable oil and gas
resources in the Federal OCS available for exploration and
development.
BOEM has also established a regulatory framework for
renewable energy leasing and development. Recently, BOEM has
taken a number of important steps towards additional lease
sales in fiscal year 2013, and beyond, including developing a
commercial lease form, conducting an analysis to determine
auction formats, and completing an environmental assessment to
support leasing in wind energy areas off four Mid-Atlantic
States.
Recognizing that America's oil supplies are limited, we
must develop our domestic resources safely, responsibly, and
efficiently, while at the same time taking steps that will
ultimately lessen our reliance on oil. We are also taking steps
both onshore and offshore to encourage industry to develop the
thousands of leases and permits that they already have but that
are currently sitting idle.
The Obama administration and the Department of the Interior
are working to secure our energy future by ensuring that our
domestic oil and gas resources are safely developed and that
the potential for clean energy development on our public lands
and water is realized.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to appear
before this subcommittee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Abbey follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. We appreciate the opening
statement of all of you, and Ms. McCarthy, I know you all have
got a lot going on over at EPA, but we have a policy of asking
that opening statements be given to us 48 hours before the
hearing, and I know a lot of people are surprised at this, but
we actually read these opening statements.
And yesterday we received yours at 6:25 last night, which
is certainly way beneath the 48 hours, so I would hope that in
the future if you could get to us 48 hours in advance, we would
really appreciate that.
Ms. McCarthy. Mr. Chairman, I will do my best in the
future. We had some difficulty because we didn't receive the
draft legislation until last week, so but we will do our best
in the future.
Mr. Whitfield. OK, and second of all, recently you gave a
speech to the Coal Club here in Washington, DC, and in that
speech you had indicated that there were hundreds of utility
plants that could meet the--existing utility plants that could
meet the Utility MACT regulations, and you indicated that you
would make that list available to anyone that wanted it. And
our staff has asked your staff to provide that list to us, and
we have not received it yet, and since the implication was that
you all certainly had that list, could you provide that to us
by the end of the day today?
Ms. McCarthy. Mr. Chairman, I did attend the meeting that
you identified. I did misspeak. There are dozens of facilities
that actually achieve the existing standards, and we are more
than happy to respond to the request.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, could we have it by the end of the
day?
Ms. McCarthy. I don't know if I can accommodate that, but I
will get back to you by----
Mr. Whitfield. Well, because your staff had indicated to us
that we needed to write a letter, so I am just going to ask you
verbally if you could get it to us by the end of today, if
possible, the 12, the list of 12 or so plants that meet that
existing----
Ms. McCarthy. It is dozens. It is in the sixties, but I
will do my best----
Mr. Whitfield. All right.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. To get that to you.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much. Now, I would like to
ask all of you yes or no, has the EPA or Department of Energy
or Department of Interior taken a position on these two pieces
of legislation? Mr. Smith, have you all taken a position on
them?
Mr. Smith. Yes. Thank you for the question, Mr. Chairman.
So on the first piece of legislation that has to do with
the petroleum reserve, as I mentioned in my opening statement
we do have some concerns about the idea of tying the
operational capability of one of the few quick response tools
that the Federal Government actually does have to respond to
emergency supply disruptions that could cause high price spikes
for American consumers and taking that and tying it to a
regulatory, legal legislative process by which we are trying to
estimate new quantities of oil and gas to be produced on public
lands in cooperation with private oil companies. So we have
some concerns about that.
Mr. Whitfield. So you are not opposed to it at this point,
but you have some concerns that we might be able to address
with you?
Mr. Smith. Well, I would say categorically that we think
that the direction of taking a strategic asset that is
dedicated by statute to protecting national security by
protecting against price spikes that might be caused by supply
interruptions and tying it to a legislative process, that is
something that we would be categorically against.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, Mr. Abbey, what about your Department?
Mr. Abbey. Mr. Chairman, we have deferred to the Department
of Energy to take a position on that particular legislative
proposal, but I will say this, that we believe such a proposal
is unnecessary.
Mr. Whitfield. And, Ms. McCarthy, has EPA taken a formal
position?
Ms. McCarthy. No, sir, we don't.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Well, one of the things that you had
mentioned in your comment was that this legislation appears to
use high gas prices as the reason to roll back fundamental
public health protections, and I would just say and clarify
that this legislation on the gas issue does not roll back
anything. It simply defers three rules for at least 6 months
after the issuance of a final report, the Tier 3 Motor Vehicle
Emission and Fuel Standards, the new Source Performance
Standards for Petroleum Refineries, which is not out there yet,
and the new Ozone Standards, which is not out there.
So it is not the intent of this legislation to roll back
any existing health protections.
Ms. McCarthy. I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman. The roll
back comment was related to the requirement that we change from
being advised by the science in terms of what is protective as
a standard for smog as opposed to taking into consideration
cost and feasibility, which would significantly change the
fundamental premise of the Clean Air Act.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, I would just say that the President
himself wrote a letter to Administrator Jackson in which he
directed that you minimize regulatory costs and burdens. He
wrote that letter September 2, 2011.
My time has expired. At this time I recognize the
gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Castor, for--Mr. Sarbanes was here
first I was told. Recognize the gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Sarbanes, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am glad to be back
here on the committee. Appreciate the opportunity.
Mr. Whitfield. Let me just say we welcome you back, and
thank you.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much.
Ms. McCarthy, I wanted to address most of my questions to
you. First of all, thanks for being here. Thanks for your
testimony, and thanks for the work that you do at the EPA. I
thought since I was returning to the committee that I ought to
get back to core principles and understanding the mission of
the EPA, so I looked again this morning at the mission of the
EPA, which is to protect human health and the environment. And
the first purpose listed for the EPA is its purpose is that all
Americans, to ensure that all Americans are protected from
significant risks to human health and the environment where
they live, learn, and work.
And I commend you for bringing out attention to Section 6
of the act that is under review here today because I agree with
you that it creates a dangerous, it is a dangerous development
to start putting aside the concerns about the science in
developing the standards, and as I understand it from what you
have said, that is your concern. It is not that we throw
economics completely out the window, but when it comes to
developing the standards that you want to put forward that are
designed to protect human health and the environment, you need
to rely on the science first and foremost, and your fear based
on this provision is that that would be trumped by these other
concerns. So I thank you for bring that up.
I come from Maryland, and I am concerned about the fact
that Maryland, I think, is one of the, well, Baltimore has been
found to have one of the highest levels of smog on the east
coast. Baltimore and Washington. That is the corridor I travel
every day, so I am very, very interested in the potential of
these Tier 3 Tailpipe Pollution Standards, which are coming
along to address pollution in our area.
And what I would like you to do, if you could, and I
understand that standards aren't developed yet, the regulations
have not been issued, I am concerned about any effort to get in
the way of the timeline for those because we have great
expectations of what they can, how they can benefit Maryland
and frankly the whole Chesapeake Bay watershed.
But if you could speak to the health benefits behind these
new Tier 3 Tailpipe Pollution Standards in terms of reducing
nitrogen, oxides, and what that means in terms of the public
health, I would appreciate it very much.
Ms. McCarthy. Mr. Congressman, first let me congratulate
Maryland for all the work they do. I know that we work with
them very closely on issues of ozone. There are many rules that
we have done that are attempting to address the interstate
transport of ozone into Maryland where they are working very
hard on Tier 3 in particular. The importance of Tier 3 is very
large to States like yours and others that deal with smog, and
it will produce vehicles that will significantly lower both
VOCs and NOCs which are precursors of ozone. They will also
provide significant net benefits related to lower sulfur in
gasoline.
So while the rules haven't been proposed, our major concern
here is that we would be having to wait for the completion of a
report that may never come, and this rule, this new law would
actually tell us that we had to wait for 6 years for the
completion of a rule that will provide no further clear
information to the public on our Tier 3 rule, and our rule
hasn't even been proposed. It is not clear how it would be
analyzed, and we want to move on and get it in front of the
public and provide the benefits that the Clean Air Act
intended, and it is a significant way for us to reduce ozone
and to provide those public health protections.
Mr. Sarbanes. I appreciate that, and I want to anticipate,
you know, in the context of this hearing the criticism would be
that those new tailpipe emission standards would significantly
increase the cost of gasoline. In fact, the studies that I have
available to me, I am looking at a very good article from the
``Baltimore Sun,'' last November, suggests based on industry
forecasts that you might increase fuel costs by a half cent,
potentially a half cent to a cent, and you are looking at, you
know, all tolled maybe $143 million increased costs up to
potentially $400.
You look at the benefits in terms of reduced healthcare
costs because of reducing the pollution out there, and you are
talking about--and this is reducing hospitalizations, sick
days, and premature deaths, and you are looking at $234 million
to $1.2 billion saved. So that is really something we should
take into consideration. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Barton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. McCarthy, yesterday the EPA put out the proposed
regulations on new coal-fired power plants that allows the
emission of CO2 to be, I think, 1,000 pounds per ton. Most
coal-fired power plants, the best that--the average, I think,
is about 1,700 pounds of CO2 per ton.
Where did 1,000 pounds per ton come from, and what is magic
about it?
Ms. McCarthy. The standard is 1,000 pounds per megawatt
hour.
Mr. Barton. Per megawatt. I am sorry. You are right. Per
megawatt hour.
Ms. McCarthy. And it is based on what we believe to be the
best system of emission reduction is what is called on in the
law. It is based on natural gas combined cycle, which is about
95 percent of the natural gas combined cycle units that have
been built since 2005, actually achieve this 1,000 pound
standard.
Mr. Barton. But that is natural gas.
Ms. McCarthy. It is, but we also recognize that most new
units are actually going to be natural gas. That is the trend
we see because of the availability and cost.
Mr. Barton. You understand that if you set the standard for
coal at that range, you are not going to build a new coal-fired
power plant.
Ms. McCarthy. We----
Mr. Barton. You understand that?
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. Identified a pathway for coal to
achieve by providing flexibility to allow coal a 30-year
averaging to achieve that standard, recognizing that carbon
capture and storage, while it is available today, they may not
want to put or design the facility----
Mr. Barton. Well, it is too expensive.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. To have it today, but they could
over a 30-year period and achieve----
Mr. Barton. Carbon capture works in the laboratory, but
when you scale it up to put it on a real power plant, it raises
the cost by about 30 percent or at least it did the last time I
looked at it. So what you have done is effectively say we are
not going to use coal to generate electricity in the United
States ever again.
Is the EPA and President Obama comfortable with that, that
you are just wiping out half the generation capacity of America
of electricity currently?
Ms. McCarthy. We believe that carbon capture and
sequestration is actually being put on at full scale now. We
believe that the capture rate, which is very modest for today's
systems, can be achieved and allow this averaging to be a very
successful approach to coal continuing to be developed.
And we recognize that over time the cost and effectiveness
of that technology will likely improve dramatically. The 30-
year horizon gives units 10 years to actually, before they need
to install carbon capture and sequestration in order to make
that standard within that 30-year period.
Mr. Barton. I don't think it is a surprise to you that many
of us don't share the optimism that you just expressed about
the ability for technology to overcome that, and I wouldn't be
surprised if you don't see some legislative attempts to correct
the proposed regulation.
I want to ask Mr. Abbey about permitting reform on Federal
lands. As I pointed out in my opening statement, in Texas the
Railroad Commission on occasion will issue a new permit for an
oil or gas well within a day, but it almost always never takes
more than a week. I can't find a record of a Federal permit on
Federal lands or the OCS being issued in--the average is 3
years. Some take as long as 7 years.
Do you agree that Federal permitting reform for oil and gas
leases should be a priority to enact?
Mr. Abbey. It is a priority for the Department of Interior
to look at our existing processes and always determine where
improvement could be achieved and efficiencies achieved so that
we can move forward as expeditiously as possible to review the
applications that come before us and make decisions on those
applications.
Mr. Barton. Do you have--what would be a good goal to shoot
for? Do you think 90 days?
Mr. Abbey. Well, again, it would be difficult to assign a
goal to each application because they vary from complexity, by
complexity, but let me just share with you----
Mr. Barton. How about let us do it in less than a year?
Mr. Abbey. Well, many of them are approved or decisions
made within a year. For example, last year we received
approximately 41 applications for permits to drill within the
Bureau of Land Management. We made decisions. We issued
approvals on over 4,200 applications for permits to drill
because we ended up addressing some of the backlog that we had.
Mr. Barton. So when industry says it is 3 to 7 years, they
are just not telling the truth?
Mr. Abbey. Some applications will require that much time
because we go back and have to do an environmental impact
statement, but many of the applications, most of the
applications that we do receive for permits to drill are
decided within probably anywhere between 90 days to a year.
Mr. Barton. OK. My time has expired. I would like to ask
Ms. McCarthy one final question.
Could you elaborate on Lisa Jackson, the Administrator, Ms.
Jackson's announcement yesterday that the EPA had no plans to
issue regulations for greenhouse gases for existing power
plants? What is no plans? Is that the next week, the next year,
the next decade? Would you elaborate a little bit on her
announcement on that issue?
Ms. McCarthy. I think her statement, Congressman, was very
clear. We do not have plans to develop new source performance
standards for existing----
Mr. Barton. So I can state that for the rest of the Obama
administration, Lisa Jackson and the EPA is not going to issue
a regulation for existing power plants on greenhouse gases.
Ms. McCarthy. We just indicated that we have no plan.
Mr. Barton. For the rest of the Obama administration?
Ms. McCarthy. Right now we have focused solely on what you
have already proposed, which is getting comment on the new
source standard, which is the premise for moving forward. We
are looking forward to those comments, and we want to make sure
that we get the new source performance standard right, that we
protect existing facilities at this point, and should we move
forward with existing in the future, that would be a standard
that would be established through separate rulemaking.
Mr. Shimkus [presiding]. The gentleman's time----
Mr. Barton. No plans is like President Clinton saying
depends on what the gentleman----
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I am glad to follow my colleague
from Texas, and if I run over, could I get a couple minutes,
too, although I am not a Chairman Emeritus as he is.
Mr. Shimkus. No.
Mr. Green. That was a quick response.
Ms. McCarthy, following my colleague from Texas, I
appreciate what you did on the existing facilities because that
was a big concern. Now, we may still have some discussion on
how we can do secrets ratio intervenings on existing
facilities, but my interest is obviously refining capacity, and
it is my understanding the EPA has publicly stated or proposed
the Tier 3 Sulfur Standards this March, which would mean they
would need to be proposed this week.
When do you plan to propose those Tier 3 Sulfur Standards?
Ms. McCarthy. We don't have an exact timeline at this
point, Congressman. We are actively looking at this issue. We
want to assure that they are as cost effective as they can be.
Right now we project that cost to be somewhere less than a
penny. We recognize the challenges associated with the cost of
gasoline, and we are going to be sensitive to that.
Mr. Green. OK, and since you don't have a timeline I know
you agree that in using the same rationale that you have used
on greenhouse gases for new permitting, the combination of
these rules could put refiners in quite a predicament, and so I
would hope that you are working with--I understand you are
working with litigants and seeing what we can do because
obviously everybody wants to do what is right, but we need to
be able to capitalize it, particularly on refineries like I
have. I have five of them that are very large, and they just
don't, I mean, at any given time there is a permit for
something in the works there in East Harris Country. So I
appreciate that.
Let me ask Mr. Smith, Mr. Smith, I have some concerns in
the discussion draft that our colleague, Mr. Gardner, has with
interfere with the efficient management operation of the
Strategic Petroleum Preserve, maybe make it unusable, in fact.
The proposal covers not just draw downs and sales but also
exchange agreements. The authority entered in an exchange
agreement with private companies has been used ten times, and
these exchanges allow refiners to overcome unforeseen emergency
disruptions in their crude oil supply.
In June of 2000 this authority was used because of a
commercial dry dock collapsing in a shipping canal in
Louisiana, blocking the primary route of the two refineries. If
not for the exchange, these refineries would have had to halt
production. In 2006, an accidental release of storm water and
oil caused another ship canal closure, again, blocking the
supply to refineries. Again, the exchange for the strategic
petroleum reserve kept these refineries running.
In my district I have a number of refineries that depend on
the Houston Ship Channel. A closure of that channel could be
devastating to these companies and the workers, not to mention
the economy that depends on their fuel.
My question is, Mr. Smith, do the requirements of
Congressman Gardner's bill apply to exchange from the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve such as the ones we that are we were done to
address ship channel closures in 2000, and 2006?
Mr. Smith. Thank you for the question, Congressman. I can't
speak to the details of exchanges. It is just something, I am
not familiar with that clause of the regulation. What I can say
is that anything in the regulation that is going to restrict
the ability for us to use the Natural Petroleum--Strategic
Petroleum Reserve in a way that protects national security and
in a way that allows us to respond to emergency disruptions in
supply that might cause price spikes for American consumers
would be something that is going to be taking away a primary
tool that the Federal Government does have at its exposure to
protect the American consumers, and it would be something that
would not be in the best interest of the American public.
Mr. Green. So would an exchange from just one refinery to
address an emergency interruption trigger the rift requirement
to create a leasing plan?
Mr. Smith. Well, my understanding is that exchanges are
covered.
Mr. Green. OK. In June of 2000 exchange I mentioned early
on, it was only 500,000 barrels, that is less than one-tenth of
1 percent of the holdings of the ``SPRO''. Mr. Smith, would
this bill require you to create a nationwide leasing plan
because of the exchange of less than one-tenth of 1 percent of
the ``SPRO,'' and the plan would have to increase leasing of
Federal land by less than one-tenth of 1 percent?
Mr. Smith. Well, my understanding of the legislation as it
is proposed is that the draw down to the ``SPRO'' would be
tied, the utilization of the ``SPRO,'' would be tied to the
requirement to create plans to increase production on public
lands, which would involve working with all of the regulatory
and legal authorities and estimates of private companies that
would be producing on the private end.
Mr. Green. I don't want any confusion. I want us to lease
on public lands everywhere we can, but I also know that if we
tie it to the ``SPRO'' there are some emergencies that happen,
and we know in our district what happened with Hurricane Ike
came into the Houston Ship Channel, we had to shut down those
refineries, and literally the price of oil went up, the price
of gasoline went up until we could get them up, and we had
airline companies and DOD saying, we need to get those
refineries back up.
So I worry that if we have a disruption, that we need to
have the ``SPRO'' on a short-term basis in some cases to help.
Mr. Smith. Well, and just to be clear about the response,
you know, we are certainly in favor of having that flexibility
to respond should need be, and we are also in favor of
generally speaking, making sure we have got an efficient
process to produce oil and gas on public lands. The tying of
the two together is something that would make us less
effective.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. I just want for the record my ranking member
of my subcommittee did get like 38 additional seconds so--thank
you, and I would like to recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Ms. McCarthy, I really do personally respect you and have
great admiration for your work, but you all are just killing us
in southern Illinois, our coalminers and our electricity
generation by coal. So I have a couple of questions.
Under the new standards, if a power producer were to build
a new coal-fired power plant, what would that cost be?
Ms. McCarthy. Mr. Chairman, we are talking about the
greenhouse gas?
Mr. Shimkus. Right.
Ms. McCarthy. Well, we took a look, frankly, and there
are--there is anticipated no proposals for coal fired at this
point in time, but we did take a look at it. We looked at the
costs and benefits.
Mr. Shimkus. Well, we did the calculation based upon your
own numbers. Your inventory greenhouse gases said this fossil
fuel electricity generation emitted 2,154 million metric tons
of CO2 in 2009. Your report, interagency report says that that
would cost between 60 to 90 per ton in CO2 avoided, and if we
assume 50 percent carbon capture, it would cost between $64 to
$102 billion to replace our existing coal-fired generation with
new plants using CCS.
We would be happy--we have economists. We will be happy to
share those numbers with you, but those are the costs incurred.
Let me go to another question.
Ms. McCarthy. Just for clarity, this has to do with future
power plants?
Mr. Shimkus. That is right. If we are going to replace our
current ones with future power plants under your standards, it
will cost $60 to--$64 to $102 billion based upon your numbers.
Now, let us go to the second question. In the analysis the
EPA assumes that nobody would want to build a new coal-fired
power plant. Is that correct?
Ms. McCarthy. That is the modeling done by----
Mr. Shimkus. Right. So you are saying no one is going to
build one anyway. In fact, I have got your all's quote here
that says we don't think anybody is going to do it with these
additional costs incurred.
Ms. McCarthy. Not at this point in time, Congressman----
Mr. Shimkus. Yes.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. Because of the availability and
price of natural resources.
Mr. Shimkus. Isn't it a self-fulfilling prophesy that if
you issue rules that nobody could meet that we won't have
electricity generation by coal?
Ms. McCarthy. One of the reasons why we created a 30-year
window was to ensure that there was a pathway forward.
Mr. Shimkus. Well, there--at $64 to $102 billion, there is
no pathway forward.
Let me go--coal is our most abundant source of low-cost
domestic energy. How is taking coal out of our energy mix
consistent with the All of the Above energy strategy?
Ms. McCarthy. EPA is not preventing either the continued
use or the construction of new coal.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Mr. Barton sent a letter, the Department
of Energy responded on May 28, 2009, and I quote. ``Timeframe
for undertaking a project varied depending upon the scale and
complexity of the project with smaller-scale projects typically
lasting 3 to 4 years in duration. Larger scale near-commercial
scale, this is for carbon capture and sequestration, projects
taking 10-plus years to complete.''
Now, I am in one of the largest areas where carbon capture
and sequestration is thought to be able to do it, and we are
not there. No one is going to go there. Also, on the DOE letter
it says, ``A legal framework is needed to provide certainty in
having to deal with ownership of the geological core space.''
That is never going to happen. So to think we are going to move
to carbon capture and sequestration is just very frustrating.
This administration promised before the election that they
were going to bankrupt coal, and if I could run the U-Tube
clip.[Video shown]
Mr. Shimkus. OK. This is to the San Francisco Chronicle,
and the President basically says--so the issue is his goal was
to bankrupt coal generation, electricity generation by coal,
and it is not just greenhouse gases. Mr. Barton was correct.
Greenhouse gases is the challenge next. What is the electricity
generation by coal challenges now? Boiler MACT, mercury MACT,
transport rule, coal ash. So, yes, let us put a new burden on
future generation, but you are not admitting the burden that is
closing down coal-fire power plants today. So you are already
taking the ones out today through current regulation. You are
going to take out the next generation of coal through
greenhouse gas.
My time has expired. I yield back.
Now I would like to recognize Ms. Castor for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. Now, wait. Mr. Rush is back. So, Mr. Rush, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. I seen that
very exciting there, but you were excited as much to do about
nothing. I mean, you--what was the President speaking of? You
are trying to insinuate--you are taking a brief three or four
words out of total context what he was saying, and Mr.
Chairman, that is----
Mr. Shimkus. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Rush. No, I won't yield.
Mr. Shimkus. It is 3-1/2 minutes.
Mr. Rush. That is the way that your side continues to
operate. Take a few words that the President says, take it out
of context, and then start attacking it in the context that you
want to place it in and start attacking him on those few words.
I am sure that the President wasn't talking about all the coal
plants. He was talking about the most egregious polluters, and
that--I am not going--but I just want to make a point that that
is totally out of line and with fairness, and that is totally
out of line with the way I would think that the Chair would
operate.
And Mr. Chairman, I just think that that is very malicious
on your part because those comments were taken out of, totally
out of context. Totally out of context.
Ms. McCarthy, what would the health implication be of
compelling the EPA to consider cost when setting health-based
standards?
Ms. McCarthy. The implication would be that science and the
advice of the scientists and health experts would no longer be
the primary and sole way in which the Clean Air Act defines the
goals that it is trying to achieve to protect the public and
deliver clean air.
Mr. Rush. Would implementing this bill help reduce prices
at the pump?
Ms. McCarthy. As far as I can see it will have no impact on
the price at the pump. For the most part the rules that it is
delaying have not even been proposed, so they could not
possible be influencing the price of gasoline today.
Mr. Rush. So, again, and this is much ado about nothing as
far as what we are going through here today, and these are my
comments. I am not asking you a question as it relates to this
hearing and what we are attempting to do in terms of blaming
the EPA and the administration for the rising, the prices at
the pump.
Also blocks the EPA from setting new Tier 3 Emission
Standards for motor vehicles and gasoline, some may believe
that the current standards are sufficient and that air quality
has improved enough. Why do we need to consider additional Tier
3 Standards?
Ms. McCarthy. Tier 3 Standards would deliver needed and
required public health protections to deliver cleaner fuel that
is lower in sulfur and also to ensure that vehicles continue to
ratchet down the amount of NOxs and VOC emissions. It is also
providing fuels that will allow new technologies to enter into
the market, technologies that the car companies are looking to
deliver to the American people so that we have clean and more
efficient vehicles.
Mr. Rush. In the absence of Tier 3 Standards, how will
States and localities achieve the emission reductions needed to
achieve clean health air?
Ms. McCarthy. Tier 3 is going to be one of the most cost-
effective methods of delivering public health protections to
the American public. If they are denied those protections, then
they will have to look at other potentially much more costly
ways of achieving those reductions that are necessary to
protect their health.
Mr. Rush. And in these present economic environment and the
plight of States and local governments, do you think that will
be part of the problem or part of the solution in your opinion?
Ms. McCarthy. I think it is safe to say our partners at the
States, local communities, and the tribes are looking to the
Federal Government to deliver for them just these types of
rules that deliver significant public health protections at
very, very, very low costs.
Mr. Rush. So how would Tier 3 Standards affect the price of
gasoline?
Ms. McCarthy. From what we can tell in the policies that we
are looking at now because the rule hasn't been proposed, we
are estimating a cost at less than a penny a gallon.
Mr. Rush. Gasoline regulations will not do nothing to
guarantee the lower of gasoline prices or reduce our dependency
on oil. What it does is guarantee as Americans we will continue
to breath polluted air.
Mr. Chairman, with that I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Burgess, Dr. Burgess, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Smith, your
testimony that you provided us this morning reading the start
of one of the paragraphs it says, ``The Obama administration is
committed to expanding the safe and responsible production of
America's energy resources.'' And let me just say I
wholeheartedly concur, and I congratulate the President for
being correct on this and congratulate him on espousing this as
a policy that he wishes to push forward.
The second part of your statement, though, confuses me. It
says, ``which is one reason why U.S. oil production has
increased each year the President has been in office.'' The
President has been in office a little over 3 years. We sat in
this committee room for a whole day in 2008, and heard a
hearing on the speculation effect on oil prices in 2008, if you
recall prices were very high, similar to what we are seeing
this year, and we heard testimony that day that it wouldn't do
any good to drill because if you drill today, you wouldn't see
anything for 4 to 7 years.
Now, I will submit that if we drilled 4 years ago, maybe
then we would be seeing something happen now, but hard to see
how your two statements are true and related if, indeed, you
want to take credit for what the President has implemented.
That credit is actually going to accrue a few years from now,
not today. Is that not correct?
Mr. Smith. Thank you for the question, Congressman. A
couple comments. First of all, I am glad we have some agreement
on----
Mr. Burgess. Sure.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. Some of the aims and----
Mr. Burgess. Always looking for areas of agreement. That to
me, I am Mr. Bipartisan, always looking for areas where we can
get together.
Mr. Smith. That is encouraging. The second part of your
question, not only are policies and practices in place that are
incentivizing production and allowing companies to get to work
in a way that is expeditious, you know, creating better value
for American consumers, but as you look at the activity that is
going on right now, if you look at the rig count that is going
on right now, not only are we producing more barrels right now,
but there is actually more activity going on in the United
States in terms of producing, crudely producing our domestic
oil and gas resources than any time in the past.
Mr. Burgess. If I may just reclaiming my time, and I live
in an area of north Texas, we live on top of the Barnett Shale,
and we have seen a lot of activity. Now, the activity is
diminishing, the price has gone down, and dry gas production is
apparently not as lucrative as gas and liquids in other parts
of the State, but nevertheless, it has been an economic benefit
to our part of the State.
On the other hand, it has not come without a cost, and
there are municipalities who have had to make some pretty tough
decisions regarding where they allow the citing of these well,
where they allow drilling, how they handle the disposal of
waste water. But, again, it is all on private land. None of
this is developed on Federal land, so I would just submit to
you some of the boom we are seeing in energy production, and I
am grateful that the gas I there, I am grateful that the cost
has come down from what it was 5 and 6 years ago.
At the same time it has not been without some significant
angst at the local level because all of these things have to be
managed at the local level because, again, these are not on
Federal land somewhere out in the wilderness. These are on
private lands very near existing residential neighborhoods and
very near existing development.
Now, one of the Presidential candidates is talking about a
goal for setting a goal for gasoline prices at $2.50 a gallon.
Is that realistic?
Mr. Smith. Well, Congressman, you know, first of all, I
grew up in Fort Worth, Texas, so I saw that boom firsthand and
as I go back and forth I see the impact that local drilling has
had both in terms of creating jobs and creating opportunities
for the people who live there but also concerns about the fact
that you are undertaking these activities in people's
backyards.
So there is going to be some concern about the
environmental impacts of drilling.
Mr. Burgess. Which is why I would submit if we would open
up more Federal lands, we could move away from where the people
are and still develop the product, but be that as it may,
$2.50, is that a realistic goal?
Mr. Smith. I think that----
Mr. Burgess. Add State and Federal taxes to that it is
almost $3 a gallon. You know, that is pretty modest in my
opinion.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. What American people understand is
that there is not a one-point plan or a five-point plan or a
ten-point plan that is going to result in a big precipitous
drop in gasoline prices.
Mr. Burgess. I am going to surprise you again. I agree. All
the above, all hands on deck. I think it is necessary.
Administrator McCarthy, before my time expires, I have just
got to ask you in your testimony you talked about the effect of
ozone on patients who have asthma, and you have talked about
this before.
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. For heaven sakes, you have got something
within your grasp to help people with asthma right now today,
because as you know, January 1 because of the banning of CFCs
in asthma inhalers, no one can buy these things anymore, and
asthma patients wake up at two o'clock in the morning without
any other med, they have got no option now other than going to
the emergency room and spending 1,500 bucks to get a breathing
treatment.
Why cannot we have a waiver to allow existing stocks, I am
not asking for anybody to make anymore, but allow existing
stocks of Primatene to be sold in the drug stores until they
are exhausted just to give a little relief to those asthma
patients that you profess to be so concerned about?
Ms. McCarthy. Congressman, we have heard nothing from FDA
that indicates----
Mr. Burgess. Wait. No FDA. OK. We have jurisdiction over
them, too. I got a beef with them as well. This is your
jurisdiction. Grant a waiver so existing stock, which has
already been approved by the FDA, can be sold to patients today
who may need this product tonight. If we cared about
asthmatics, if we weren't conducting a war on asthmatics, we
would allow this to happen.
I have submitted a letter to the President on this. I would
ask that it be made part of the record. I simply do not
understand EPA's intransigence on this. It makes no sense, and
people are suffering as a consequence.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection the letter will be
admitted for the record.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. And Mr. Shimkus asked me if I would submit it
on his behalf subject for the record as well dealing with if
you want to build a coal plant, you can, but it is going to
bankrupt you. Can I submit that for the record?
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentlelady from
California, Ms. Capps, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director Abbey, we have been told that the proposal
relating to the Strategic Petroleum Reserve is about linking
supply from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, which I will refer
to as ``SPRO,'' to supply from domestic production. The
proposal says that--or the bill that is being proposed says
that we can't release oil from the ``SPRO'' no matter how
important the reason is unless we also engage in a duplicative
planning process to lease more Federal land for oil production
years down the line.
The bill sponsor has said that this bill is intended to
increase production, and I quote, ``to match the amounts
released from the reserve.''
However, while the proposal would interfere with operation
of the ``SPRO,'' it may not achieve this goal. The bill ignores
the fact that the Department of Energy has no expertise in
lease sales, that lease sales may or may not be bid on by
industry, and that leased land may or may not produce oil.
Director Abbey, does this bill specify how much production
from Federal land should be increased?
Mr. Abbey. It doesn't the way at least I interpret it. It
does require us to make available more Federal minerals as a
result of any release from the reserve.
But let me point out as I state in my opening remarks, we
are already leasing land. Last year the Bureau of Land
Management held 32 oil and gas lease sales offering up 4.4
million acres on approximately 1,750 parcels. Of those 1,750
parcels 1,296 were actually leased.
Mrs. Capps. Right.
Mr. Abbey. We have 38 million acres already leased on
onshore, we have another 38 million acres already leased on the
Outer Continental Shelf. Of the 76 million acres that the
Department of Interior has already leased, 50 million of those
76 million acres have not even been explored or developed at
this point in time.
Mrs. Capps. Let me ask. I want to get some certain specific
things on the record, so if I could just ask you a series of
questions that pretty much could be responded to with a yes or
a no, and Mr. Abbey, if we look at acreage leased nationwide,
is there a simple calculation to find the oil and gas holdings
of that acreage? In other words, are all acres of Federal land
equal in terms of oil and gas holdings?
Mr. Abbey. They are not.
Mrs. Capps. And if acreage is offered for lease, is it
guaranteed that industry would bid on those leases?
Mr. Abbey. No.
Mrs. Capps. In recent lease sales, both onshore and off, a
significant portion of offered leases have not received bids.
Is that correct? I believe I just heard you say that.
Mr. Abbey. Primarily on offshore.
Mrs. Capps. Primarily on offshore?
Mr. Abbey. Uh-huh, and in the case of Alaska as well.
Mrs. Capps. Offshore leases.
Mr. Abbey. Onshore and Alaska.
Mrs. Capps. Offshore and on, a significant portion of
leases have not received bids that have already been offered?
OK. Moving on. Assuming for the sake of argument that acreage
was offered for lease and industry did bid on those leases, is
it guaranteed that those lease holders are going to drill on
that land or offshore?
Mr. Abbey. No.
Mrs. Capps. OK. A 1 percent draw down from the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve would make about seven million barrels of oil
available, but it sounds like you were saying, you are saying
that a 1 percent increase in the amount of Federal land offered
for lease could run a gamut. It might be ten times that, or it
might be no oil at all.
Mr. Abbey. I see no correlation.
Mrs. Capps. So there is, in your opinion, no correlation
between--there is not an equal over here and an equal over
there?
Mr. Abbey. No.
Mrs. Capps. So this bill does not match new domestic oil
and gas reduction to draw down from the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve?
Mr. Abbey. I don't see how it is.
Mrs. Capps. Well, I have one just comment to make, and then
I will let you--because this is your area of expertise, make
any further conclusions that you would like to. In my way of
understanding this legislation it is just not thought out. I
suggest that we need to go back to the drawing board. I suggest
this to the Office of the Legislation and perhaps in this
subcommittee we need to hold a hearing, Mr. Chairman, on the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve before we pass legislation to
interfere with its management and operation.
I will yield the last half minute to the director of BLM to
respond.
Mr. Abbey. Well, again, the Department of Interior is quite
proud of the work that we are doing to support this
administration, but more importantly to support the citizens
that we serve in making appropriate lands and waters available
for leasing. We are making progress. As I mentioned in my
statistics, you know, there is 76 million acres that we have
already leased offshore as well as onshore. Fifty million of
those acres are not even being explored or developed.
At the same time we have 7,000 permits that we approved
last year, I mean, that we have already approved that are not
being developed on by the industry.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady's----
Mrs. Capps. I yield.
Mr. Whitfield [continuing]. Time has expired.
I might say that this bill does not preclude the release of
oil from ``SPRO'' in the event of an emergency. It simply asks
that a plan for leasing be submitted within 180 days.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
Bilbray, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilbray. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Following up on that just quickly, there is no guarantee
that if you offer land up that you will get bids. Right?
Mr. Abbey. That is true.
Mr. Bilbray. But isn't it true that there is a guarantee
that if you do not offer the land up, you will get no bids at
all?
Mr. Abbey. That is true.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. So let us talk about the world of the
possible. Do you have the slide up, please? Slide on the Gas
Buddy.
To the EPA, if you look at this slide, those of us in
California, and let me just say this as--wouldn't you agree
that, first of all, probably one of the most successful clean
air strategies that has ever been implemented or agencies have
been very successful is the Air Resources Board in California.
Right?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Bilbray. OK, and I think Connecticut, you guys kind of
kept an eye on us. Can you explain to me then when we are told
that oil is fungible around the world, that environmental
regulations aren't affecting price, that supply doesn't affect
the price, would you take a look at this graphic and explain to
me so I can explain to my citizens in California why we have
the highest priced gasoline in America as a State?
Ms. McCarthy. I am sorry. I don't have the information
available to me to make an assumption.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. Well, let me say as somebody who is a
regulator, for me to deny that our regulations didn't have some
affect there or the Federal mandate of regulations haven't had
an affect there or the fact that domestic supply coming from
Alaska and California has dropped of dramatically and we import
55 percent of our oil in California now from the States, I just
think that we ought to, Mr. Chairman, I think we ought to have
a hearing and try to explain what is that impact, because
obviously there is some impact there, and we ought to be
upfront about this. I think that that is one of the things I
would like to look at.
You brought up the issue of volatile organic compounds, and
you used the term tailpipe emissions. Can you explain to me why
the Federal Government at this time in our history is still
operating off of tailpipe emissions rather than going to total
emissions, which at California we did in the early '90s? Why
are we maintaining that antiquated testing system when those of
us at ARB found it grossly inadequate at reflecting real world
emissions?
Ms. McCarthy. Just a second. I am sorry. I would like to be
able to answer your question, and maybe we could have an
exchange after.
Mr. Bilbray. OK.
Ms. McCarthy. But I am not following the question.
Mr. Bilbray. The question is this. The cutting edge agency
on Clean Air that you as a State agency followed and everybody
looked to, we had the proof that tailpipe emissions were
misleading and did not reflect reality, and we abandoned that I
think in 1990, '92. In fact, I think even before that.
When California recognized the failure of using tailpipe
emissions, why in the world has EPA continued to use that
system, which is faulty science, and you talk about science,
faulty testing, why haven't you gone to barn testing and total
emissions so it is a real world issue not just sticking a probe
in the tailpipe but looking at total emissions?
Ms. McCarthy. Well, we--let me just make clear. We do
actually look at tailpipe emissions, and we do have almost
complete alignment with California who also looks at tailpipe
emissions. If you are talking about evaporative emissions, we
also address those in various ways, and we look at the fuel
that is being used and the vehicle of the engine. So we do look
at a variety of ways in which we can actually reduce pollution
using our fuels.
Mr. Bilbray. The point being is that the Federal Government
is still not using as their standard for auto emissions total
emissions. They are using tailpipe. Right?
Ms. McCarthy. We are using a variety of emissions,
primarily tailpipe, but we look at evaporative emissions as
well.
Mr. Bilbray. OK. Ma'am, I will just tell you the reason why
we abandoned it because we saw in real-life experience that our
modeling did not reflect reality, and so we abandoned that a
long time ago, and I am still--I still think that the Federal
Government is consciously or unconsciously hiding the fact that
evaporative emissions are a much bigger issue than what anybody
wants to admit to, and tailpipe emissions is a faulty science
that hides true emissions.
And so I just ask we take a look at that and have a
dialogue about when we talk about let us go science, let us go
to real science.
Ms. McCarthy. But you do agree that we both look at
tailpipe emissions.
Mr. Bilbray. But you continue to hide evaporative emissions
by even using tailpipe emissions in my opinion. We use barn
testing out there, we use cold start so you reflect the fact
that the catalytic converters don't operate initially, and hot
soak, which then reflects the evaporative emission.
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired.
At this time I recognize the gentlelady from Florida, Ms.
Castor, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
You know, if you look back at the past 40 years of the
Clean Air Act, and you combine that with the improved fuel
economy standards over time for the cars that we drive, this is
a real success story for our country and a great success story
for our American families. I mean, I remember being younger in
the 1970s and going out in the morning and the smog-filled
mornings. We don't have those as much anymore thanks to the
Clean Air Act.
And we have also made fantastic progress on the gas mileage
for our cars, and we are on track now for cars in America to
the standard to be 55 miles per gallon by 2025, but a lot of
those vehicles are already on the road. That American
technology is out there. Someone in my family bought one of the
cars recently. It is over 50 miles per gallon, and he loves
driving by the gas stations these days.
There are additional policies that the Congress can adopt
to address high gas prices over the long term, and I am very
disappointed in my Republican colleagues because they continue
to turn a blind eye to good public policy. Their prescription,
according to the two bills here, is, one, roll back fundamental
health protections. Two, create new bureaucracy on top of
existing agencies.
And then they continue to guard the subsidities to the big
oil companies. These are not the answers.
There are a few things we should be doing. We could require
oil companies to use the oil that is produced in the United
States from public lands and offshore to meet the energy needs
here at home and stopping oil companies from exporting oil from
our public lands and waters to overseas markets. I mean, our
domestic production is at an 8-year high, and now America is an
exporter. We export more product.
We could repeal the $4 billion per year in Federal
subsidies that are currently given to the big oil companies and
use that money instead to fund investments that will make us
less dependent on oil. After all, the big five oil companies
made $137 billion in profit last year, and then you ask the
American taxpayer not just to pay one time at the pump, you ask
them to pay again when they fill out their tax return.
We could have tighter oversight and regulation of Wall
Street speculators to prevent them from artificially driving up
the price of gasoline. We could do even more to increase fuel
efficiency standards for cars and trucks so they get even more
miles per gallon and consumers will save on their gasoline
costs.
Just the standards we have in place now it is predicted
that will save the average American family at the pump over
$8,000 over time. So that is meaningful, and that is doable,
and the two bills that are proposed here are--they are simply
not the answer.
First let us start with the Gasoline Regulations Act. It
studies blocks and delays EPA quality, air quality protections
that haven't even been proposed, and I have a hard time
understanding how blocking rules that aren't even on the books
would do anything to help consumers at the pump.
Ms. McCarthy, would blocking EPA from taking action on
rules that haven't even been proposed help lower gasoline
prices?
Ms. McCarthy. No.
Ms. Castor. And this proposal also includes an amendment
previously offered by Mr. Latta on the House Floor. It is a
radical proposal to overturn 40 years of Clean Air Policy by
undermining the goal that air should be clean enough to breathe
safety.
Ms. McCarthy, will gutting the Clean Air Act help lower
gasoline prices?
Ms. McCarthy. No.
Ms. Castor. The bills we are discussing today also would
create a new, would create new government bureaucracies.
Chairman Whitfield's proposal would create a new interagency
committee to conduct an impossible study based on data that
doesn't exist. Mr. Gardner's bill would assign the Department
of Energy the job of developing a new plan for drilling on
Federal lands when oil is released from the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve, but this isn't even the Department of Energy's area of
expertise.
Mr. Abbey, do you think that adding another layer of
bureaucracy to help the Interior Department's oil drilling
policing process will help lower gasoline prices?
Mr. Abbey. I do not.
Ms. Castor. What about you, Mr. Smith? Do you think adding
another Department of Energy, adding the Department of Energy
to leasing process for Federal lands will help lower gasoline
prices?
Mr. Smith. I agree with Mr. Abbey. I do not.
Ms. Castor. The bill would also apparently require the
USDA, the Interior Department, and even the Department of
Defense to follow DOE's drilling plan, even if the plan is
inconsistent with those Departments' missions authorizing
statutes and regulations.
Mr. Smith, can you explain how forcing the Defense
Department to follow the Department of Energy's drilling plan,
even if it compromises military training, is a sound solution
to rising gasoline prices?
Mr. Smith. I can't really answer that question.
Ms. Castor. And Mr. Abbey, can you explain how forcing
Secretary Salazar to do whatever Secretary Chu says would lower
gasoline----
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Castor [continuing]. Prices?
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Abbey. I don't see where it would add value.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you for these, for your testimony.
These bills are not----
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize----
Ms. Castor [continuing]. Real solutions to rising gasoline
prices.
Mr. Whitfield [continuing]. Mr. Olson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair. I would like to welcome the
witnesses. Thank you for coming today and giving us your time
and expertise.
And Ms. McCarthy, I would like to talk to you about EPA's
Tier 3 gasoline rulemaking because as you can imagine good
period----
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Olson, excuse me. Excuse me. All right.
Go ahead. I am sorry.
Mr. Olson. I am sorry, sir. As you can imagine the good
people of Texas 22 want me to ask you a lot of questions about
how this rulemaking is going to impact their jobs. Compliance
with these new standards will require refineries to make very
large capital investments, and the cost will be passed down to
the consumers. America is feeling the pain at the pump as you
alluded to in your opening statement.
Our economy can't handle skyrocketing energy prices as the
President promised in the video my colleague from Illinois
showed earlier today. Now is not the time for unjustified new
regulations that will raise the price of fuel even further.
In a letter to Congress in February you affirmed that your
agency plans to propose gasoline sulfur changes only, a likely
reduction of ten parts per million in sulfur. I know that you
know that the Tier 2 Standards have already reduced sulfur from
300 parts per million down to the current standard of 30 parts
per million, a 90 percent reduction.
Will the EPA propose to reduce the sulfur standard to ten
parts per million? You said you were considering it.
Ms. McCarthy. We haven't even yet proposed the rule. It has
not gone through interagency review. I hesitate to tell you
what we will actually propose at the time.
I will tell you that we are very interested in ensuring
that there is a national standard for the amount of sulfur in
gasoline and that it be a cost-effective way of achieving
reductions, and I don't think that there is enough information
out yet for people to assume that there are going to be
significant capital expenses associated with complying with a
rule that we have yet to propose.
Mr. Olson. And that is what they are most scared about is
there is no, they have no idea where you are going to go with
this proposal. We achieved a 90 percent reduction. That is
something to be very proud of.
Has your agency studied how the Tier 3 Standards will
impact gasoline prices?
Ms. McCarthy. We will be, we will obviously have to do that
and will have a public debate about that when the rule comes
out. It will be a accompanied by a complete economic analysis
that will look at all prices associated with this rule that we
can identify.
Mr. Olson. I look forward to you getting us that
information.
I would like to add also, do you believe that as my
colleague from Maryland mentioned earlier today that he thinks
that your study will result that gasoline prices are somewhere
in the cost of a gallon of one penny will be what the increase
to Tier 3 Standards? Do you think one penny is the number on
the price per gallon of gasoline? Something like that as my
colleague from Maryland stated?
Ms. McCarthy. Right now the policies that we are
considering, and, again, it is yet to be gone through the
process and out in the public arena, is we estimate that the
cost associated with this rule will have an impact of less than
a penny on a gallon of gasoline.
Mr. Olson. Well, I would love to see that statement when
you get it out there, because the facts back home, the work in
the industry, think that it will increase their manufacturing
costs by about 9 cents a gallon. It is almost, you know, nine
times what you are proposing, what you think may be the limit
there. That is significant.
Do you know of any refineries right now that can comply
with the ten parts per million standard?
Ms. McCarthy. I am sorry. Say that again.
Mr. Olson. Do you know any refineries right now, ma'am,
that can comply with the proposed ten parts per million
standard?
Ms. McCarthy. What I do know is that under our rules and
under our proposal we will be giving substantial lead time
associated with any rule change as we always do. In the case of
fuel standards it is usually 4 years, and I believe that the
standard that we are considering is certainly achievable with
current technologies.
Mr. Olson. We have been told that 17 refineries currently
can attain, can achieve those standards, but do you have any
idea how many refineries are going to have to install expensive
retrofits to comply with the ten parts per million?
Ms. McCarthy. We will be looking at that and providing that
information, and we are working with the refinery industry now,
and I would note that they are already looking at how they can
comply with these standards, and they always seem to be able to
use their innovation and knowhow to achieve these standards
much more efficiently and at lower costs than we anticipate.
Mr. Olson. And I have been told that 110 or more of the
refineries are going to have those expensive retrofits, and
finally just do you have any idea what the cost is going to be
to the industry to get down to ten parts per million?
Ms. McCarthy. I cannot--that certainly will come out in the
regulatory impact analysis that we release with the rule.
Mr. Olson. And does this problem have a negative impact on
consumers? What about their health? I mean, obviously, you have
no power, that is going to impact our jobs, we will have no
jobs, no people's healthcare, no people--and if people are out
there are struggling, that is a health impact, and so I submit
to you EPA needs to include these analyses in the proposal. It
can't just be done in a box in a vacuum. You have to take into
account what you are actually doing to our economy because
there are health impacts of these rules.
And it looks like I have used my time and yield back. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. At this time I recognize the
gentleman from California, Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today's bills may win
the prize for legislative false advertising. These bills will
not reduce gasoline prices by a single penny. Instead they will
block pollution controls, increase health costs for Americans,
diminish our energy security, and create pointless new
government bureaucracies. There is no silver bullet for gas
prices.
But there are some critical steps we can take to reduce our
vulnerability to swings in world oil markets and gas prices.
This administration is taking those steps and getting results.
The most effective thing we can do is use less oil. If your car
is more efficient, increased gas prices will have less effect
on you, and if all of our cars and trucks are more efficient,
increased gas prices will have less effect on our whole
economy.
Recent data from the Energy Information Administration
underscores this point. Cost per mile driven were about 23
cents in 1980. Last month gas prices were higher than any
previous February, but thanks to more efficient vehicles, the
cost per mile driven were lower, only 16 to 17 cents per mile.
Ms. McCarthy, what has EPA done and what are you working on
that will protect American consumers from gasoline price
spikes?
Ms. McCarthy. We have been working on----
Mr. Waxman. Is your mike on?
Ms. McCarthy. Is it? OK. We continue to work on fuel
economy standards with NHTSA and what we do is ensure that
there are greenhouse gas reductions that are driving both
reductions in the amount of oil that is demanded by this
country, as well as providing significant cost savings in
cleaner air for the American people.
Mr. Waxman. Millions of Americans are already enjoying
savings at the pump with new model year 2012, vehicles. As new
cars become more efficient, the least efficient oldest cars are
gradually phased out, improving efficiency, saving money
throughout the whole fleet. In addition to reducing the demand,
the Obama administration is also increasing domestic
production.
Mr. Abbey, please describe the administration's
achievements in increasing domestic reduction.
Mr. Abbey. Well, as Mr. Smith indicated in his opening
remarks, domestic oil and gas reduction has increased each year
of the Obama administration and is the highest it has been in
almost a decade, and I know that there is some criticism that
most of that increase is on private lands and minerals, but
that is not necessarily the case. Even though there was a dip
last year relative to the amount of oil that was produced from
public lands, in the first 3 years of the Obama administration
total Federal oil production has increased by 13 percent over
what was produced in the final 3 years of the Bush
administration.
Mr. Waxman. The increase in U.S. production does not lower
gas prices. Every oil market economist tells us that. Years of
experience here and in other countries proves it. For example,
Canada is a net oil exporter but still experiences the same
gasoline price spikes we do. The real answer to gas prices is
to reduce our dependence on oil, which means transitioning to
alternatives. Here, too, the Obama administration is investing
serious effort and making real progress.
Mr. Smith, what is the Department of Energy doing to
develop alternatives to oil?
Mr. Smith. Thank you for the question, Congressman. One
observation, we pointed out the fact that as Director Abbey
just mentioned, that oil production here is at an 8-year high.
If you----
Mr. Waxman. What are you doing to develop alternatives? Are
you doing things in the battery technologies, vehicle
electrification, renewable electric power in natural gas
vehicles? Are those things you are working on?
Mr. Smith. Congressman, we are working on all of those
things.
Mr. Waxman. And so that will help us develop alternatives
so we don't have to use that--as much oil, isn't that right?
Mr. Smith. Yes, it will.
Mr. Waxman. Ms. McCarthy, what has the combination of more
efficient vehicles and more alternatives to oil done to reduce
U.S. oil dependence?
Ms. McCarthy. It has significantly reduced oil independence
by billions of barrels of oil each and every year.
Mr. Waxman. And Mr. Smith, what has happened with oil
imports as a result of these achievements?
Mr. Smith. Oil imports have declined every year of this
administration.
Mr. Waxman. Oil imports have fallen from 60 percent to 45
percent. Last year the U.S. became a net exporter of refined
products for the first time since 1949, according to EIA. The
Obama administration is doing exactly what is necessary to
reduce the dependence on oil, reduce our vulnerability to
gasoline price spikes for over the long term, but there is no
quick fix. Anyone who tells us that we can drill or deregulate
our way to $2.50 gasoline isn't telling us the truth.
Finally, I would like to note that the Tier 3 Clean Vehicle
and Fuel Requirements are critically important to reducing
unhealthy air pollution that is affecting millions of
Americans.
Ms. McCarthy, when will the EPA propose these provisions?
Ms. McCarthy. We are actively working on these rules, and
we hope to have them ready for interagency review shortly.
Mr. Waxman. Well, I urge you to do it as soon as possible.
Cleaning up vehicles and fuels is a highly cost effective way
to reduce air pollution and keep our children and families
healthy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I would recognize the gentleman
from Nebraska, Mr. Terry, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I just want to follow up on what I heard is
that the administration is responsible for the reduction in oil
imports. That is interesting considering that most economists
state that the reduction of imports is due to a recession where
people used less, and so I assume that the President is now
claiming credit for the recession now.
Is that an accurate statement, Mr. Smith? Yes or no?
Mr. Smith. What we will say, that was not a----
Mr. Terry. That is a yes or no. Is he claiming credit for
the recession now since that had the largest impact in reducing
imports?
Mr. Smith. Congressman, that is not a yes or no question.
Mr. Terry. Well, then probably you shouldn't have answered
that that way.
Now, Ms. McCarthy, are the new Tier 3 Standards to be
proposed, are those discretionary or mandatory?
Ms. McCarthy. We have not yet proposed the Tier 3 rules
but----
Mr. Terry. That is why I said to be proposed.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. They are----
Mr. Terry. Are those discretionary or mandatory?
Ms. McCarthy. They are mandatory.
Mr. Terry. They are mandatory?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes. We are required to look periodically at
fuels and vehicles and to make adjustments to comply with the
requirements under----
Mr. Terry. OK. Under what authority then specifically are
they mandatory?
Ms. McCarthy. I will get back to you with that, Mr.
Congressman.
Mr. Terry. OK. Do you know how much time you would need to
be able to get back to us on the basis of the authority that
they would be mandated? All right.
I just--could you do it in 30 days?
Ms. McCarthy. I should clarify, and I just received
clarification. When I said they were mandatory, we are looking
at requirements to reduce pollution necessary to achieve ozone
standards. They are not required apparently under Title II of
the Act. They are a discretionary act on our part, which is
providing cost effective reductions of ozone precursors.
Mr. Terry. OK. So they are discretionary.
Ms. McCarthy. I believe--if you are talking about whether
or not this specific act is required----
Mr. Terry. Has----
Ms. McCarthy. No.
Mr. Terry [continuing]. EPA performed an analysis of the
accumulative impacts of regulations on fuel prices?
Ms. McCarthy. When we look at every fuel rule, we look at
the rules that have come before. They are built into the
baseline, and we take those into account relative to our
economic analysis.
Mr. Terry. So they have not yet been performed?
Ms. McCarthy. When we do a fuels analysis, we look--the
baseline includes all of the regulations that have come before.
So they take account of all of the regulations----
Mr. Terry. So you take the studies that have been done
before on accumulative impacts of the regulations? I think you
are kind of half answering the question, and so it is confusing
me.
Ms. McCarthy. Well, you have defined cumulative impact
differently in the proposed act that I am testifying on, so I
am trying to make that distinction. When we do our rules, we
look in the baseline----
Mr. Terry. Right.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. When we look at what the costs
are associated, the rules we consider.
Mr. Terry. If I ask to be delivered with the next 24 hours
your analysis of the cumulative impacts to date on fuel prices,
could you provide me anything?
Ms. McCarthy. We could provide you with an assessment of
the individual, the costs associated with each of these rules
as we propose them.
Mr. Terry. So you said individual, but I am talking about
cumulative where you can determine----
Ms. McCarthy. Well, some of those will be redundant, so
there will be overlaps in those costs, but we can certainly
provide you as best we can the information that you looking
for.
Mr. Terry. All right, and I asked about the cumulative
impact on fuel prices. How about the cumulative affect of these
regulations on businesses?
Ms. McCarthy. We look at impacts both relative to small
businesses as well as the economy at large. We look at costs
associated with refineries, we look at consumer costs. Those
are all included in our economic analysis.
Mr. Terry. All right, but that is on an individual rule
basis, but I am talking about the cumulative nature of those.
Has there been a study of how together they all affect
businesses?
Ms. McCarthy. I don't think we could answer a question as
broad as that with the analysis that we do.
Mr. Terry. All right. Well, I think that answers the
question, and it would be no. Just one last observation in my
12 seconds, not a question, but we have heard along the rant
earlier from the gentlelady from Florida that data doesn't
exist. I think that is probably why we are here, but you have
also then stated that you have studies that show that the Tier
3 will only impact gas prices 1 percent. So I am hearing that
you don't have studies----
Ms. McCarthy. No. By less than a penny.
Mr. Terry [continuing]. But that you do have studies.
Yield back.
Mr. Gardner [presiding]. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Massachusetts is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today is the 17th time this committee has met to discuss
some form of repeal of the EPA's Clean Air Act authority during
this Congress, and the House has acted so far on Republican
bills to, one, prevent EPA from reducing the amount of oil we
have to import from hostile nations, two, preventing EPA from
reducing the toxic mercury, dioxin and other chemicals that
spew out of power plants and other industrial sources.
Three, prevent EPA from reducing harmful global warming
pollution, four, Republicans have even felt compelled to
prevent EPA from promulgating fictitious regulations to reduce
levels of farm, fairy, or pixie dust, and why did the
Republican majority do that? Because when unemployment is
spiking, Republicans tell us EPA regulations, even the non-
existent ones, are going to kill jobs. But that storyline is
getting harder and harder to sell as the economy improves and
improves and improves month after month after month, and we see
positive job numbers.
So what are the Republicans doing to try to convince
Americans anew of the reason why EPA must be stopped now? Well,
they shake up the Etch a Sketch and tell America that the new
reason to limit and postpone EPA's authority under the Clean
Air Act is to stop gas prices from spiking, and just like the
committee's earlier efforts to repel non-existent regulations
to reduce levels of farm or fairy dust, this new bill also
requires a trip to Fantasyland.
Ms. McCarthy, isn't it true that the EPA has no plans to
propose an expensive standard to lower the Reid vapor pressure
in gasoline and that what you will propose is likely to cost
only one penny per gallon?
Ms. McCarthy. That is correct.
Mr. Markey. Isn't it true that there are also no rules
currently in development to reduce global warming pollution
from refineries?
Ms. McCarthy. That is correct.
Mr. Markey. And just so I am clear, are any of the rules
that this bill delays or weakens the reason why gas prices are
so high?
Ms. McCarthy. No.
Mr. Markey. So when Americans pull up to the pump these
days, there is no question that it is stressful. They see their
paychecks trickling away right in front of them, and they can't
understand why these prices are spiking, but let me just say
this to all the members if they want to hear it. This is not
about Obama. This is about OPEC, oil companies and Wall Street
speculators.
Now, what does the majority want to do about those things?
One, should we deploy the Strategic Petroleum Reserve to send a
signal to Wall Street speculators? Republican answer: No,
absolutely not. That would interfere with the free market that
OPEC totally manipulates in their meetings in Vienna.
Number two, should we fully fund the Commodities Futures
Trading Commission, the police on the beat for the Wall Street
speculation? The Republicans say no, we are going to kneecap
that agency, keep the cops off the beat, and try to stop the
rulemakings on manipulation, on position limits, on the kinds
of power that the agency would need.
Three, the Democrats say keep the oil and gas that is
drilled for on public lands in the United States. Don't send it
overseas. How do the Republicans vote? No. Send that oil
overseas, send that gas overseas.
So, ladies and gentlemen, when it comes to lowering gas
prices, you know, when you say to them, hey, let us make sure
the Keystone Pipeline oil stays in the United States, the
Republicans say, oh, no. We are voting no on that, and you did
all vote no to keep the Keystone oil in the United States. We
had that vote out on the House Floor 3 weeks ago.
So this crocodile tear, concern about consumers and trying
to blame the EPA when you have it within your own power right
now to do something about gasoline prices is so clear in terms
of what the goal is. It is not about Obama. It is about OPEC,
oil companies, Wall Street manipulators and speculators, and we
see no activity on the side of the Republicans in taking any
actions in this area.
Moreover, just for the record, there are one-third more
rigs, floating rigs that are going to be in the Gulf of Mexico
this summer than there were before the oil spill. So this is a
very bad way that Obama has of having a plot to undermine oil
drilling in our country if one-third more floating rigs are
going to be in the Gulf of Mexico this summer than there were
before the actual BP historical worst environmental spill in
the United States. And by the way, each one of those CEOs
should be sitting down here. You want to investigate the mess
we have got in the country, BP should be sitting next to
Halliburton, and we should have them under oath, and they
should be explaining why they lied or incompetence saying only
1,000 barrels per day were going into the Gulf of Mexico.
I thank the chairman.
Mr. Gardner. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman recognizes--the chairman recognizes himself
for 5 minutes.
Thank you to the witnesses for being here today and to Mr.
Abbey, a question for you. Oil production on Federal lands
increased in 2009, and 2010, as a result of leasing and
permitting decisions made before your administration took
office. However, the fall off in leasing and permitting actions
under the Obama administration is apparent and even your own
EIA anticipates continued fall off in production in 2012, and
beyond.
Isn't it true that BLM leased fewer onshore acre than any
administration going all the way back to 1984?
Mr. Abbey. There is a lot of factors that come into play
where we lease. I will say this, that we are moving forward
aggressively in identifying appropriate areas for leasing, and
we are making progress in offering up more acres each year.
Mr. Gardner. So let me repeat the question. Is it true that
BLM leased fewer onshore acres than any administration going
all the way back to 1984?
Mr. Abbey. Well, that is based upon the market. For
example----
Mr. Gardner. Yes or no? I have the public land statistics
right here.
Mr. Abbey. Yes. We will get----
Mr. Gardner. So it is yes or no? Have you leased----
Mr. Abbey. We offered 4.4 million acres for lease last
year.
Mr. Gardner. Onshore acreage according to this shows the
past 3 years, 2009, 2010, 2011, the lowest on record going back
to 1984, and it is public land statistics is what I am citing
data for fiscal year 1984, through fiscal year 2011, from your
Web site. So is that true?
Mr. Abbey. That is true.
Mr. Gardner. And so, yes, the lowest number since 1984.
Thank you.
Oil and gas production on Federal lands and waters declined
14 percent in 2011. However, oil and gas production experienced
a massive increase last year on lands controlled by State and
private entities. The CRS last week, Congressional Research
Service, reported that 96 percent of the increase in oil and
gas production between 2007, and 2011, has occurred on non-
Federal lands, the lands you do not have anything to do with.
Since the Federal Government does not manage private lands,
do you think it is fair for it to take credit for private
market decisions?
Mr. Abbey. Congressman, total natural gas production from
public lands, and I am talking about onshore, has increased 6
percent during the first 3 years of the Obama administration
and during the last 3 years of the Bush administration.
Mr. Gardner. So are you taking credit for private land
production as well?
Mr. Abbey. I am talking about public lands.
Mr. Gardner. But I am asking----
Mr. Abbey. Six percent on public lands.
Mr. Gardner [continuing]. A question about private land.
You said natural gas, correct, not oil?
Mr. Abbey. Natural gas. On oil it has increased 13 percent
over the last 3 years or the first 3 years of the Obama
administration.
Mr. Gardner. Yes, but what about last year?
Mr. Abbey. Last year it took a dip.
Mr. Gardner. It did take a dip. Thank you, and a further
question for you, Mr. Abbey. A Citigroup last week predicted
total liquids production could double for the continent in the
next decade and that the United States could overtake both
Russia and Saudi Arabia in oil production by 2020.
Here is what Citi said about new energy production would
mean for the U.S. Read GDP would increase by 2 to 3.3 percent,
that is $370 to $624 billion. Three point six million direct
and indirect jobs could be created by 2020, as a consequence of
increased energy production. Our trade deficit could shrink by
80 to 90 percent. The value of the dollar could jump by 1.6 to
5.4 percent due to increased energy production, and risks to
the United States, in particular geopolitical risks, would
dramatically decrease.
But the only caveat in this report, here is the Citi report
right here, is this, and this is a quote from the report.
``Whether the increase in production results in the U.S.
reducing its imports or whether net exports grow doesn't matter
much to world balances. Either way North America is becoming
the new Middle East. The only thing that can stop this is
politics, environmentalists getting the upper hand over supply
in the U.S. for instance.''
Yet according to CRS as I mentioned 96 percent of the
increase in production from '07, to 2011, was on non-Federal
lands. Only about 5.5 percent of government lands onshore are
leased for energy, and you said the lowest amount in 3 years,
since 1984, the past 3 years leased. And 93 percent of the
shale oil and gas wells have occurred on non-Federal lands, and
there is no commercial leasing system for government lands for
oil shale production even though Congress ordered one in 2005.
And people are worried including Indian tribes about new
regulations regarding drilling and fracking that might affect
their energy production.
Assuming you agree that more jobs, more GDP growth, more
oil production, and more potential to become the largest
producer of energy in the world are good things, how do you
square your administration of lands and these sorry statistics
with those goals? It is clearly not working.
Mr. Abbey. Well, what I did not see in that report is the
fact that there is 50 million acres that have already been
leased by the Department of Interior that are going undeveloped
at this point in time.
Mr. Gardner. Does a lease guarantee production?
Mr. Abbey. It does not.
Mr. Gardner. Does an oil rig guarantee production?
Mr. Abbey. It does not.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you. Further questions to Mr. Smith. Mr.
Smith, last week Mr. Chu, Secretary Chu testified saying that
supply mattered when it came to price, and I will quote him.
``If long-term decreased demand has an affect on price, then
don't the basic laws of supply and demand dictate that so will
long-term increased supplies?'' His response, ``I absolutely
agree.''
Do you believe increased supply will decrease costs?
Mr. Smith. What we do believe is that over the long term
increased supply will have an impact on global oil.
Mr. Gardner. So a long-term increase in supply will
decrease costs like the Strategic Energy Production Act calls
for?
Mr. Smith. I would disagree with the premise of that
statement given that this act, what it will do is simply tie
any activity that is going on anyway, which is trying to make
sure that we are prudently developing acres on public land with
an important operational capability that the Federal Government
has. So I would disagree with your assertion that this act
would actually have an impact on U.S. production or on global
oil prices.
Mr. Gardner. So if you have this under this act, 3 percent
of the Federal land is leased onshore without this under this
act?
Mr. Smith. I am sorry. I didn't hear that.
Mr. Gardner. Without this act 3 percent of Federal lands is
leased. Without this act.
Mr. Smith. Without this act----
Mr. Gardner. As it stands today, 3 percent of Federal lands
is leased.
Mr. Smith. Is--I am sorry. I am not hearing the question.
Three percent of Federal lands is what?
Mr. Gardner. Leased.
Mr. Smith. Is leased.
Mr. Gardner. Right.
Mr. Smith. Three percent of--well, I mean, you would have
to direct that question, I think, to----
Mr. Gardner. My time has expired. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Griffith.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I noted with some
interest earlier when Mr. Shimkus was talking that he made
several comments that I happen to agree with, and then Mr. Rush
said, well, this is much ado about nothing. Much ado about
nothing? I have to beg to differ.
Three companies in my region have recently either laid off
employees or idle production of coal. Much ado about nothing?
Tell that to those employees.
When you take utility MACT, boiler MACT, transfer rule, and
coal ash and now the greenhouse gas regulations on utilities,
you are affecting jobs. My district has a median household
income of $36,000. Median household income. The President said
that they were going to raise electric rates. Now, he was
talking about his cap and trade scheme at the time.
Ms. McCarthy, this is going to raise electricity rates
because as the President said when he was campaigning, the
utilities, and his quote was, ``They will pass that money onto
consumers.'' Isn't that true with your utility plan as well?
Ms. McCarthy. We looked at the impact of the mercury and
toxics standard on electricity rates, and we did not see a
significant increase as a result of that rule, and that was
based on looking at the Cross State Air Pollution Rule as well.
The Greenhouse Gas Standard that we announced yesterday has
nothing to do with the electricity rates.
Mr. Griffith. Has nothing to do with electricity rates
because it doesn't affect the current facilities. Isn't that
correct?
Ms. McCarthy. And it also has very little impact on the
future facilities that we anticipate to be constructed.
Mr. Griffith. It would be constructed not using coal,
however.
Ms. McCarthy. They have a place should natural gas rise so
much in price that cost would again be--coal would again become
competitive. Right now in most places it is not.
Mr. Griffith. All right. If we could see that clip, please.
All right. Let me just read it.
[Video.]
Mr. Griffith. All right. Let me read you what else is in
there. ``When I was asked earlier about the issue of coal, you
know, under my plan of a cap and trade system, electricity
rates would necessarily skyrocket.'' Those--well, let me finish
the quote and then I will get onto my hypothesis. ``Even
regardless of what I say about whether coal is good or bad,
because I am capping greenhouse gases, coal-power plants, you
know, natural gas, you name it, whatever the plants were,
whatever the industry was, they would have to retrofit their
operations. That will cost money. They will pass that onto the
consumers.''
Now, I have to ask you, Ms. McCarthy, when the President
has a little more flexibility, when he gets past November, do
you anticipate that that flexibility will incorporate not only
the existing, not only the future power plants, but existing
coal-power plants and that new regulations will come forward on
the existing plants at that time?
Ms. McCarthy. The regulations we announced are a
commonsense step forward that look at regulating solely
greenhouse gases emissions from future power plants. That is
what is in the works. That is what we are taking comment on. It
is not a cap, it is an emission rate that we relies on modern
technology and that can be delivered today.
Mr. Griffith. But when the President has more flexibility,
if we believe his words, and we believe his words from his last
campaign, don't you anticipate that he is going to make the
costs rise on the use of coal and even natural gas, because
they are both carbon-based fuels? Wouldn't you anticipate that?
If you were sitting in my shoes watching your district being
decimated in jobs across the board because the electricity
rates don't just affect the coalmines and the coalminers and
the people relying on coal. They affect every business in my
district because in our area we are relying on coal at this
time to produce every good that we produce.
Ms. McCarthy. Right now the flexibility that the President
is allowing is allowing EPA to provide the public health
benefits that the legislature asked us to deliver relative to
the Clean Air Act. That is the kind of flexibility that I
expect him to continue to provide.
Mr. Griffith. And so when it comes to using of the carbon-
based fuels, you expect less flexibility so that he can be more
flexible in cleaning up the air and taking away the jobs of the
hardworking American taxpayer. Is that correct?
Ms. McCarthy. The President was very clear that it is an
All of the Above Strategy. The rule we propose----
Mr. Griffith. All of the above but doesn't include coal.
That is a four-letter word now, isn't it?
Ms. McCarthy. It allows a pathway forward for coal as well
as natural gas.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman with a birthday
today from West Virginia, Mr. McKinley.
Mr. McKinley. You would add that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and welcome back Ms. McCarthy. That last question perhaps
needed a little bit more, but if we have time, we will get back
to that, but it is interesting that you just, you said all of
the above.
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. McKinley. And you have said I think earlier in your
testimony about that the--for sequestration with coal, they
could go ahead with sequestration, but I thought--did I, maybe
I didn't hear correctly. Did you say there is an existing
facility now with sequestration? You said there it is going on
today?
Ms. McCarthy. There are facilities that are large-scale
applications----
Mr. McKinley. Can you share that? We don't have any--I have
no listing of those commercial--could you send that to our
office for someone to release that?
Ms. McCarthy. I most certainly will.
Mr. McKinley. If you would. Thank you. But let us go back
to the sequestration again, because in your testimony you are
saying you believe in we should be pursuing the sequestration
at a route to continue to use fossil fuels, coal particularly.
Ms. McCarthy. I think the administration----
Mr. McKinley. But yet the DOE just cut the NETL's
laboratory by 41 percent. So, you know, that is where the
research and development for coal, that is where we have the
plans for carbon capture and sequestration, which didn't get
funded at all under this.
So can you share, do you agree with the DOE's idea to slash
funding for coal research?
Ms. McCarthy. I am aware that there has been significant
funding to----
Mr. McKinley. No. My question was do you agree with it.
Ms. McCarthy. I am not aware of DOE's current plan----
Mr. McKinley. You weren't aware that they cut it 41
percent.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. At NETL.
Mr. McKinley. I just, I am astounded with that because I
think the idea of using it is fine, but then to cut the
research for it shows it is disingenuous on the part of this
administration. They have, try to have it both ways.
Let me go to the economic models, because in your testimony
on page two of ten you use a lot of statistics. You talk about
the model year 2016, the cars will cost maybe only $950, but we
have heard testimony from the EPA time and time again that it
just--I really have to question your economic model. If you
look at--if we could have up on the chart, the first one, you
were predicting or the EPA was predicting that the grid
reliability was only going to be 4 gigawatts, and everyone else
was showing that they were in the 50 to 60 to 70 gigawatts of
potential loss. We already had one company, First Energy, alone
cut 4 gigawatts out of the system.
So there is your model. There is what you are saying--and I
have got to question it.
Let me go to the second one having to do with heavy-duty
trucks. In this chart this is from 2004, to 2010, the
compliance you could see it in different years that it talks
about in these charts, this one in particular, says in 2004,
you, the EPA was predicting that the cost of compliance was
only going to be $900 and some or less than $1,000, but in
reality it was over $4,000. And in 2007, you were predicting,
it might be $4,000, but in reality it was closer to $8,000, and
then just 2 years ago you were, you all were predicting it was
going to be just over $3,000, but the cost was $9,000.
Could I see the next chart?
Here is another one in 2010. This talks about your estimate
was $3,400, but look down the list of all of these from
Freightliner, International, Kenworth, Mac, Peterbilt, Volvo,
Western Star are all in the $9,000 range, three times the
amount that you all were predicting. I really question your
ability to estimate and because we rely on those estimates.
When the people on the other side of the aisle, we are trying
to work together on this, and if your numbers are good, we want
to work with them, but I come from the construction industry.
When we give an estimate, we live with it.
Are you ready to live with it? If your estimates are wrong,
are you going to reimburse the consumers for the cost that you
have incurred because you have convinced Congress to adopt
these heavy regulations because they are only going to cost
$3,000, but in the real world it costs $9,000. Are you going to
reimburse the consumers?
Ms. McCarthy. I believe that over the course of the last 40
years that EPA had done some of the best economic modeling
available to any agency.
Mr. McKinley. So you are disagreeing with all of your----
Ms. McCarthy. I do not have any idea what those charts
were, who they developed them on, what basis. Those were not
charts developed by the EPA, so if that information is
available, we are happy to take a look at it and to provide you
some input as to whether or not we believe it is accurate.
Mr. McKinley. That is fair. I mean, I have got your number.
So you just project----
Ms. McCarthy. We have retroactive----
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. These numbers at $900, and we
can see it is--and you are predicting that it is going to be
$900 4 years from now.
Ms. McCarthy. And the only other thing I would like to
clarify is that the retirement slide that you put up is we took
great pains in the mercury and toxic standard to do that
understanding the impacts associated with the utility industry.
We knew that there were more than those retirements strictly as
a matter of business decisions related to the market. What you
are seeing closing are inefficient, old coal-fired power plants
that cannot compete moving forward. I do not believe----
Mr. McKinley. But everyone else----
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. McKinley. I am sorry my time has elapsed, but everyone
else had the same information, and they used more accurate--
they came to a better conclusion than you did.
Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Kansas is recognized for 5 minutes, Mr.
Pompeo.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for being
here today. I am going to try and--I think these pieces of
legislation are both good. I think there are a few things that
could change, but I think they make good sense. I want to make
sure and get a couple facts straight, Ms. McCarthy, about what
you said in your testimony today and then I want to talk about
your theory of regulation.
So you said nothing in these regulations has any impact on
high gasoline prices. Is that correct?
Ms. McCarthy. We were speaking about the current gasoline
prices. That is absolutely true.
Mr. Pompeo. Do you believe that both for the short term and
the long term? That is do these regulations have you so--I have
heard some trying to say, well, I can't do anything about
tomorrow's gasoline prices. Do you think this impacts next
week's or next year's or a decade's from now gasoline prices?
Ms. McCarthy. All I can tell you is that we have managed a
number of fuel and vehicle programs over the years, and as far
as we know the result of the impacts of those relative to
gasoline prices is dwarfed by crude oil prices, by taxes, by
other inputs that go into the price of gasoline.
Mr. Pompeo. I disagree. Do you think the same thing for
electricity? So we talked about gasoline. Do you think these
regulations have no impact on electricity prices in America
because you have been talking about gas, now electricity.
Ms. McCarthy. Well, the regulations in----
Mr. Pompeo. I am just asking you about electricity. Do you
think these regulations----
Ms. McCarthy. Are we talking about the----
Mr. Pompeo. I am talking about the cumulative set of
regulations that EPA has pending and current. Do you think they
impact--you have testified before. Do you think they impact
electricity prices?
Ms. McCarthy. Only--I am trying to see how.
Mr. Pompeo. OK. So you think they don't, no impact.
Ms. McCarthy. I don't believe so.
Mr. Pompeo. The more the merrier.
I want to talk about your theory of regulation you
mentioned. You said, hey, we are going to essentially put these
new rules on new coal-fired power plants, but that is OK
because no one is building them anyway.
Ms. McCarthy. That isn't my theory. That is an analysis by
the Energy Information Office and EIA, and they are the ones
that have done modeling, that took a look at what power plants
are being constructed, and it is really on the basis of market
conditions, what is competitive.
Mr. Pompeo. Right. So your justification for this set of--
this greenhouse gas rule that you have presented yesterday is
that it is OK because no one is building----
Ms. McCarthy. No, no. That was how we analyzed the result
of the cost and benefits. The reason for regulating greenhouse
gases from power plants is because greenhouse gases pose a
danger to public health and welfare, and they are a regulated
pollutant, and as a regulated pollutant under the Clean Air Act
we must move forward with new source performance standards.
That is why we did the rule.
Mr. Pompeo. So why do you talk about that? Why do you talk
about what the market might or might do in response? You just
throw it out there as a justification to explain to the
American people?
Ms. McCarthy. No. It is part of the economic analysis that
you are interested in us pursuing----
Mr. Pompeo. Right.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. Was to look at what are the
costs and benefits as a result of the rule.
Mr. Pompeo. Right.
Ms. McCarthy. We are required to regulate greenhouse gases,
we have tried to do that in a reasonable way, we have
identified costs. What is clear is that because of the
availability of natural gas in the low cost, that coal is not
competitive at this moment, so it is not anticipated that these
rules would have a significant cost impact. That is what we
have identified.
Mr. Pompeo. I appreciate that. You say coal is not
competitive. I will tell you compared to solar, compared to
wind, compared to all the things that you are taking taxpayer
money to throw resources at, I will promise you that coal is
intensely competitive. It is why we are using it in America
today. It is because consumers care about their rates. You
haven't talked about ratepayers one moment today. You haven't
talked to the fact that ratepayers all across America may or
may not know it but they are thrilled that we are using coal-
fired power plant generation in America today because it allows
them to continue to take care of their families and heat their
homes and cool their homes and all the things that consumers
care about.
Manufacturers care about it, too. They need to make sure
they have affordable electricity as well. As you continue to
foreclose these facts, and I have heard others, depending on
how you count them, 13 to 15 different sets of rules and
regulations just in my time in Congress that you all have
imposed on the fossil fuel industry and to sit here today and
tell me this isn't going to impact costs for consumers and
costs for businesses and jobs in America, I just think it is
Alice in Wonderland, and I will yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Louisiana is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
time, appreciate the panel.
Coming today I think it is important that we continue to
talk about energy policy in this country and different
proposals that we brought forward in the House and passed in
the House that actually would increase energy production,
implement a real All of the Above strategy, and lower gas
prices at the pump. It is unfortunate that the Senate has
blocked that legislation. It is unfortunate the President
continues to oppose that, and that gets into my questions.
Mr. Abbey, in your opening statement you made a number of
comments I want to go through, but you said, ``This is why the
President and the Department has continued to promote and
implement an All of the Above approach to American energy.''
And I know the President said that out on the campaign trail a
lot. He has, you know, taken the language that we have been
using. We have actually filed an All of the Above Bill, passed
All of the Above legislation, and now the prices are going
higher. The President is feeling the heat from his policies,
and so he is trying to say that he is for All of the Above, and
unfortunately, if you look at the record, it just doesn't back
up that the President or your agency supports an All of the
Above strategy.
I want to start with the moratorium in the Gulf of Mexico.
You know, in my area we have seen since the, not only the
moratorium, but even after the moratorium was lifted, there is
still what people consider a permatorium in the Gulf of Mexico.
It is very difficult to have any kind of consistent policy out
of Department of Interior that allows people to go back to
work. We have seen about a dozen deep water rigs leave not only
the Gulf of Mexico but leave the United States, left this
country, taken about 12,000 jobs with it. That number is now up
to about 19,000 jobs.
And I am not sure if you have seen this, I hope you would
go look if you haven't, a group called Greater New Orleans,
Inc., which is an alliance of business organizations in the New
Orleans region, did a study called the ``Impact of Decreased
and Delayed Drilling Permit Approvals on Gulf of Mexico
Businesses,'' and I am not sure if you have seen it. I would
like to submit this for the record if I could ask unanimous
consent to have this report issued.
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Scalise. Because they actually surveyed not the big
five oil companies, small businesses that are American
businesses that service the oil and gas industry, and what they
found in their report 41 percent of those businesses are not
making a profit. In fact, 50 percent of the businesses, and you
can see this in the report, 50 percent of the businesses in the
oil and gas industry have laid off workers as a result of your
policies.
And so while you are out there touting and saying, hey,
production is up, everything is great, the companies that
actually do this with over $100 a barrel oil, with gasoline
skyrocketing, they are laying people off in the industry
because they can't go to work. They have sent rigs to places
like Egypt, and so people have calculated that it is better to
do business in Egypt than in the United States because of your
policies.
And so when you are making those statements, that is not an
All of the Above policy when companies are losing money or
laying people off in America because they have got to send jobs
overseas, and so I would hope you would take a look at that.
Have you seen that report yet?
Mr. Abbey. I have not, but what I have seen are statistics
that would lead me to believe that the pace of permitting is at
nearly pre-Macondo levels as it stands today.
Mr. Scalise. OK, and I know you have talked about that,
too, and I have got some information that unfortunately
disputes what you just said there and what your testimony said,
because, again, in your testimony you tout here that you have
had increased total Federal oil production has increased by 13
percent during the first 3 years of the Obama administration
combined, yet your own Department of Energy, your own
Administration's agency, the U.S. Energy Information
Administration, confirms that production in the Gulf of Mexico
was down 22 percent in 2011, projected to be down 30 percent in
2012. Again, Energy Information Administration said in the
Rockies leasing is down 68 percent since Federal--President
Obama took office. This is Federal lands, and all of this is
down. That is not an All of the Above strategy.
And, again, you know, I don't know, do you dispute those
numbers, because they are actually looking at your data. I
mean, Energy Information Administration is under the Obama
administration, and they are using real numbers, and they are
saying that production is actually down 22 percent last year.
Do you dispute that?
Mr. Abbey. You know, Congressman----
Mr. Scalise. I know I am running out time. A yes or no. I
mean, yes or no. Do you dispute it, or do you know about it?
Mr. Abbey. I think that the statistics speak for
themselves, but, you know, the Department----
Mr. Scalise. Well, they do, and they say that it is down.
That is not All of the Above. That is not All of the Above when
you have got production down because of your policies. We are
losing jobs because of your policies.
I want to ask Ms. McCarthy, you know, we have seen some
numbers from a number of different entities. You know, you talk
about this as well, but, you know, we see on EPA going after
hydraulic fracturing, and this is something that has been one
of the areas, one of the few areas that has actually been doing
well. President Obama, you know, touts the success of hydraulic
fracturing, and we do, and fortunately, the President hasn't
been able to shut it down. It is mostly on private lands, but
now we are seeing that--we understand next week EPA plans to
issue a new source performance standard on hydraulic fracturing
which will actually decrease one of the big areas that has
actually been doing well in this industry, and that is not All
of the Above.
Are you all getting ready to release some kind of new
source performance standards on hydraulic fracturing? Is that
accurate?
Ms. McCarthy. We are under a deadline to release that next
week, yes, but it is not a rule that is specifically focused on
hydraulic fracking. It is----
Mr. Scalise. Right. That is one of the few areas that has
been up.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. A rule that looks at oil and
gas.
Mr. Scalise. So now you all are going to go after that,
too, so that the President has actually shut down----
Ms. McCarthy. Actually, I think if you wait until next
week----
Mr. Scalise [continuing]. Areas in leasing, rejected
Keystone XL Pipeline.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. To see what the rule is, and we
will show you that it is not just cost effective, but it will
be a way to actually enhance development and----
Mr. Scalise. People have heard that before and then they
see their prices go up even higher when you all go in and try
to help enhance production, it usually means people are going
to pay higher prices for energy, and people are fed up with
those higher prices.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Scalise. I hope you all would review those policies
again.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. I thank the witnesses for the first panel, and
your time is done, so thank you very much for being here today.
Appreciate your willingness to testify.
And if the second panel witnesses would please come take
the table. I want to welcome the panel today for joining us and
for your testimony and time today. Appreciate your willingness
to be here and the expertise that you are going to provide.
We will begin this testimony to my left here, Mr. Burkhard,
the Managing Director of Global Oil Group, IHS Cambridge Energy
Research Associates. You will be given 5 minutes to testify,
and thank you for joining us, and also joined on the panel
today by Matthew--let us see where is that in order here. By
Dr. Joseph Romm, Senior Fellow, Center for American Progress,
Jack Coleman, Mr. Jack Coleman, Managing Partner and General
Counsel, EnergyNorth America, Mr. Matt Smorch, Vice President
of Strategic Planning, CountryMark, Mr. Robert Meyers, Senior
Counsel, Crowell and Moring, and Mr. Niger Innis, Co-Chairman,
Affordable Power Alliance, and Dr. George Schink, Managing
Director and Principal Navigant Economics here on behalf of the
Emissions Control Technology Association.
Thank you very much for joining us. Each panelist will be
given 5 minutes.
Mr. Burkhard, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF JAMES BURKHARD, MANAGING DIRECTOR, GLOBAL OIL
GROUP, IHS CAMBRIDGE ENERGY RESEARCH ASSOCIATES; JOSEPH ROMM,
SENIOR FELLOW, CENTER FOR AMERICAN PROGRESS ACTION FUND; W.
JACKSON COLEMAN, MANAGING PARTNER AND GENERAL COUNSEL,
ENERGYNORTH AMERICA, LLC; MATT SMORCH, VICE PRESIDENT,
STRATEGY, COUNTRYMARK COOPERATIVE; ROBERT J. MEYERS, SENIOR
COUNSEL, CROWELL & MORING, LLC; NIGER INNIS, CO-CHAIRMAN,
AFFORDABLE POWER ALLIANCE, AND NATIONAL SPOKESMAN, CONGRESS OF
RACIAL EQUALITY; AND GEORGE R. SCHINK, MANAGING DIRECTOR AND
PRINCIPAL, NAVIGANT ECONOMICS, ON BEHALF OF EMISSIONS CONTROL
TECHNOLOGY ASSOCIATION

STATEMENT OF JAMES BURKHARD

Mr. Burkhard. Thank you very much for this very timely
opportunity to discuss oil and gasoline markets and----
Mr. Shimkus. Press your microphone. Thank you.
Mr. Burkhard. Is that on? OK. Good. Thank you very much for
the opportunity, very timely opportunity to discuss oil and
gasoline markets and the role of the U.S. Strategic Petroleum
Reserve.
As we all know, gasoline is nearing $4 per gallon on
average in the United States, which isn't far from the all-time
high of $4.17 in 2008, and this is clearly a burden for
American motorists and businesses.
Since the beginning of the year gasoline is up nearly 20
percent, and the reason for that is mainly due to higher crude
oil prices. So what is driving crude oil prices? The main
driver is geopolitics, specifically concern over the adequacy
and reliability of oil supplies due to the uncertainty
surrounding the--nuclear issues having such an impact is the
limited amount of oil production capacity of the world. The
capacity is the oil market's----
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Burkhard, I am sorry to interrupt you
again, but I think your microphone may have been bumped and
turned off again.
Mr. Burkhard. It has gone off again? OK.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Mr. Burkhard. There we go.
Mr. Shimkus. Pull it up a little bit closer to you.
Mr. Burkhard. Is that better?
Mr. Shimkus. Is the light on?
Mr. Burkhard. The light is on.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Burkhard. OK. So spare capacity is the world oil
market's shock absorber. When it is high, the oil market can
better absorb supply disruptions or demand spikes for large
volumes of oil to be brought into production. And for decades
Saudi Arabia has been the main holder of spare capacity, and
that is still the case today.
As recently as 2010, global spare production capacity stood
at about 5.5 million barrels per day, and at that time that was
equivalent to about 6 percent of world oil demand. Today spare
capacity is much less. It is at most at 2.5 million barrels per
day, which is equivalent to less than 3 percent of current
world oil demand. For context, Iran in 2011, exported about 2.4
million barrels per day. The spare capacity and the amount of
exports last year are roughly the same.
Under such conditions limited spare capacity, under such
conditions of limited spare capacity yields political concerns
and can impact payoffs--switch mikes there.
OK. Is that--is this mike working? Well, we will just go
ahead. OK.
So November last year the International Energy Atomic
Agency--if that is not working I will just pretend this one is
working--stated that Iran had carried out activities relevant
to the development of a nuclear explosive device. In the time
since that report was issued, the U.S. and the European Union
have adopted sanctions aimed at tendering Iran's economy,
particularly by making it more difficult for Iran to sell its
oil, and that is in order to pressure the Iranian regime to
reign in its nuclear program and international monitoring and
controls.
Iran has responded with bellicose statements such as
threatening to close the Strait of Hormuz, through which passes
about 35 percent of the world's oil exports. The sanctions the
U.S. and the E.U. sanctioned may well succeed in reducing the
amount of Iranian oil in the global market, and this would
likely lead to even lower spare capacity and the possibility of
higher prices. The oil market is tense.
It is also an election year in the United States, and this
has raised question again of the purpose of the U.S. Strategic
Petroleum Reserve, the ``SPRO,'' which is the world's largest
emergency oil reserve. The ``SPRO'' was created in the
aftermath of the 1973, '74, oil crisis when disrupted flows of
oil from the Middle East exposed vulnerability in the U.S. and
global economies to such actions.
The original purpose of the ``SPRO'' was to help the U.S.
manage a very large oil supply disruption from the Persian
Gulf. If the ``SPRO'' is used to influence the price of
gasoline and not in response to a major disturbance in the oil
market, it is a blunt instrument with limited prospects for a
lasting impact. The original purpose of the ``SPRO'' was not to
manage gasoline prices, which is an extremely daunting
challenge even under benign conditions, but it was said to help
to address major supply disruptions, particularly from the
Persian Gulf.
The first emergency release of oil from the ``SPRO'' was in
January 1991, at the start of Operation Desert Storm, and it
was done in coordination with other members of the
International Energy Agency. The release was conducted out of
concern for what could happen amid the fog of war in the
world's most important oil-producing region. When the release
was announced, war was certain. In fact, the very day that the
President just announced the commencement of attacks against
Iraqian forces, and it had a calming impact on the oil market.
Today, to conclude, there is a risk that ratcheting up
economic pressure on Iran, combined with Iranian intransigence
on the nuclear issue could lead to a situation where the
``SPRO'' needs to be used for its original purpose, as an
emergency response to a massive supply disruption.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burkhard follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Burkhard.
Dr. Romm, 5 minutes, please.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH ROMM

Mr. Romm. Is this working?
Mr. Shimkus. We just ask that you speak very loudly,
please.
Mr. Romm. All right.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. .
Mr. Romm. Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, thank you
for inviting me to testify. Actually my first hearing was 16
years ago this month when I was Principle Deputy Assistant
Secretary at the Department of Energy, and that hearing was
also on oil crisis.
Imagine the world's oil market is the Atlantic Ocean. U.S.
oil production is the Potomac River. You could release every
reservoir dam in this country, and it just won't raise sea
levels noticeably. There is just too much water in the ocean,
and that is the way it is with oil, the global oil market, and
oil prices.
I have six key points to make.
First, there is broad agreement among energy experts and
economists that increasing domestic oil production will have no
noticeable impact on U.S. gasoline prices for the foreseeable
future. Oil prices are set on a world market.
Could we have the first chart?
This is a chart of the U.S. oil price, which is on the
bottom, plotted against the price of--U.S. gasoline price, I am
sorry, which is the line on the bottom and the British, German,
and French price, which is on the top, and as you can see oil
prices, gasoline prices rise and fall in tandem. Our prices
rise and fall in tandem with European countries, even though
they produce very little oil, and we produce a great deal. It
is, again, gasoline prices are driven by the world price for
oil.
Second, my second point, the rising U.S. gasoline prices
has come at a time of soaring U.S. gasoline production. So
while President Obama has adopted an aggressive pro-drilling
strategy, it has, as expected, not worked to lower prices for
Americans. As the Cato Institute itself explained this month,
``It is not Obama's fault that crude oil prices have
increased.'' Indeed, Douglas Holtz-Eakin, former CBO Director
and Chief Economist for President Bush's Council of Economic
Advisory, wrote this month, ``Domestic actions to increase
production will not lower gas prices set on the global
market.''
The Energy Information Administration has estimated that
adding a quarter million barrels of oil a day in 2020, would
have no impact on gasoline prices whatsoever, and adding half a
million barrels of oil a day in 2030, would lower gasoline
prices by just 3 cents.
Third, U.S. refining costs account for a mere one-eighth of
the price of gasoline. The cost of reducing pollutants that
harm public health and our children are a small fraction of
that small fraction. As the Wall Street Journal has noted,
``Germans over the past 3 years have paid an average of $2.64 a
gallon, excluding taxes, while Americans have paid $2.69, even
though we produce 200 tons as much oil at they do.'' Again, it
just is not domestic regulations that affect the price of
gasoline.
Senator Bingaman has explained, ``We do not face these
cycles of high gasoline prices because of lack of access to
Federal resources or because of some environmental regulation
that is getting in the way of us obtaining cheap gasoline.''
Fourth, every independent study shows that EPA regulations
deliver benefits to the economy and public health that vastly
exceed their short-term costs. The OMB reported to Congress
that in the past decade EPA regulations had total costs of some
$28 billion while delivering benefits to the Nation that ranged
from $80 billion up to an astonishing $500 billion.
Economic analysis does not support the conclusion that EPA
regulations have harmed U.S. competitiveness, and indeed, some
analyses suggest that they have boosted our competitiveness by
giving us market leadership and cleaner technologies. Given
that our major industrialized trading competitors pay $2 and $4
a gallon more for gasoline than we do, it would be essentially
impossible for the tiny impact EPA regulations might have to
harm U.S. competitiveness.
There is only one demonstrated way to reduce gasoline
prices a little in the short term and that is the release of
oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, ideally in concert
with a similar release by our allies. This has on average
temporarily reduced oil prices by around 10 percent.
Six, the only thing that can protect Americans from rising
gasoline prices and global oil shocks is an aggressive strategy
to reduce the country's oil intensity, oil consumed per dollar
of GDP, including a steady increase in the fuel efficiency of
our vehicles and an alternative fuel vehicle policy built
around electric vehicles. As Michael Levi of the Council on
Foreign Relations put it, ``The amount of oil you produce at
home does not affect the price. You can lower your
vulnerability price by lowering your consumption of oil but not
by increasing your production.''
So you are not going to notice a big change with gasoline
prices through more domestic production or by gutting
regulations to protect public health.
Just one final point since the new carbon pollution rules
have been discussed here, unrestricted emissions of industrial
carbon pollution are the greatest threat to public health and
the American way of life that we know of. The EPA's new carbon
pollution rules are the minimum first step to protecting our
children and future generations.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Romm follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Dr. Romm, and Mr. Coleman, for 5
minutes, please. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF W. JACKSON COLEMAN

Mr. Coleman. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
It is a pleasure to be here. I appreciate the opportunity to
testify on this proposal that you submitted the underlying bill
for.
I think it is extremely important, and by the way, my 6
years of working for the House Resources Committee, I had the
pleasure of working with this committee many times, and it is
my pleasure to testify before it.
I think the Strategic Energy Production Act of 2012, is a
very important piece of legislation that highlights the fact if
we have supply situations that we need to draw down Strategic
Petroleum Reserve for, then we need to be doing more to produce
from our Federal lands.
It has been mentioned that, you know, we haven't had a lack
of resources available from Federal lands. I beg to differ.
When we look at the Outer Continental Shelf, only 2 percent of
the Outer Continental Shelf is available, is leased. Five
percent of the onshore public lands, Federal lands are leased.
So a total of around 3 percent of all federally-controlled
lands are leased. You cannot tell me that we don't have a lot
of resources that are available to the United States and to the
citizens of this country for not only economic development,
creating jobs, high-paying jobs in those other resources that
have not been made available or not leased.
You know, I think it is a lot of fuzzy thinking, frankly,
to say that we don't, it doesn't matter about American
production of oil to the Federal oil price. You know, the AP
analysis that came out about the price of oil and trying to say
that, you know, it didn't matter about increases or decreases
in production in the United States because the world, the oil
is set on the world market, certainly it is, but we are the
third largest producer of oil in the world. You cannot tell me
that if we--if our production was eliminated, that that would
not have an impact on the price of oil in the world. We already
have just because of the reduction in production from Iran,
much smaller amount than what this country is producing,
already has a significant impact on the world market price of
oil.
So what we need to be focused on is what can we do. You
know, I am pretty amazed with the credit that is being claimed
for increases in production of oil from private and State
lands. As we, as I point in my testimony, actual production of
oil from Federal lands decreased significantly over the last
year. We all know based on how long it takes to get permits and
how long it takes to get out there and drill, it takes a long
time to get that production on board. The increase that we had
in the previous years came about from significant lease sales
that were in the past and commitment of capital, what you have
seen.
And a little bit of my background, I have spent 14 years as
Senior Attorney for Offshore Minerals at the Interior
Department, and you know, I know something about this, and then
another 6 years here at the committee. What we have seen is
really a manipulation of statistics, trying to claim credit for
something which people aren't due credit for, and actually what
credit there is due is a 15 percent reduction in leasing of
Federal lands, onshore and offshore, in the last 3 years. The
actual number--it doesn't matter. The actual number of leased
acreage, which is an indicator of future production, has
decreased by 15 percent over the last 3 years. It is one of the
lowest levels that we have had in almost 20 years.
This should be a great concern to the American people, that
you have much less opportunity. We talk about opportunities for
production in this country. You know, for the longest time we
were given the mantra, oh, we don't have much resources,
nothing we can do. Well, we actually have had that corrected by
the record of Congressional Research Services, I point out in
my testimony, came out with a report about 2 years ago that
said the United States has the largest endowment of total
fossil fuel resources that have not yet been produced in any
other country in the world, and even in the oil and gas area we
have significantly more conventionally recoverable resources
than most nations on the face of the Earth.
And the Institute for Energy Research came out with a
report about 3 months ago in North America we have something
around a 1-1/2 trillion barrels of oil that could be produced.
The vast majority of that is in the United States, and more
than half of that is on Federal lands.
So I appreciate the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Coleman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Coleman, and Mr. Smorch, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MATT SMORCH

Mr. Smorch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to
testify and tell you about CountryMark and how the current
regulatory regime affects our business.
CountryMark is Indiana's only American-owned oil refining
and marketing company. We are a cooperative, and we are owned
and controlled by our members who represent over 100,000
farmers in our market area. Our purpose is to ensure adequate
supply of quality fuels to these farmers.
CountryMark, our refinery, is small. Only one-tenth the
size of the average refinery in our region. Even though
CountryMark is small, we have a big impact in our area. We
purchase 100 percent American crude oil, providing $100 million
of income per year to 40,000 local royalty owners. We supply
over 75 percent of the agricultural market and 50 percent of
the school districts in the State of Indiana. We employ nearly
450 workers, mostly in rural communities. We purchase nearly
$200 million in products and services every year.
With everything combined, CountryMark's total economic
contribution exceeds $2.5 billion per year. This value stays
here in the United States and provides much needed jobs in
mostly rural communities. We are not a fully-integrated oil
company. We operate between two commodity markets, crude on one
side, products on the other. CountryMark stays in business
based on how well we can control our costs compared to other
fuel suppliers.
Regulations and mandates increase operating costs, which
makes our viability uncertain. My job is to analyze market
trends and develop long-term strategies. Since I work for a
cooperative, I do not own a piece of the company. I am here
solely due to the longevity of CountryMark. I am a chemical
engineer and have spent most of my career in refinery
operations, so I have real world experience.
In my current role I have to look at the cumulative affects
over a 10-year period of all regulations to make sure that
money and credit is available when it is needed.
Today I would like to highlight two examples where
regulations increased our costs.
First let me talk about sulfur and gasoline. In 2010,
CountryMark constructed a process unit that reduced gasoline
sulfur by 90 percent to meet the Tier 2 sulfur limit of 30
parts per million. We had to do this to be able to sell
gasoline and stay in business. That unit cost $33 million, and
its annual operating cost is $1.8 million.
Tier 3 requires gasoline sulfur reductions to 10 PPM. This
will take an additional $15 million of modifications and more
energy, in turn, increasing operating costs again. When
averaged over a 10-year period, meeting Tier 2 costs $160,000
per ton of sulfur removed, while meeting Tier 3 will cost
$200,000 per ton of sulfur removed.
This comparison demonstrates two things. The cost of
compliance is high when based on the amount of pollutant that
is removed, and also at each stage there are diminishing
returns. By requiring multiple reductions in different years,
capital costs increase and are less efficient.
I would also like to talk about renewable fuels mandates.
CountryMark blended biodiesel since 2005, and ethanol since
2008, because it made economic sense. The Renewable Fuel
Standards changed the natural progression of these fuels by
mandating a market. It is a very complicated rule. We either
purchase and blend renewable fuels or purchase credits. Even
though there are four distinct categories of renewable fuels,
ethanol and biodiesel are the only two fuels that are
available. Cellulosic biofuels don't exist.
Under the current rule CountryMark's estimated compliance
cost for buying credits would be $9 million this year, but that
increases to $64 million like the year 2021. We continue to
blend ethanol and biodiesel for compliance but now at a loss.
For example, to drive the demand for biodiesel we would have to
sell it at the same price as diesel fuel. We purchase biodiesel
at $5 a gallon and have to sell it for $3 a gallon at a loss of
$2 for every gallon of biodiesel that we sell.
Over the next 10 years these two areas combined to increase
our average cost to produce gasoline by 19 cents per gallon or
diesel fuel by 22 cents a gallon. Our costs of operation have
and will increase due to EPA regulation.
While fully integrated oil companies or larger refineries
may be able to absorb these incremental costs, small business
refineries like CountryMark cannot. If the market does not bear
the additional cost with higher prices, refineries will go out
of business. Jobs are lost, and gasoline and diesel prices
still increase.
Sixty-six refineries have shut down in my 22-year career,
and I happened to be at one of those before I came to
CountryMark. It makes sense to let the experts determine the
combined effects of all EPA regulation on the industry, the
consumer, and the American worker.
CountryMark fully supports this legislation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smorch follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Smorch, for your testimony, and
I am going to recess the committee for such time as may be
necessary to put this new microphone up and hopefully we can
get it addressed quickly.
[Recess.]
Mr. Shimkus. Reconvene the committee, and Mr. Meyers, 5
minutes, please.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT J. MEYERS

Mr. Meyers. Thank you. First I just want to thank the
chairman and members of the subcommittee for the opportunity to
be here, and I would ask that the full written statement be
placed into the record.
My written testimony addresses the cumulative impact
analysis required by the discussion draft pending Clean Air Act
rulemakings affecting refinery sector and the projected timing
for the new requirements, and I also address the parts of
legislation that affect the promulgation of ozone standards.
What my bottom line conclusion is is that it makes sense to
do a comprehensive analysis, and it also makes sense to do it
at this time. A fundamental issue in this legislation as my
experience tells me for a while is that any time you are
dealing with the Clean Air Act you always have to face the
challenge of why do we want to change anything.
And I can completely understand why EPA is taking the
position that they do. They are charged with implementing the
act. That is their role, but I wanted to clarify a couple of
things from the first panel.
First, from my reading of the discussion draft, there is no
rollback under the bill to affect current regulations, so my
definition of rollback would be, you know, if you are affecting
the current regulations. By definition you are looking at the
effect of regulations in the future.
Second, I was also a little bit confused in terms of we are
to understand that in terms of the Tier 3 rulemaking it has not
been decided exactly what the regulations are but at the same
time we know they cost less than a penny. The two don't go
together because cost analysis is essentially derivative of
what the regulatory standards are.
So my questions there go with respect to the current, if
you look on current OMB iteration of the rulemaking, we are
also dealing not only with residual authority in the act to set
standards but 211(v) regarding renewable fuel standards and
211(h), which deal with volatility.
Now, they may not do volatility through other authoring
act, but you also have the issue with the E-15 labor at this
point in time, whether the current 1-pound waiver exists, and
that could be another significant cost impact if based on the
decision to allow E-15, if you don't allow a 1-pound waiver,
you will have an effect of effectively decreasing the
volatility of ethanol-blend gasolines by those two actions.
In any event, in terms of the general nature of the bill
and in terms of looking at multiple pollutant strategies, this
is something that the agency itself has talked about and
advocated. Indeed, just last fall the Clean Air Act Advisory
Committee concluded that the time was right to take a more
vigorous look at opportunities to align and optimize Clean Air
Act regulations affecting individual sectors. That is an
outside committee that advises EPA.
My written testimony outlines the nexus between the various
rulemakings contained in the discussion draft, but I was trying
to think of a simple analogy, and I think that it is mostly as
taxes. As an individual we need to pay multiple tax levies,
sales taxes, school taxes, property taxes, Federal, State,
sometimes local, and Federal gas and State taxes, and I am
certain that each of these taxes were initially enacted to
convey a public benefit.
But it really their combined effect on individuals in our
economy that we feel, not the individual levies themselves,
although sometimes they can be painful.
So I don't see the intellectual leap it takes to support a
comprehensive review of the cumulative impact of regulations.
The bill does not require the government to do the impossible
but instead allows reliance on available data.
Despite numerous executive orders, the plain fact of the
matter is that such reviews aren't done. I will give you a few
examples. In the latest transport rule EPA did not examine the
effects of the current program, even though it is being
implemented in over two dozen States. EPA's climate rules
didn't examine the impact of the rule on stationary sources,
even though the net effect of the rules, as was explained in
the earlier panel, as a result of these determinations, now you
need to have greenhouse gas permitting for large facilities.
And EPA doesn't consider NAAQS imposed costs on small
businesses, State, local, or tribal governments or the private
sector. Why? Because the prevailing view is that NAAQS did not
directly impose regulations on sources. This is legally correct
but analytically it is problematic.
So the basic question is why does this system of analysis
make more sense and target the legislation to require
assessment of the accumulated costs of regulating the petroleum
sector? What is essentially so sacrosanct about the current way
we consider costs and benefits?
My written testimony tries to point this out in detail, but
basically in terms of the impact going forward I made a couple
observations.
One, we got Tier 3. You are talking model 2017, cars and
vehicles, other light-duty vehicles, so you are talking
essentially approximately about 5 years from now before the
effective date of standards.
In a similar fashion I understand EPA's current ozone
regulations to require plans for regulations to require rules
about 28 months from now. Under the reading of the bill you
have got 13 months for the study, so it would seem to be that
you do have enough time, well enough time to do a comprehensive
study before the impact of regulations are going to be felt.
So I will sum up here by just saying that the last thing I
think you should look at was March 20 memo from Cass Sunstein,
head of OIRA, OMB Office, would direct the agencies to, ``take
active steps to take into account the cumulative effects of new
and existing rules and to identify opportunities to harmonize
and streamline multiple rules.''
The discussion draft in large part implements this
directive.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Meyers follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Meyers.
Mr. Innis, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF NIGER INNIS

Mr. Innis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Minority Member Rush, members of the
committee, I want to thank you for the opportunity to address
the committee today. I also want to thank your crack technical
team for getting our mikes up and running.
I am here in my capacity as co-chairman of the Affordable
Power Alliance and national spokesman for the Congress of
Racial Equality, one of our Nation's oldest civil rights
organizations.
In 2007, CORE's National Chairman, Roy Innis, wrote the
book, ``Energy Keepers, Energy Killers: The New Civil Rights
Battle.'' The premise of my chairman's book is that the final
frontier of the civil rights revolution is the fight for
economic opportunity and that access to reliable, affordable
sources of energy is integral to providing that economic
opportunity. Conversely, when energy prices are raised due to
the market or unfortunate government policy, that final
frontier becomes all the more difficult to reach.
And that makes high energy prices, be it gasoline for our
cars or electricity for our homes, an assault on the people's
ability to exercise their fundamental civil rights.
The book, ``Energy Keepers Energy Killers,'' inspired the
formation the Affordable Power Alliance. This alliance is led
by the Congress of Racial Equality and was joined by the High
Impact Leadership Coalition of Churches, the 60 Plus
Association, the 2-decade old Senior Citizens Advocacy Group,
and the National Hispanic Christian Leadership Conference,
which is the largest Hispanic Christian organization in the
country with a network of over 30,000 member churches.
The Affordable Power Alliance campaign has promoted the
message that affordable energy is a critical element of today's
civil right struggle because energy is the master resource that
reaches into every facet of our lives. We cannot tolerate
bureaucratic bans and regulations that separate people from
that desperately-needed affordable energy. Affordable energy is
not only a vital resource, it is a moral imperative.
Rising energy prices disproportionately discriminate
against the poorest and most disadvantaged among us. People
don't want energy welfare. They want affordable energy. They
want affordable prices based on abundant supply, not government
subsidies and certainly not artificially-high prices based on
bureaucratic bans and regulations.
EPA's current automotive standards enacted in 2000 and
implemented beginning in 2004 already require vehicles to be 77
to 95 percent cleaner and reduce the sulfur content of gasoline
by up to 90 percent. As for fuel efficiency, fuel economy which
has been discussed a great deal today, these standards, the EPA
admits already, they will raise automobile sticker prices by
$1,000 by 2016, and $3,000 by 2025. Industry estimates are
often higher. These higher sticker prices would disqualify
nearly 7 million working class Americans and potentially new
car buyers. You can't get the fuel savings if you can't afford
the car in the first place.
The legislation before this subcommittee, I believe, we,
the Affordable Power Alliance and the Congress of Racial
Equality believe will help America produce affordable and
reliable energy for all its citizens.
Mr. Chairman, the Affordable Power Alliance and CORE are
not here today with an economic plea. We are here to give our
support to these measures as a moral imperative to remove the
bans and regulations that now force energy prices beyond the
means of millions of decent, worthy Americans.
I see that I have a little bit more time. Very quickly, we
have made a tremendous amount of progress in our country.
Minority Member Rush, Congressman Rush was a part of that great
civil rights revolution, along with my father and many others,
that changed this country for the better. It would be tragic if
the social and the political activity and progress that we have
made as a country would be balanced off with a stifling of
economic mobility which has been the hallmark of making this
country the greatest country on Earth.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Innis follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Innis, and Dr. Schink, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GEORGE R. SCHINK

Mr. Schink. Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. I want to thank you for allowing me
to appear before you and testify regarding this very important
and relevant topic.
As an economist my work over the past 30 years has been
focused largely on the energy industry. Today I am here to
discuss some economic issues related to EPA's Tier 3 Motor
Vehicle Emission and Fuel Standards.
There are four major points I will make today regarding
Tier 3 related to the affects not only on gas prices but also
on the environment, human health, and the economy. These points
are addressed in more detail in my written testimony.
First, it is vital to understand that Tier 3 has absolutely
nothing to do with the recent increases in gasoline prices. The
Tier 3 rules have not yet been proposed and will not go into
effect until 2017.
The retail price of gasoline depends on numerous demand and
supply factors with the global price of crude oil being the
most important. The cents per gallon increases in U.S. retail
prices and global crude oil prices over the last 3 years are
virtually identical. That is the entire increase in U.S. retail
gasoline prices over the last 3 years can be fully explained by
the increases in global oil prices.
Second, the estimates of the marginal cost to U.S. refiners
of meeting of Tier 3 standards prepared on behalf of the oil
industry by Baker and O'Brien are significantly overstated.
Initially these estimates costs, marginal cost estimates were
up to 25 cents per gallon and included the cost to U.S.
refiners of reducing both the sulfur content and vapor pressure
of gasoline.
However, the EPA has stated that the Tier 3 rules only
involve reducing the sulfur content of gasoline. The oil
industry's revised marginal cost estimates for U.S. refineries
are 69 cents per gallon for just the sulfur reduction. The oil
industry's estimated average increase in U.S. refining costs is
only 2.1 cents per gallon.
However, there are two major concerns with the assumptions
underlying the oil industry's marginal and average cost
estimates. First, the investment cost and resulting annual
capital costs are unrealistically high. Second, the cost
estimates are developed without taking into account the option
of averaging and trading across refineries. The lateral
omission biases the marginal cost estimates upward
dramatically.
It should be noted that if the latest Baker and O'Brien
marginal average cost estimates are correct and the refiners
are able to pass the marginal costs onto consumers in the form
of higher gasoline prices as implied by their study, the
refiners can make a profit from Tier 3. They could sell
gasoline for 69 cents per gallon more while incurring only a
2.1 cent per gallon average cost increase. If this is the case,
it seems odd the refiners would oppose Tier 3.
There is another study cost that has been performed by
MathPro Incorporated for the International Council on Clean
Transportation that has more realistic estimates of investment
costs and annual capital costs. The MathPro study calculates an
increase in average U.S. refining costs for reducing the sulfur
content in gasoline of at most 1.4 cents per gallon. This
result is close to the EPA's estimate of about 1 cent per
gallon.
The difference between the oil industry's 2.1 cent per
gallon estimate and MathPro Inc.'s 1.4 cent per gallon estimate
can be explained almost entirely based on the difference
between the annual capital costs estimates in the two studies.
Third, when Tier 3 goes into effect in 2017, there may be
no increase in gasoline prices for the American consumer.
Removing sulfur from diesel fuel will increase the production
costs of refineries by a small amount, but there is no
certainty that this incremental cost will result in higher
retail prices. The retail prices are determined by many factors
and impossible to tell to what extent these costs will be
passed through.
It is also important to note that the likely increase in
the average cost to refining the low-sulfur gasoline is
probably in the vicinity of 1 cent per gallon. Even if this
cost were passed to the consumers, increase in gas prices would
hardly be felt.
Fourth and finally, the increased refining costs associated
with reducing the sulfur content of gasoline are likely to be
more than offset by environmental and health benefits that will
be realized from Tier 3. Tier 3 will be pre-submissions of
nitrogen oxides that are responsible for countless health and
environmental problems, including asthma, ground level ozone,
acid rain, and damage to soil, just to name a few.
For the northeast and Mid-Atlantic regions alone, the
annual health benefits by 2018 are estimated to be in the area
of--health benefits are estimated to be in the neighborhood of
$235 million, which are expected to rise to $1.2 billion over
time.
Further, the improvement in health will result in a more
productive workforce, which will lead to a more productive
economy. Tier 3 will also generate economic benefits. In the
auto and emission control industries it will increase jobs and
value added to the implementation of the technologies.
I haven't fully evaluated these yet, but my preliminary
analysis indicates that these benefits will greatly exceed the
cost.
Thank you, again, for allowing me to appear here.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schink follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Dr. Schink, and, again, thank you
to the witnesses for your testimony today, and I yield myself 5
minutes for questions.
We have heard a lot today discussing the issue of demand, a
lot about supply, and in particular, some of our colleagues on
the Democratic side of the aisle believe that perhaps demand
can address the price of gasoline, but supply is no part of
that equation.
A couple of weeks ago we had Secretary Chu from the
Department of Energy here, and I asked a question about whether
or not the release that President Obama made last year from the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve impacted price, and Secretary Chu
said, ``I think the supply did make a difference.'' And we
talked about the lifting of the moratorium in 2008 by President
Bush when the price of oil dropped $9, and then the price that
happened when the ``SPRO'' was released, it was two times more
than the ``SPRO'' was released, its impact on the price, and he
said that is true.
My next question was if long-term decreased demand has an
affect on price, then don't basic laws of supply and demand
dictate that so will long-term increased supplies, and he said,
I absolutely agree. And then the next question, if you increase
supply, it will decrease costs. That is what you have admitted
to. That is what the ``SPRO'' did. Is that correct? That was a
question to the Secretary of Energy, and Secretary Chu said,
``I agree that both supply and demand matter.''
Now, we have heard people say that supply doesn't matter.
We have heard people testify that supply has no impact, and Mr.
Burkhard, in your testimony I don't know if you were able to
pick out in Dr. Romm's testimony, he talked about only a--only
by reducing demand can the U.S. lower prices at the pump, and I
do have a couple of questions for you on that.
Do you agree with that assessment?
Mr. Burkhard. Well, both the demand and supply set the
price. It is not one or the other, but it is, indeed, both.
There is a mix of factors that push prices up. There is a mix
of factors that push prices down, and the net result is what we
see in the price of oil.
Mr. Shimkus. Dr. Romm says that U.S. demand has decreased
while U.S. production has increased over the past few years,
yet oil and fuel prices have continued on an upward trajectory
over that same time period.
Do supply and demand data only from the U.S. explain the
global price of oil?
Mr. Burkhard. No, they don't, but because it is a global
market as has been discussed here, and both the demand trends
in the U.S. and the supply trends in the U.S. have had a big
impact. The U.S. is the biggest oil consumer. It is the third
largest oil producer. If you look at supply, U.S. liquid's
production has increased 1.3 million barrels per day in the
last 3 years. That is by far, by far the largest increase of
any country in the world.
Mr. Shimkus. Well, then do you agree then that more U.S.
oil production won't help lower prices?
Mr. Burkhard. That more production won't----
Mr. Shimkus. Well, not----
Mr. Burkhard. It is in more--economic logic would dictate
that more supply at a given level of demand would tend to--
would be a force to lower prices.
Mr. Shimkus. And so any clue if the U.S. was not the third
highest producer in the world what prices would be?
Mr. Burkhard. If we didn't have that supply growth, this
great revival in U.S. oil production, I talked about how tight
the market is right now. If we did not have that supply growth,
we would probably be faced with an even tighter market today
and probably higher prices.
Mr. Shimkus. So if you are releasing oil from the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve in order to impact price, then it makes sense
then to have long-term policies in place to increase overall
U.S. supplies as good solid policy?
Mr. Burkhard. Yes. Short term or long-term supply does
matter, just like demand does.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. Mr. Coleman, some have said that
oil companies are sitting on millions of acres of land but not
producing any oil from their leases. What are the problems with
that characterization in your opinion?
Mr. Coleman. Mr. Chairman, there are many problems with
that. Number one, it defies economic logic. Companies have to
pay substantial amounts of money to get these leases. They have
to pay a lot of money to maintain them every year. They have a
lot of expenses in studies and surveys to--before they could
ever go out and try to even apply for a permit to drill.
Yet the idea that companies just sit on an asset just to
drain money out of the corporation is ridiculous, and I talked
about it in my testimony, in my written testimony, how
difficult it is and what length of period of time it takes to
get a permit from the Federal Government versus State
permitting agencies.
The amount of red tape and the studies and reviews that
have to be gone through to be able to move forward on Federal
land are not comparable to States. So I really take offense at
people who say they are just sitting on this stuff and not
making use of it. There is always work to be done in the
continuum.
Mr. Shimkus. And without objection I would enter into the
record a letter from Steven Allred at the United States
Department of Interior discussing the Federal Government's
policy when it comes to using leases and the difficulty it is,
that it takes in order to move forward with the leasing and
achieve a permit.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Coleman.
Mr. Rush, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. Most of us
understand that oil is trading on the global market, and
therefore, prices are established based on rule of supply and
demand in addition to other geopolitical factors. I think in
this panel and the prior panel, I don't think there is any
disagreements in that.
A number of prominent oil and energy economists have
indicated that tensions with Iran increase demand from China
and India, reduce production in Libya, and worried observations
about global economic growth are all contributing to rising oil
prices.
Mr. Romm, in your testimony you stated that the only thing
to protect Americans from rising gasoline prices and global oil
fluctuations is by implementing an aggressive strategy to
reduce the country's demand for oil. You cite measures such as
steadily increasing vehicle fuel efficiency and finding
alternative fuels to power our automobiles.
Given your conclusions, do you believe that either of the
two bills under consideration will have any noticeable impact
on U.S. gasoline prices? And if not, what type of policy and
programs should Congress be pursuing in order to resolve this
yearly, almost monotonous debate on how to address these rising
gasoline prices?
Mr. Romm. Thanks for that question. No. I don't believe
either of the bills in question could substantially or
noticeably affect gasoline prices.
I want to clear up something about what I was trying to say
in my testimony. I don't think that an aggressive energy
efficiency strategy fuel economy standards and alternative
fuels would substantially lower prices. I don't, again, the
price of oil is set on the world market, and demand is really
being driven by countries like India and China.
What we can do, however, is reduce fuel bills, which is the
product of the price and the amount that you use personally,
let us say, through your vehicle or that the economy uses per
dollar of GDP. So the goal if you are trying to reduce the
country's vulnerability to an oil shock, price spike that is
out of our control because of what happens in the Middle East
or somewhere else, is to reduce the amount of oil that an
individual uses when they drive their car, and that is what the
President has done with the aggressive fuel economy standards
he has put on the table, and I think it was Representative
Waxman who cited this new EIA analysis which showed that even
though we have record gasoline prices, consumers are not seeing
record fuel bills because their vehicles are considerably more
efficient than they were the last time gasoline prices were
very high.
So the goal if you want to make the economy more resilient
to the inevitable rising prices driven by other countries and
the inevitable price spikes driven by, you know, disasters or
conflict in other countries, is to make this country less
dependent on oil consumption, decrease oil intensity by making
our cars more efficient and by finding substitutes for oil.
Mr. Rush. Any independent peer review studies that conclude
that EPA regulations have harmed U.S. competitiveness, and
commercially, are you aware of any independent studies that
suggest that EPA regulations have loosened our competitiveness
by giving us market leadership and cleaner technology?
Mr. Romm. Well, it is a good question. I discuss it
somewhat in my testimony. I think it is quite clear that there
really are not independent studies that find that EPA
regulations have hurt U.S. competitiveness. I mean, I think it
is pretty obvious in the case of gasoline. Most of our trading
competitors, whether it is Japan or Germany or Great Britain,
tax gasoline at a very high level. I mean, if you have been to
Europe, you know they are paying $2, $3, $4 a gallon more for
gasoline than we are. So some regulation that might affect U.S.
gasoline prices by a penny or two pennies can't possibly hurt
U.S. competitiveness when they are paying, you know, $2, $3, $4
a gallon more than we are.
What I do think you will find in the literature is that
U.S. leadership on clean energy standards, particularly the
automotive industry, created leadership in pollution control
technology, catalytic converters, and in fact, the low sulfur
standards ironically have allowed U.S. diesel producers to sell
diesel into the European market because it now meets their
standard.
So I think in general it is always good, the world is
moving towards cleaner energy and lower emissions. The
countries that do it first become leaders in the technology,
and they create jobs exporting that technology.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Virginia is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smorch, each of the regulations that would be included
in this study would require a refiner to spend capital. What is
it like to face these types of capital improvements? Is it easy
to arrange for loans, engineering design services, construction
permitting, and other steps that may be required to comply?
Mr. Smorch. That is a great question. One of the things
that we look at, you know, like I said in my testimony is I
look at where cash and credit is going to be available over a
10-year period, and these regulations come one after the other
it seems like. So I am looking at trying to deal with capital
for multiple regulations at one time.
OK. For small business refiners in this type of an economy
there are some out there that would have a hard time being able
to get the credit and raise--and to be able to go and comply
with regulation.
There is an example for renewable fuel standard. Thirteen
small business refiners got an exemption, an additional 2-year
exemption because it was a burden for them. So that just shows
that these are burdensome regulations.
Mr. Griffith. If a small refiner is forced out of business,
how does that impact the local economy? I know that when small
coal operations are forced out, it impacts my district
tremendously. What happens when a small refiner is forced out
in a local, in the local economy, particularly a rural economy?
Mr. Smorch. For small companies like CountryMark we do
mostly operate in rural communities. In Posey County, Indiana,
we are the second biggest employer in the county, and as I
testified, we have about a $2.5 billion per year economic
impact.
Other small refiners are similar to that, but they are
typically located in rural areas that are remote. They tend to
be the biggest employers and have the most economic impact in
their areas.
Mr. Griffith. And so that then affects the car salesman,
the refrigerator salesman, the Long John Silvers, the
McDonald's, et cetera.
Mr. Smorch. Yes. It is going to affect everybody in the
community. When you lose a big employer in any community, it
goes away forever.
Mr. Griffith. Yes.
Mr. Smorch. And you can never recover. Those communities
have a hard time recovering in the long term.
Mr. Griffith. That is why a lot of folks in my district are
concerned about the whole array of new regulations.
Do you have any examples where different rules would either
overlap or contradict each other in regard to your business?
Mr. Smorch. You know, there was a lot of talk about Tier 3
rules and all that, and EPA hasn't really proposed them yet,
but I was able to go and sit on a small business advocacy
panel, and so I got to see what they were going to propose. The
sulfur standards for me is at CountryMark we just completed
construction of our low sulfur gasoline unit to comply with
Tier 2, just a couple of years ago. Now we are faced with going
and modifying that same equipment and going and to meet a ten-
part-per-million standard.
Well, it would have been better for us and more efficient
if we would have known that ahead of time because now we have
to go and rearrange the equipment we just bought, and I don't
even know if we can recoup the cost of that modification or not
in the marketplace.
So it does have a vulnerability. So for me that is two
regulations I kind of stack on top of each other and really
cause us problems in the long term.
Mr. Griffith. And for some businesses, maybe not yours, but
for some businesses you start doing that stacking. You collapse
the business, and they go out of business.
Mr. Smorch. That is exactly right.
Mr. Griffith. Mr. Innis, let me ask you talking about small
businesses, many small businesses and what I would call micro
businesses, the ones that have one or two folks, Mom and Pop
operations, are owned by low-income persons who are struggling
to work their way to a better life. They are taking a risk,
they have opened up a business.
What is the impact of high gasoline prices on small
businesses such as this?
Mr. Innis. The impact of high gas prices or high
electricity prices are traumatic. It stifles economic mobility
for these entrepreneurs and these small businesses.
Just one quick statistic. The average family right now
spends 5 percent of their disposable income on energy costs.
Lower income, 20 percent. You fall below the poverty level, 50
percent of your income. That means if you are, if you fall
below the poverty level, before you wake up in the morning,
half your income is gone, is soaked by high energy prices. That
means that is income not available for healthcare, for
education, for food, for shelter, and forget entrepreneurship,
forget investing in this great idea that you might have as a
potential entrepreneur.
So it stifles economic mobility, and that is why we
consider this fight for affordable access, access to affordable
energy as a final frontier for the Civil Rights Revolution.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much. I yield back my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back, and I have three
things for the record. Without objection I would enter into the
record the analysis of the Tier 3 Sulfur Rule conducted by
Baker and O'Brien for the American Petroleum Institute, a
letter of support for the Gasoline Regulations Act from the
American Fuel & Petrochemicals Manufacturers, and a letter of
support for the Gasoline Regulations Act from the National
Biodiesel Board.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. I recognize Mr. Sarbanes for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
your testimony.
I wanted to start with Mr. Smorch. Just real quick, how is
your business doing? Is it doing OK?
Mr. Smorch. Yes. Our business is fine, and one of the
things that when you work for a cooperative, we share in our
profits with 100,000 farmers. That basically--our profits end
up going and are shared out in the rural areas of our marketing
area.
So for us we are sharing in profit with 100,000 farmers
that are going out, using that money to increase their
business.
Mr. Sarbanes. Well, I commend you for doing that, and I
just wanted to make the point that the upgrades that you needed
to implement in response to Tier 2 haven't prevented the
business from doing well and still having profits that it can
distribute, and I would expect you would be able to handle the
Tier 3 requirements as well.
I would like to ask Mr. Coleman, you suggested you were
offended at the notion that the people would have leases issued
to them, permits, and would not then take advantage of those to
produce on the land. Are you questioning the fact that there
are a substantial number of permits and leases that have been
issued in instances where production has not yet occurred?
Mr. Coleman. Congressman, I am offended at the
misrepresentation of the situation. Leases are out there. They
are working on these leases all the time. It is not possible to
drill them all at once because the process that you have to go
through to do the analysis of the lease, you get a lease, you
may do more analysis, more 3D seismic surveys, and you may--and
that takes a while to do. It takes money to finance that. It
takes the availability of seismic crews to be able to shoot
that seismic. You may have permits, but those may be in
litigation. There is a lot of different----
Mr. Sarbanes. Well, I sat through a lot of hearings in the
Natural Resources Committee. I have heard endless testimony on
this question, and I have gotten pretty comfortable with the
idea that there is substantial number of situations in which
there is nothing preventing the industry from developing,
producing, and so forth these leases that they have, and yet
they haven't proceeded forward.
So I am equally offended by the notion that these resources
would be available, typically given all the arguments that you
are making about how we have to increase supply and that the
industry would not be pursuing them.
But I am going to run out of time, so I need to turn to Dr.
Romm, who I want to thank for your testimony. You put together
a terrific set of bullet points about the six key points that
you wanted to see, and I wanted to first echo your observation
about the benefits the EPA regulations offer us in terms of
public health in particular. There is--I just lost it on my
iPad, but there is an article that I was referring to earlier
which showed great expectations in Maryland about the benefits
that would come from Tier 3 in terms of reducing these nitrogen
oxides, and the health benefits that would follow reducing smog
and so forth. And, you know, limiting the amount of sulfur that
is coming from the gas is one of the most effective ways to
impact the pollution out there.
But you also made two points that I thought were intriguing
given the purpose of the legislation that was put through here
with respect to the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. You noted
there is broad agreement among energy experts and economists
that increasing domestic oil production will have no noticeable
impact on U.S. gas prices for the foreseeable future. And then
you also indicated there is only one demonstrated way to reduce
gasoline prices in the short term, and that is release of oil
from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
And as I understand the legislation, the second piece that
we are discussing here today, it says that you can't go take
action with respect to the Strategic Petroleum Reserve until
you put more of these lands into production.
So essentially it is saying you can't go do the one thing
that will work until you go do the thing that won't work, which
doesn't make any sense to me, and I think really sort of
undermines the inherent logic of that particular legislation.
With that I yield back my time.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, and the
Chair recognizes himself for 5 minutes, and actually, the
legislation that is before us, the Strategic Energy Production
Act, doesn't tie the hands of the President whatsoever in order
to access or release energy from the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve. In fact, it is very clear that the President may
continue to make the decision under any circumstances that
comply with the law to release energy from the ``SPRO.'' So the
President can continue just as they always have as long as they
meet and comply with the conditions of the law that allow for
the ``SPRO'' release to occur in the first place.
But if that happens, and I believe what we have heard
today, what we have heard in other places, is that we have
heard another witness testify today----
Mr. Sarbanes. Mr. Chairman, you just recognized yourself
for an additional 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. I am sorry. We are doing another round.
Mr. Sarbanes. Oh. You want to do another round?
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. I am sorry. Yes.
Mr. Sarbanes. I didn't understand that. Yes. We can do
another round.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. Thank you. I had a conversation
with Mr. Rush, and that is why we switched out. I apologize for
that.
But anyway, so the conversations we have had all point to
the release of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve causing prices
to go down 4 cents a gallon for, you know, a maximum amount of
time of a week or so because of the infusion of supply into the
marketplace, and it makes sense then if you infuse the
marketplace with supply that supply then matters.
And so instead of a quick fix to supply by going into the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve, why don't we have a long-term
supply policy of increasing domestic production so that we can
actually reduce the price long term instead of just for a week
or so.
So I think the conversation about the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve, the very point of the conversation is that increasing
supply decreases price. So if we increase that supply, we will
decrease price, and that is long term as well as short term.
And with that being said, I wanted to get back to this
issue of leases on Federal lands. I know Mr. Abbey in the
previous panel had talked about the number of acres that are
under Federal leases that may or may not be under active
production, and, again, I refer to the letter that I entered
into the record from Mr. Steven Allred, the Assistant Secretary
of Lands and Minerals Management. This is a letter to Don
Young, ranking Republican member then in 2008, on the Committee
on Natural Resources. And the letter makes reference to the
fact that you have a lease doesn't mean that you have
production opportunity. It means that you may not have
production opportunities to go forward with, and the letter
specifically says that the existence of a lease does not
guarantee the discovery of or any particular quantity of oil
and gas.
Mr. Coleman, can you expand on that a little bit?
Mr. Coleman. Yes, Mr. Chairman. Leasing happens based on a
general analysis of the area. Then once you get a lease, you do
a more specific analysis of the specific leases that you have.
That is based on additional seismic surveys rather than
potentially a 2D seismic survey which would be used for--and
less expense seismic survey used to get the lease, and you do a
3D seismic survey to determine whether you, really looks like
you have something there to go after.
That takes a while as I explained in my previous statement.
And there are many other hoops that you have to jump through.
You have to do surveys with endangered species before you go
out and apply for permits. So many, many stages to go through.
This is not a static situation. Just because it is not
drilling doesn't mean there is not activity. To say as previous
testimony says, sitting on the leases, they are not active on
the leases, that is not the case.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Coleman, and Mr. Burkhard, in
your opinion would it be responsible to initiate a ``SPRO''
draw down right now in the face of what could be an extreme
supply emergency caused by Iran?
Mr. Burkhard. Given the potential for what could happen
and, again, the oil market is very tense, there is a very
limited cushion of spare capacity, the situation with Iran,
there is many scenarios that we could come up with which could
be startling to the oil market.
So the ``SPRO'' is intended as a response to a large supply
disruption, and we haven't had one yet.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Burkhard, and to your knowledge
has the ``SPRO'' been refilled, the amount of oil that was
taken out last year, has it been replaced?
Mr. Burkhard. It stands at 696 million barrels, which is
below what it was last year.
Mr. Shimkus. And are you aware of any plans to refill that
if there is access to the ``SPRO'' this summer?
Mr. Burkhard. I am not aware of any plans.
Mr. Shimkus. And so if there is an extreme supply emergency
caused by some kind of international conflict, right now there
is no plan to actually fill the ``SPRO'' back up to capacity.
In fact, Congress has approved the ``SPRO'' to go up to a
billion barrels, but it is almost 300 million below that. Ss it
currently stands it is even lower than capacity at this point.
Correct?
Mr. Burkhard. That is right.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Thank you, Mr. Burkhard, and the Chair now
recognizes Mr. Sarbanes for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before I ask a question
I ask unanimous consent to, without objection, to submit two
letters to the record. One is from the Consumers Union, the
other is from coalition environmental groups, both addressing
the legislation that we are looking at here.
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you. This debate over whether we are
using the lands that have already been leased we could probably
go on all night with it, but I just want to point out some
statistics here, again, reiterate that between fiscal year 2009
and fiscal year 2011, the Bureau of Land Management approved
almost 14,000 applications for permit to drill, but as of the
end of 2011, had yet to begin production on over 7,000 of them,
more than half that had been approved. They had yet to begin
production, and overall of the nearly 39 million acres that are
currently under lease to oil and gas companies, onshore only
about 13 million or less than one-third are actually in
production.
Now, I understand your point that you take a snapshot. It
may not capture what is going on behind the scenes, that
industry is making judgments about, you know, which leases are
the most important to pursue and what is involved in doing it,
so that, you know, it may be that if only one-third of the
acreage is in production at a given time that doesn't mean that
the other two-thirds is being completely ignored.
But to suggest that we are not making lands, public lands
available to the industry to pursue in the context of this idea
that have to increase supply, when two-thirds, you know, at
least one the surface appear not to be actively in production,
I think is sort of pushing the question here, and so, again, I
don't want to debate it because we are not going to solve it
here today, but I think it is a legitimate point that is being
made about the number of acres that are actually out there that
have yet to be put into production.
Why don't you respond? I don't want you to feel like you
are not getting a chance to respond to this because----
Mr. Coleman. Well, Congressman, I appreciate the
opportunity to----
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes.
Mr. Coleman [continuing]. Respond to your comments. This is
a very complicated question, you know. Just to give you--for
the BOM to give a statistic, OK, this is how much percentage of
acreage or how many permits are not being used, I assume they
didn't tell you how many of those permits are being litigated,
how--what other kind of problems there might be with some of
these areas.
These are not static. Litigation comes. It can come----
Mr. Sarbanes. I will tell you what because I am going to--I
will commit to you that I am going to make this a project of
mine to find out the answers to those questions that you are
raising.
Mr. Coleman. And there are other questions, too.
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes. I am sure there are, and we will make
sure we get them all, but I am betting that that won't fully
respond to the observation that these are not being utilized to
the extent they could at a time when we need to increase
production, and I am going to have to move on.
I just wanted to ask Mr. Schink if you could speak, you
talked about in your testimony but speak to the benefits, well,
two things. There is this specter raised that if we have the
Tier 3 regulations as we envision they might be because they
haven't actually been proposed yet, but if they went into the
fact that I would have this substantial impact on the price of
gas and you already spoke to how modest that would be, if at
all, if it got passed on at all, if you could reiterate that
and then also allude, again, to the benefits in terms of health
and protecting the health of the public.
Mr. Schink. Yes. I think the reliable estimates are that
the cost increase refiners will face is somewhere in the
neighborhood of a penny a gallon, and I think there is no
guarantee that that will necessarily get passed through,
because the refining industry is highly competitive, and it is,
you know, whether or not they are able to pass it on is not
clear, but even if they are, it is only a penny.
So I think that there has been a lot of skies falling going
on and based on numbers that are too high and not justified. I
think it is a small effect, if any.
But I think, and I am glad I ran out of time at the end,
but, you know, the benefits that come from this in the
environmental health area I think are probably some of the most
important. The purpose of the regulations are to improve health
and environment, and I think this will go a long way.
In the Mid-Atlantic area the emissions from motor vehicles
of nitrogen oxide are a high source of that, and this is a cost
effective way of trying to reduce it, and the benefits can be
very large. I think we both cited the same numbers or at least
one study, and that is one area.
The amount of emissions that are in the others are two or
three times that much, so the benefits of these other areas
could be two or three times the numbers for the Northeast
Region. So rather than $1.2 billion it could be $3, $4, $5
billion once we get through it. I haven't done the studies yet.
I am not saying that is the number, but I think it could be
very big.
And one of the benefits of this----
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired. If you could
wrap it up, please. Thank you.
Mr. Schink. OK. There are benefits because the health
benefits of people would be more productive, and this is also
very much pro industry. We have a very strong emission control
industry and auto industry. They have leadership in this, and
this will be a chance for them to, you know, to show their
stuff again and generate jobs and investment by moving to meet
these standards.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired. Dr. Schink,
thank you, and the Chair recognizes the chairman of the
subcommittee, Mr. Whitfield.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, and I would like to
welcome all the witnesses, and I am sorry that I had to leave
for a while, but we genuinely appreciate your being here, and
Mr. Meyers, let me ask you a question or two. I know you have
spent quite a bit of time over at EPA, and Ms. McCarthy
indicated that it was very difficult for them to analyze the
cumulative effect of the rules in our bill, and just from your
experience at EPA do you think that they have the necessary
tools to review the cumulative impact of the regulations that
we set out in our legislation?
Mr. Meyers. Well, I think in any economic analysis that you
do you need to make certain assumptions. So you are going to
have to make some assumptions that would be clear, but in
different ways that are currently done, you do sensitivity
analysis, you do different analysis, different proposals. They
will turn it proposals, so I don't see that as insurmountable.
You know, you could basically using current data
effectively do a range of proposals as to what you think they
might be and do that prospectively. Plus I think I note in the
discussion draft, there is a limitation saying it is not
required to go beyond available data.
So I think it is a doable option. It is just, you know,
whether they want to do it.
Mr. Whitfield. Did you hear her testimony today? Did you
hear the question and answers with Ms. McCarthy?
Mr. Meyers. I was here during the hearing. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. Was there anything else that she may have
made a comment about that you would like to commend on?
Mr. Meyers. Well, you know, I think there was basically
referenced in my oral I was just saying if Tier 3 is limited to
sulfur, that is one thing. There are other authorities in the
Clean Air Act regarding fuels that could also be--have an
effect on the marketplace in the next 5 years.
Secondly, although when we were talking about the changes
on the ozone standard and the authority on the ozone standard,
I make two observations. One, they are not inside the act. They
don't amend directly the standards saying provision that is
inside the Clean Air Act. So that still remains.
That being said, there are still other statutory law
talking about cost and feasibility. What I think I tried to
point out in my testimony is that EPA examines those issues now
in terms of cost of the standards, in terms of postural
limitations to scenarios, but what we have is a situation where
you are effectively saying to the Administrator, you know, put
blinders on. Don't look at the man behind the curtain and try
to make this decision.
There are other ways of doing it. The Safe Drinking Water
Act, for example, has two concepts in it; MCLG, which is a
goal, and then basically a limitation level. So they decide
what the goal is.
And the last thing I thought in the written testimony was
and that is where we actually referred in the written testimony
as a goal. They are not a goal. They are a standard, and I
think any State that puts together any Federal implementation
plan that is trying to implement a standard knows it is a
standard. So I think there is a way around it. What I think the
legislation is looking for is a balancing of factors and
allowing the Administrator to look at cost and feasibility.
It is a big change. I don't think there is any way of
getting around saying it is a big change, but it is something
that could be supportable by looking at other statutes.
Mr. Whitfield. We know we are getting ready to have some
forums on the Clean Air Act simply because it has not been
really reviewed in quite a while, and there have been some
unintended consequences with the Clean Air Act, and we are
looking forward to having these forums to have people come in
on all sides of the issue to determine is the Clean Air Act
working the way that it was really intended to work today, and
we will be getting into that later on.
Mr. Smorch, let me just ask one question. How many
refineries do you, are you involved in?
Mr. Smorch. CountryMark only owns and operates one
refinery.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Now, have you estimated the potential
impacts of the regulation on gas and diesel prices from EPA's
pending rules, and if so, what would the range of increases be?
Mr. Smorch. Earlier, you know, earlier I mentioned that we
were able to share our profits with our members who represent
100,000 farmers in our area, and I thought that was the point
of this regulation or the legislation, the Gasoline Regulations
Act, to go and look at regulation and how the accumulative
effect is going to affect our business.
My job is to try to preserve that that we can go and still
provide that and return to our member owners. When I look at
the range, and if you look in my written testimony, there is a
chart on page 11 that basically, depending on how regulation is
developed, it can be as low as 8 to 13 cents a gallon and as
high as 39 to 61 cents a gallon, depending on how all the
regulations stack on top of each other.
That is an extreme expense that we either have to absorb or
is going to have to get transferred to the consumer.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Innis, if I might ask you a few questions, one of the
concerns that I have with so many of the regulations that have
been proposed by the EPA is that coming from a district that
does not have great wealth, we have a few places that are
wealthier than others, but we have some really poor areas in
particular, I sense that there are actually public health
concerns with all these regulations, and I am wondering if you
can comment on that, and do you share that concern?
Mr. Innis. Well, I think what is very important for this
committee and others to recognize is that economic
sustainability for these communities that are affected by these
regulations should be part of the health consideration as well.
What high energy costs represent on poor people in particular
and working class Americans is the most vicious regressive
attacks. As I said before, when you have got to spend a
disproportionate amount of your income, be a small family or be
a small business, on high energy costs, that takes away income
that could be made available for other things, including
healthcare.
So I think what is very important, I think it is what--
there is no question that the regulations that have gone into
effect over the last several decades have helped the American
people. It has helped the environment, it has helped the health
of the American people.
The question is at what point is there diminishing returns.
At what point, I mean, do you attempt to achieve some type of
balance where you realize how much more regulation do you want
to put on a particular industry and what kind of negative
impact potentially could it have on the economy.
Mr. Griffith. And do I hear from your testimony and from
comments today that you believe we are at that point of
diminishing returns, at least in the current economic situation
that we are in?
Mr. Innis. Well, if you just look at the sulfur rule, and
forgive me for not knowing the technical designation, but I
believe that the bill or the regulation that was passed in
2000, and implemented in 2004, said you have to regulate
emissions, sulfur emissions up to 95 percent. I mean, how much
more regulation do you want to implement on top of that? And I
think that is the question that this committee has to ask. I
believe I have heard several cases that the EPA is not allowed
to look at economic impacts on communities, all American
communities. Forget lower-income communities but all
communities.
So I think this committee as a representative of the people
have the moral responsibility to look at those economic
impacts.
Mr. Whitfield. And I would agree with you on that. I worry
about folks on fixed incomes in my district having to heat to a
minimal level, one room in their house during the wintertime,
and when I asked the EPA if they took that into consideration
as part of their health--Lisa Jackson was here last year, and I
said, did you take that into consideration when you were
looking at the health concerns related to greenhouse gases, the
response was, well, we have programs to help those people.
Unfortunately, my folks tell me that while it may help the very
poorest of the poor, they don't have enough money in those
programs to help the working poor and some of the folks who are
on fixed income, that it does help the very poorest of the
poor, but there are a lot of folks who are not caught in that
safety net who then find themselves having to make sacrifices
or as you said, do we pay for healthcare or do we pay for heat.
And fortunately, we have had a very mild winter, but when you
don't have natural gas into every area of the district, when
you have a lot of folks using electricity, and those rates have
gone up substantially, and you have folks who are using oil to
heat their homes, this becomes a very serious health concern in
my opinion, and I appreciate that.
Last but not least and it is somewhat of a rhetorical
question because I already know the answer, but do you see
electric cars and other green energy alternatives a viable
option at least today for low-income households?
Mr. Innis. No. That dog is just not going to hunt in the
lower-income communities, but I would argue, though, that the
reason we really need to examine these regulations and the
impact that they have on all energies, be they renewable or
traditional sources of energy, is that even if you can afford
the Volt, the Volt to recharge the battery has to be plugged in
and has to use electricity. In today's Washington, I believe it
was today's Washington Post, it said that some recent EPA
regulations, I believe that were released yesterday----
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, sir.
Mr. Innis [continuing]. Are going to cause coal-powered
generated power plants, no new ones to be built for the next 10
years. This is while our largest economic competitor, China, is
building two per week. What kind of impact is that going to
have on electricity, which is going to have on the ability of
someone who can afford that Volt vehicle and needs to plug in
to recharge it, what kind of impact is that going to have on
the feasibility of this alternative vehicle?
Mr. Whitfield. And I think you are submitting that it would
have a negative impact, and I would completely agree with you.
Thank you.
Mr. Innis. I am.
Mr. Whitfield. I yield back my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back.
Thank you, again, for your time to be here today and
appreciate your testimony, and that concludes today's
committee.
[Whereupon, at 1:50 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[The report is available at http://www.theicct.org/sites/
default/files/publications/ICCT04--Tier3--Report--Final--v4--
All.pdf.]


