- WHERE THE JOBS ARE: EMPLOYMENT TRENDS AND ANALYSIS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

WHERE THE JOBS ARE: EMPLOYMENT TRENDS AND ANALYSIS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 15, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-115

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
80-106                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

7_____

Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade

MARY BONO MACK, California
Chairman
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       JIM MATHESON, Utah
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
PETE OLSON, Texas                    MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio)
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Mary Bono Mack, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. G.K. Butterfield, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina, opening statement.....................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................    14
Hon. Charles F. Bass, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New Hampshire, opening statement............................    14
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    15
Hon. Edolphus Towns, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New York, prepared statement................................    80

Witnesses

Harold L. Sirkin, Senior Partner and Managing Director, Boston
Consulting Group, Inc..........................................    16
Prepared statement...........................................    19
John Berlau, Director, Center for Investors and Entrepreneurs,
Competitive Enterprise Institute...............................    23
Prepared statement...........................................    25
John M. Abowd, Edmund Ezra Day Professor of Economics, Director
of Labor Dynamics Institute, School of Industrial and Labor
Relations, Cornell University..................................    31
Prepared statement...........................................    33
John Schmitt, Senior Economist, Center for Economic and Policy
Research.......................................................    51
Prepared statement...........................................    53

WHERE THE JOBS ARE: EMPLOYMENT TRENDS AND ANALYSIS

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:08 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mary Bono
Mack (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representative Bono Mack, Blackburn, Bass,
Harper, Lance, Cassidy, Guthrie, Olson, McKinley, Kinzinger,
Butterfield, Gonzalez, Towns, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Charlotte Baker, Press Secretary; Kirby
Howard, Legislative Clerk; Brian McCullough, Senior
Professional Staff Member, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade;
Gib Mullan, Chief Counsel, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade;
Shannon Weinberg, Counsel, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade;
Michelle Ash, Democratic Chief Counsel, Commerce,
Manufacturing, and Trade; and Will Wallace, Democratic Policy
Analyst.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Good morning. As the economy--as the
American economy struggles to regain its footing, we are going
to spend a great deal of time this year as a subcommittee
exploring both the obstacles and opportunities for job
creation. Today we will hear from a respected panel of experts
who will join us in a wide range of discussion about employment
trends in America and what factors are driving and shaping
these trends.
I also want to thank everyone here for your ongoing
commitment and efforts aimed at creating new economic
opportunities and new jobs for Americans.
And now the Chair recognizes herself for an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARY BONO MACK, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Last year when I began chairman of the subcommittee, I
encouraged all of my colleagues to join me in an effort to make
``Made in America'' matter again.
Well, today we are actually starting to see a renaissance
of sorts in manufacturing with companies like Caterpillar,
General Motors, Master Lock, Sauder Furniture, General
Electric, Ford, and many other companies all bringing jobs back
to the U.S. But is this trend sustainable, or will jobs return
to America in dribs and drabs instead of droves? This is the
first in a series of hearings we will hold this year looking
closely at ways to stimulate job creation and economic
opportunities.
I believe we have a window of opportunity, but it could
close on us quickly if we don't take action. China's
overwhelming manufacturing cost advantage over the U.S. is
shrinking fast. Within 5 years a Boston Consulting Group
analysis concludes that rising Chinese wages, higher U.S.
productivity, and weaker dollar increase Trans-Pacific shipping
costs and a variety of other factors will virtually close the
cost gap between the U.S. and China for many goods consumed in
North America.
This is our chance, in fact, the best chance we have had in
decades to make ``Made in America'' matter again. But to be
successful we must remove the roadblocks and barriers
businesses are facing today when it comes to job creation.
Embracing tax reform, regulatory reform, and tort reform are
just some of the things that Washington can do to help jump
start real job growth in America.
But here is the good news. The data issued by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics shows a recent uptick in monthly job creation
with the jobless rate declining to 8.3 percent. Now, here is
the bad news. To date we have had 36 straight months of
unemployment above 8 percent, the longest such streak since the
great depression. Today too many people are still suffering.
That is why we need to work closely together to create forward-
looking policies which will create economic growth in America,
not stifle it.
Clearly the lack of job opportunities remains a dark,
ominous cloud over Main Street, USA, with the average duration
of unemployment for job seekers lasting more than 40 weeks.
The bottom line: unemployment today remains stubbornly and
unacceptably high with nearly six million more unemployed
workers right now than there were just prior to the beginning
the recession in 2007.
Additionally, many economists suggest this number does not,
in fact, represent the true unemployment rate. After factoring
in a number of people who are under-employed, such as part-time
workers in search of full-time employment, and those who have
completely given up hope and exited the job market altogether,
the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports the effective
unemployment rate stands at a staggering 15.1 percent.
What is more, in comparison to recent recessions the rate
of our job recovery this time is much weaker, too. For
instance, at a comparable point in the recovery from the 1981,
to 1982, recession, the U.S. economy had added 6.2 million jobs
above pre-recession levels, a growth of 6.8 percent. Yet while
the U.S. economy added nearly two million jobs over the past
year, the employment level today reflects a net loss with
America's non-farm workforce approximately 4 percent below pre-
recession levels.
Today industry experts are divided and see things
differently when gazing into their crystal balls. The Boston
Consulting Group, which is testifying before us today, projects
the U.S. has the potential to add up to three million new jobs
in the manufacturing sector alone over the next decade. The
chief factor in support of his upbeat forecast is the
decreasing cost advantage of manufacturing in China due to the
rapid rise in Chinese wages.
On the other hand, a study recently conducted by the
Harvard Business School involving nearly 10,000 graduates
reveals a more pessimistic view, a sense that America has a
deepening, competitiveness problem. At the heart of this
viewpoint is a sense that our Nation is falling behind in
fostering an environment conductive to job creation.
The U.S. tax code, uncertain political environment, and
burdensome and sometimes unpredictable regulatory regime, a
decline in education system, and the lack of a skilled
workforce were cited as contributed factors to this dreary
assessment.
So as we examine the data and analyze the trends, is the
glass half full or half empty when it comes to our future?
While I am a big Clint Eastwood fan, I don't buy the idea that
it is halftime in America. I think we are in the fourth
quarter, we are still trailing in the game, and we need to
drive the length of the field to win. That will take great
teamwork and a smart game plan, but working together and for
the good of all Americans I know that we can do just that.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Bono Mack follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.002

Mrs. Bono Mack. And with that I now am handing the ball off
to the ranking member of our subcommittee, Mr. Butterfield of
North Carolina. Mr. Butterfield, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. G.K. BUTTERFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA

Mr. Butterfield. Thank you, Madam Chairman, for holding
today's hearing, which I understand is going to be the first of
several job-related hearings the subcommittee will hold this
year.
There is no more important issue to working Americans than
the ability to get and keep a job, provide for their families,
and ensure that when their children grow up, they can succeed,
too.
The causes of the most recent economic recession are many,
and they are certainly complex. While the solutions can also be
complex, one thing is certain; the creation of jobs benefits
the entire American economy, and in recent monthly employment
reports, we have begun to see the fruits of that labor, but
there is still much work to be done, and I agree with the chair
on that.
On day 1 of his administration, President Barack Obama
inherited an economy in the worst shape since the Great
Depression, a tremendous national debt was inherited, a
crippled manufacturing sector and auto industry, and he became
the Commander in Chief of not one but two wars in the Middle
East. Just 3 years ago, 3.6 million jobs had been lost and
businesses were eliminating more than 700,000 jobs each month.
By March of 2010 we reversed that course, and by the end of
2010 American businesses would go on to create more than one
million net jobs.
But with the national unemployment rate at 8.3, much more
still needs to be done to return us to full employment. One of
the keys to returning America to lasting prosperity is
education. However, the cost of college remains a major barrier
to those wanting to attend, and those barriers are particularly
acute for minority citizens. In a June, 2011 report by the
College Board, the cost of college was cited as one of the
biggest roadblocks to gaining an education. The report find
that in order to regain the Nation's once preeminent
international position in educational attainment, we must begin
to matriculate and graduate populations of American students
who traditionally have been underrepresented at the post-
secondary level. Only 26 percent of African-American men hold
at least an Associate's Degree, compared with almost 50 percent
for while males. Those numbers are reflected in current
employment statistics with 13.6 percent of African-Americans
unemployed compared to 7.4 percent of white citizens
unemployed.
I am encouraged by the President's 2013 budget proposal
which includes $8 billion, $8 billion for community colleges to
help train workers in high-growth industries. The President
proposed the creation of a new community college to career
fund. That would be administered by the Department of Labor and
Education. This effort could lead to over two million
unemployed Americans finding good-paying jobs, paying into the
system, and help to reduce the debt.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics report on employment for
2010 through 2020 projects that 20.5 million jobs will be
created over the course of the decade, many in industries
requiring significant education or training. It is, therefore,
imperative, Madam Chairman, that we invest significantly in
these areas in order to build the strong workforce necessary to
succeed in an increasing competitive global economy.
And so I say in--I look forward to hearing from today's
witnesses and thank each of you, each of the four of you, for
so graciously coming today and giving us your time. Thank you
very much. I look forward to the testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Butterfield follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.008

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank the gentleman, and in accordance with
committee rules, Chairman Upton has yielded his 5 minutes to
me, and I will yield the first 2 minutes to Ms. Blackburn of
Tennessee.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Welcome to our
guests, and I think we all welcome the series of hearings that
we are going to focus on jobs and job creation in the country,
and I want to start by talking about a time-tested formula that
always works.
Less regulation plus less taxation plus less ligation
equals more innovation and more job creation. It is a formula
that we need to grow this economy to give American businesses
and manufacturers the certainty that they need to expand and to
allow the U.S. to be successful when they compete
internationally.
If you go back and listen to some of the testimony that we
had in Mr. Guthrie's manufacturing briefing last week, you see
from these manufacturers how difficult it is to be globally
competitive and create jobs when the Obama administration
basically has their boot on the neck of innovation. We have
seen nothing but regulatory explosion from this administration.
Let me give you an example of this. Just last year the
Obama administration issued close to 4,000 burdensome and
restrictive new regulations. In 2011, the Federal Register
printed nearly 80,000 pages of new and additional regulations.
The Federal Government has over 291,000 regulatory agency
employees. Total cost to Federal regulations is estimated to be
at $1.75 trillion annually. Now, keep in mind that is about
twice the amount that the IRS collects in Federal income taxes.
Just this morning Gallop released a poll where an
overwhelming majority of small business owners were surveyed.
Eighty-five percent indicated that they are not looking, not
looking for new workers. Asked why, 48 percent of those that
were surveyed said they are not hiring due to concerns about
possible rising healthcare costs, the uncertainty of Obama
Care. Forty-six percent said they were worried about new
government regulations. With what we saw last year, is there
any wonder that they are worried about that?
I think this is one of the reasons that we also are seeing
our labor force participation rate at the lowest level that
they have been in recent memory. It is more than just
healthcare and regulations, and I am looking forward to our
witnesses and hearing what you have to say today.
I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentlelady. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Bass for 1 minute.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CHARLES F. BASS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE

Mr. Bass. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and thank you for
having this important hearing.
I think it is important over and above the very cogent
remarks of my friend from Tennessee to remember that it is
important for, in addition to low regulation, low taxes, it is
important to promote firstly the creation and growth of small
businesses in this country, and I know we will be dealing with
these issues on the floor of the House in the next couple of
weeks.
It is also very important not to close our borders to free
trade. In my State one out of every four jobs in New Hampshire
is directly related to our State's ability to export its
products beyond the borders of the United States. It is
important also not to fall prey to the idea that we can tax
companies into staying in the United States. What we can do is
hold business in the United States by making them competitive
and giving them the ability to trade their products across our
national borders.
And with that, Madam Chairman, I thank you for the hearing
and yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Bass.
The Chair is pleased to recognize Mr. Waxman for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you for holding
this hearing, and focusing attention on job creation and
economic growth, which should be our immediate priorities, and
I hope this hearing will contribute to this effort.
At last we are starting to see promising news on the jobs
front. The number of unemployed Americans has declined by more
than a million in the past 6 months. Yet too many Americans are
still out of work, and we must do everything we can to ensure
that the job numbers continue to improve.
The financial crisis that ripped through our economy in
2008 was the worst our country has faced since 1929. These two
events have much in common. Both were brought about by excesses
at Wall Street, both resulted from asset bubbles, both followed
periods of reckless deregulation.
My colleagues, Mr. Butterfield, indicated when President
Obama took office, he inherited an economy that had already
shed 3.6 million jobs and was losing 800,000 more each month.
In addition he faced paying for two wars that added billions to
our national debt.
No one action turned the economy around or can turn the
economy around, but efforts including the Recovery Act, the
rescue of General Motors and Chrysler, and billions of tax
dollars in tax relief to working Americans have helped.
Although factors such as what might go on in the European debt
crisis could change our trajectory, the U.S. economy is on the
right path. But we won't have a full recovery until unemployed
people can find work, and we know the economy is growing, and
that in economist terms the recession is over, but while this
may be lagging indicator, our focus has to be on getting people
to work.
I know some Republican members think we need severe cuts in
the Federal budget that put gapping holes in our safety net
while giving tax breaks to the wealthiest Americans. That is
the American equivalent of medieval bloodletting, a cure that
makes the disease worse. In the aftermath of a recession like
the one we have just experienced with 12.8 million Americans
still unemployed, more than 42 percent of them unemployed for
27 weeks or more, just leaving the economy alone and cutting
Federal spending is not an option.
I am pleased that we are going to have a conference
agreement on extending the payroll tax cut, paying for some
more unemployment benefits, and keeping the promise to the
seniors under Medicare that their doctors will be paid so they
can still--people can still get access to those physicians.
But the Congress needs to work with this administration on
long-term adjustments that must be made to ensure that the U.S.
economy is one that rewards fair play and hard work. The recent
budget by this administration for fiscal year 2013 shows its
commitment to restoring middle class security by attacking
wasteful spending and instead investing in education,
innovation, and infrastructure, the building blocks for an
economy that works for all Americans.
I appreciate this opportunity to make this statement, and I
yield whatever--I yield back my time. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Waxman.
Today we turn our attention to four very knowledgeable
witnesses joining us. Each of our witnesses has prepared an
opening statement that will be placed in the record. Each of
you will have 5 minutes to summarize that statement in your
remarks. Our panel today includes Harold Sirkin, Managing
Director of Boston Consulting Group; John Berlau, Director,
Center for Investors and Entrepreneurs at the Competitive
Enterprise Institute; John Abowd, Edmund Erza Day Professor of
Economics at Cornell University; and John Schmitt, Senior
Economist, Center for Economic and Policy Research.
Good morning, gentlemen, and thank you all for coming. You
will, again, be recognized for 5 minutes. To help you keep
tract of time there are the lights on the table in front of
you. When the light turns yellow, you will have 1 minute to
finish your remarks. Please remember to turn the microphone on
when you are ready to speak, and Mr. Sirkin, we are pleased to
recognize you for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF HAROLD L. SIRKIN, SENIOR PARTNER AND MANAGING
DIRECTOR, BOSTON CONSULTING GROUP, INC.; JOHN BERLAU, DIRECTOR,
CENTER FOR INVESTORS AND ENTREPRENEURS, COMPETITIVE ENTERPRISE
INSTITUTE; JOHN ABOWD, EDMUND EZRA DAY PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS,
DIRECTOR OF LABOR DYNAMICS INSTITUTE, SCHOOL OF INDUSTRIAL AND
LABOR RELATIONS, CORNELL UNIVERSITY; AND JOHN SCHMITT, SENIOR
ECONOMIST, CENTER FOR ECONOMIC AND POLICY RESEARCH

STATEMENT OF HAROLD L. SIRKIN

Mr. Sirkin. Chairman Bono Mack, Ranking Member Butterfield,
and other distinguished members of the subcommittee, good
morning, and thank you for the opportunity to testify on
``where the jobs are''.
While many negative comments have been made about the state
of U.S. manufacturing, I would like to paraphrase, Mark Twain
and say ``The death of U.S. manufacturing has been greatly
exaggerated.''
We have heard the pronouncements of the death of U.S.
manufacturing before. In the 1970s conventional wisdom said,
Japan, Inc., with its low cost cars, televisions, and other
manufactured goods was going to wipe out U.S. manufacturing.
Americans were going to be farmers and bankers. Children were
sent to schools to learn Japanese, the language of their new
masters.
But that didn't happen.
In the 1990s, conventional wisdom also said that the Asian
Tigers from Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan were
going to wipe out U.S. manufacturing. But that didn't happen
either.
And in the past decade, conventional wisdom has said the
China was going to wipe out U.S. manufacturing.
And that is not going to happen either.
Why? Our economy is designed to respond quickly to threats,
unlike any other economy in the world. We are not a country
that protects, we compete. Our internal competition is fierce.
Companies are forced to be competitive or die.
And the results of all this competition are breath taking.
The U.S. produces 2.5 times as much manufacturing value added
then we did in 1972, and we do this with 30 percent less labor.
We are among the most productive economies in the world, far
more productive than Germany and Japan.
Each time we are attacked, we don't give up. We respond, we
adapt, and we thrive. It is what we are as a Nation.
The threat from China is large, a nation of 1.3 billion
people with a non-democratically elected government that can
move fast and subsidize industries. And when China entered the
WTO in 2001, wages in China were only 58 cents per hour on
average. At that rate, outsourcing to China was a no-brainer
decision for companies in many industries.
But the economics of China are rapidly changing. Wages are
rising at about 15 to 20 percent a year. The Yuan, a controlled
currency has been rising at 4 percent per year and most
economists believe would be rising even faster if it wasn't
controlled. And while productivity in China is rising at 7
percent a year, an incredible pace for any economy, it is
swamped by wage and Yuan increases. And today the average U.S.
worker is 3.4 times as productive as the average Chinese
worker.
The tide is turning in favor of the U.S. China is just
getting more expensive. Companies that went to China for ultra-
cheap wages are finding it not so cheap, and they are beginning
to rethink their decisions.
We project that at sometime around 2015, we will reach a
tipping point for seven key categories of goods where the cost
to produce in China will be just 10 percent lower than in the
U.S.
While 10 percent is a very important difference to
companies, when you include all the costs associated with
producing in China to serve the U.S. market like the
transportation to ship goods, the inventory costs for the 2 to
3 months of shipping, the risk of obsolescence, and the
intellectual property capital theft and country risk, and just
being five to 7,000 miles away from the customer and not
understanding their needs, the 10 percent differential
disappears.
These seven categories include computers and electronics,
appliances and electrical equipment, transportation goods,
plastics and rubber, machinery, furniture and fabricated
metals. These account for two-thirds of the $300 billion we
import each year from China.
In June we estimated that the impact, including the
manufacturing multiplier, would be about two to three million
jobs over the decade.
Given what we have seen since June, we believe that our
estimate is conservative because we have seen far more re-
shoring from China already than our models predicted. Companies
like NCR, Ford, Coleman, Nat Labs, and many others have re-
shored. We are also seeing companies from Japan and Europe
recognizing that they can produce much more economically in the
U.S. for consumption in the U.S., coming to the U.S., and many
of them are using or are considering using the U.S. as an
export base; companies like Siemens for power turbines now
exporting to Saudi Arabia, Rolls-Royce for Jet engines that
will appear around the world, and Toyota are seeing the U.S. as
a low cost manufacturing location.
Once again our amazing economy is responding. Once again
manufacturing is growing in the U.S. because of our underlying
advantages. While this is just taking hold now, government
policy can help accelerate the trend. Whether it is providing
funds to train American workers, reforming our tax system, or
finding ways to level the playing field with our competitors,
our government can make a difference.
Creating more good paying jobs is something that all
Americans, whether they are Democrats, Republicans, or
Independents can agree on. We all need to work together to
create good jobs for our children and their children and ensure
that our economy remains strong for generations to come.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sirkin follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.012

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Sirkin.
Mr. Berlau, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN BERLAU

Mr. Berlau. Chairman Bono Mack, Ranking Member Butterfield,
and distinguished members of this subcommittee, thank you so
much for inviting me to testify on behalf of my organization,
the Competitive Enterprise Institute in this hearing asking the
important question of where the jobs are.
In answering this question I will focus not on particular
locations or industries but rather on the characteristics of
the firms that for the past few decades have been most
responsible for job creation. The respected Kauffman Foundation
in Kansas City, Missouri, has done some convincing research on
this question, and its findings have been embraced by many in
public policy, including President Obama's Council on Jobs and
Competitiveness.
And on a net basis the bulk of where the jobs are or have
been created is at young firms of all sizes as noted by the
President's Jobs Council report. Over the last 3 decades young
firms less than 5 years old have created 40 million new jobs.
Especially important among these companies are innovative,
high-growth firms referred to as gazelles that are found to
both double their revenues and employment every few years and
are found in every sector and every region.
Unfortunately, a series of adverse financial regulations
have stunted these young firms' growth by making it much more
difficult for them to access capital through means such as
launching an initial public offering.
Now, some of these rules like Dodd-Frank have been enacted
in the past couple of years, but others like the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act of 2002, were promulgated ironically in the supposedly
deregulatory era of the last decade.
As the President's Jobs Council notes of Sarbanes-Oxley and
other rules enacted in the aftermath of the Enron implosion,
well-intentioned regulations aimed at protecting the public
from the misrepresentations of a small number of large
companies have unintentionally placed significant burdens on
the large number of smaller companies.
This regulatory overhang explains part of the slower-than-
expected recovery. According to the Treasury Department's IPO
Task Force, the long-term decline in the number of IPOs, a
decline that began more than 5 years before the financial
crisis hits, may have cost the economy as many as 22 million
jobs not created over the past decade.
Now, the good news is there is an emerging bipartisan
consensus on scaling back some regulations that specifically
burden these firms. In fact, in one week in November this House
passed four bills with more than 400 votes for each measure to
ease regulatory barriers to accessing capital through online
social networking and general advertising to venture
capitalists and angel investors. But despite the near unanimous
support for these measures in this body, they still linger in
the U.S. Senate some 3 months later.
Now, also tomorrow your colleagues in the House Financial
Services Committee are slated to mark up H.R. 3606, the
Reopening American Capital Markets to Emerging Growth Companies
Act. This is a bill with widespread bipartisan support that is
designed to smooth the IPO process for these young firms by a
5-year exemption from some of the most onerous provisions of
Sarbanes-Oxley, Dodd-Frank, and other burdensome rules.
Given the ingenuity of American entrepreneurs and the
broad-mindedness of investors who fund them, clearing away
irrational regulations might very well lead to a future hearing
entitled, Where the Jobs Aren't. This House has passed an
essential access to capital bills, and the Senate needs to be
told to, in the phrasing of the President, pass these bills
now.
Thank you again for inviting me to testify, and I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Berlau follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.018

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much.
Dr. Abowd, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN M. ABOWD

Mr. Abowd. Chairman Bono Mack, Ranking Member Butterfield,
and members of the committee, thank you very much for this
opportunity.
I am an economist but I am also a teacher, and we don't do
our talks without pictures, so I brought some pictures, and we
are going to play them, and I am going to hope that--my goal is
to show you the dynamics of the American labor market work
through both the way in which people are hired and fired and
the way in which jobs are created and destroyed, and there are
some surprising patterns in these creations and destructions
and hiring and separations.
And I think the first chart that I want you to look at just
shows how the recession spread its way across the economy,
starting in 2004, quarter four. As the graph gets green, that
is good outcomes. As it gets brown, those are bad outcomes, and
this is the growth rate of jobs spread across the country.
So, as you can see, the growth rate of jobs basically went
south after the recession started. A more telling measure is
what we call stable jobs, which are jobs that last for a full
calendar quarter. This one shows that those also went south,
not when the recession started, but after the recession had
been underway for awhile. So there is 2005, mostly green, 2006
and 2007, there is the start of the recession. There is 2008,
the fourth quarter, when it really kicked in, 2009, 2010, it
hasn't come back very much.
What is happening? Well, what is happening is that
employers have basically stopped hiring into these stable jobs,
so I am going to skip figure three and go straight to figure
four here. This is the rate at which employers hire into these
long-term stable jobs, and as the economy progresses from 2004
through to 2010, you can see that here is the start of the
recession in 2007, and right here in 2009, that is--the
recession has already ended, and the hiring rate is at the
lowest level of any of these graphs that I have shown you, and
then in 2010, it has basically not come back very much. The
latest data that you can do for jobs that last 6 months is
basically 2010, quarter four. When the Census Bureau releases
the quarterly workforce indicators in a few months--in a few
more weeks, rather--for the current quarter, we will have 2011,
quarter one.
So it is important that employers have stopped hiring into
these stable jobs. In addition, the creation rate of these
stable jobs, which is the next figure, figure five, slowed
early on in the recession. That is the separation. I need
creations. Number five. That was right. Yes.
What the creations show is that the creation rate didn't
slow nearly as much as the accession rate. So jobs were being
created. They are being created pretty much continuously, but
they slow down during the recession, and they show down a lot
right after the recession and then come back up in 2010 a bit.
All right. So we have both that there is less hiring and
that there are fewer creations. On the flipside, there are also
more separations and more destructions, but not nearly as many
as you think. Most of the downturn in the economy wasn't
accomplished by massive amounts of job destruction and massive
amounts of separation. Basically the separation picture--green
is now good still, so it is the negative of the separation
rate.
The separation rate didn't tank as you can see from these
figures. Green is good, and the next figure seven, the
destruction rate didn't tank. Tank is the technical term for
head south. As you can see, it stays mostly green in the
economy, indicating that the jobs weren't being destroyed at
massive rates, these stable jobs, compared to the rates at
which the hiring went down.
So what went wrong? If you will skip straight to figure 10,
what has gone wrong is, the rate of movement in the economy,
the ability of workers to move around and to get to new jobs
where they are created, that has seriously gone south. It is at
very low rates, and generally that churning rate isn't
cyclical. So the fact that it has been so low in this recession
is a serious issue for the labor market to recover. As you can
see, it went very brown in 2009, quarter four, and it is still
very brown in 2010, quarter four. If the workers can't move
around to find the new jobs, and if the businesses can't adjust
to find the new jobs, this excess separation, this excess
reallocation, won't occur, and the biggest benefit of the
recession, to move high-valued labor into high-valued jobs,
doesn't happen.
So what I urge you to do is to promote policies that will
put the fluidity back into the labor market and to get this
churning rate going again.
Thank you very much for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Abowd follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.036

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, and Dr. Schmitt, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN SCHMITT

Mr. Schmitt. Good morning, Chairman Bono Mack, Ranking
Member Butterfield, and distinguished members of the
subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify this
morning. My name is John Schmitt, and I am a Senior Economist
at the Center for Economic and Policy Research, where I
specialize in labor market issues.
The labor market is in a stronger position today than at
any time in years. The unemployment rate is down to 8.3 percent
from a peak of 10 percent, and the private sector has created
3.5 million jobs since March, 2010. The American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act has played an important role in this
turnaround. According to the Congressional Budget Office, the
Recovery Act is responsible for saving or creating one to three
million jobs in 2010, 900,000 to 2.7 million jobs in 2011, and
400,000 to 1.1 million jobs this year.
As many economists said at the time, the biggest problem
with the Recovery Act was simply that it was not big enough to
address the size of the jobs crisis was face.
But despite some encouraging recent data, the labor market
is not out of the woods. There are 5.5 million fewer jobs today
than there were in 2007. After factoring in natural growth in
the labor force which increases about 900,000 potential workers
each month, the total jobs deficit stands at almost 10 million
today.
At the current pace of job growth about 200,000 jobs per
month, we won't close this gap and return to 2000, levels of
unemployment until 2019, 7 years from now. Even though
unemployment has been falling, it remains very high by
historical standards. Rates are particularly high for African-
American workers, almost 14 percent, and Latino workers, over
10 percent.
Meanwhile, measures of long-term unemployment, under
employment, and what my colleague Janelle Jones and I refer to
as long-term hardship, have barely improved at all in the
recovery. Sustained high unemployment has led some to suggest
that structural problems are the biggest barrier to reigniting
job growth. I believe this view is mistaken. The two most
commonly cited versions focus on extended unemployment benefits
or an alleged mismatch between skills workers have and the
skills employers need.
On unemployment benefits, the best evidence, however,
suggest that the unemployment insurance system increases the
average duration of unemployment by only a few weeks and
increases the overall unemployment rate by only a few tenths of
a percentage point. At the same time unemployment benefits also
inject income into communities, sustained consumer spending as
well as private sector employment.
One recent estimate, for example, suggested a $45 billion
extension in unemployment benefits for 2012 could create a half
a million jobs this year.
Nor is skills mismatch a serious structural barrier to
growth. Media counts sometimes feature employers who want to
expand but just can't find the right workers. The data,
however, provide little evidence that these anecdotal
experiences are widespread. If skilled workers were in short
supply, we would expect to see two things.
The first is an increase in the hours worked by current
workers, as employers use their existing workforce to meet
rising demand. In fact, average hours remain below their pre-
recession levels.
If skills were in short supply, we would also expect
employers to raise wages in order to attract the kinds of
workers they need. This is basic economics. When something is
in short supply, its price goes up. In fact, again, we see no
signs of rising wages in the economy.
The real barrier to faster job creation at the moment is a
lack of demand. The economy is currently operating
substantially below the limits set by the existing capital
stock and the available supply of labor. The binding constraint
is not the productive capacity of the economy but rather a lack
of demand in the economy for the goods and services that we are
already capable of producing.
What the economy needs are continued efforts to sustain and
restore demand. In the short and medium term government
deficits are an important tool for getting the economy back on
course. A large-scale jobs program built around repairing our
physical and social infrastructure would be ideal.
Short of that, however, three immediate measures would
help. First, an extension of the unemployment benefits, second,
an extension of the payroll tax cut, and third, increased
Federal support for State and local governments.
The labor market is looking brighter now than at any point
in years, but enormous challenges remain. The way forward
requires measures that will sustain and spur private sector
demand.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schmitt follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.049

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Dr. Schmitt. I thank you all
very much for your testimony and your expertise in these areas
that are interesting to us all, and I recognize myself now for
5 minutes of questioning.
And my first question is to Mr. Sirkin. You mentioned in
your written testimony seven categories of goods that will see
only a 10 percent pure cost advantage to manufacture in China.
Why aren't other categories such as apparel and footwear
subject to the same narrowing of the cost gap and therefore,
candidates to be manufactured in America?
Mr. Sirkin. Well, the goods that we are talking about
generally have a moderate amount of labor, so about 25 percent
labor involved. If you go to shoes and apparel and categories
like that, you are looking at more like 60, 70 percent labor.
So it may in the long term come back to the U.S. but over the
next decade it is unlikely for many of those to come back to
the U.S.
Mrs. Bono Mack. And would it surprise you that a
constituent in my district, Ms. Liat Talla, moved her
manufacturing from China to California to produce her brand of
apparel and blue jeans, even as she faces downward pricing
pressure? And is this atypical for what we might expect for the
apparel industry, or does it validate your analysis of the
improving costs and quality differential to make products in
the U.S.?
Mr. Sirkin. Well, we are going to see examples of many
different things happening, and on the premium side we are
going to see apparel companies potentially coming back to the
U.S. for reasons other than the exact costs but because of the
need to have a very short supply chain.
I am very pleased that she is trying this. I think it is a
wonderful thing for our country, and we need to have more
entrepreneurs doing this, and if she is producing at a premium
price, it will probably work quite well.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. I will pass along your words to
her.
Mr. Sirkin. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Your report concludes the cost gap of
manufacturing some goods in China will continue to narrow
significantly enough so that U.S. companies may be able to
manufacture their products in the U.S. again without loss of
comparative advantage.
I understand that this is based on rapidly increasing costs
in China including labor, land, and energy. What are the costs
affecting decision to manufacture in the U.S. that are prone to
increasing, and therefore, disrupting your analysis? For
example, additional regulatory costs or higher energy costs,
higher taxes.
Mr. Sirkin. Well, a lot of those costs are obviously going
to be decided on government policies, so it is hard to know
exactly what will the rising costs and what won't. We are
certainly in a time of uncertainty, but the ones that you
mentioned are clearly things that could affect it.
I think the biggest driver, though, is the Chinese wage
rate increases. The reality is they have over-stimulated their
economy, they have controlled their currency, and what they are
seeing is 15 to 20 percent wages growing a year, and that is
the real thing that is going to help us in many ways.
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. Thank you, and moving now to Mr.
Berlau, it sounds like the President's Job Council report has
some good, bipartisan ideas. Has the President or even Congress
for that matter followed any of them?
Mr. Berlau. Well, yes and no. One of the council reports
recommends approval of the Keystone Pipeline, for instance, the
President recently delayed that, but I would say on access to
capital, the President has endorsed the concept and the House
bills that has passed such as crowd funding which is making it
easier to raise funds on--through online social networks and
exempting from some of the SEC red tape and other things. I
think the specifically, the administration specifically
endorsed one of the bills and the concepts in some of the
others to make public offerings easier and similar items.
The issue is that is somewhat puzzling because these bills,
these four bills in November passed by more than 400 votes, one
of them literally had one vote against it, but they have been
lingering in the Senate for the past 3 months.
So, yes, we have seen progress in the House, we have seen
the President embrace some of the bills. You have got
Republicans and Democrats endorsing H.R. 3606 as far as the
onramp for public firms, exempting them from some of the
regulations from Sarbanes-Oxley and Dodd-Frank their first 5
years after being public, but just the Senate, these have just
been lingering and with no sign that they are going to be
brought to the floor.
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. Let me jump ahead because I have
only--less than 1 minute left. Several critics, including your
co-panelist, Dr. Schmitt, argue that the stimulus was not big
enough and that the government should consider a second round.
Would you like to speak to that? What is the opportunity
and costs associated with such an action?
Mr. Berlau. Yes. I think you are right that opportunity
cost is always an important economic concept. What could have
been done instead of the stimulus to bring back the economy
very rarely is the choice between the--taking one action and
doing nothing. The stimulus, the cost of the stimulus means
there is less money to do things that would be truly--bring
back a vibrant economy like cutting the, some of the highest
corporate tax rates in the world, and also there has been
interesting new data from the Mercatus Center of George Mason
University that 42 percent of the jobs in the Recovery Act were
actually for those already employed. So there are some doubts
on the stimulus effect.
Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. Thank you. My time has expired,
and I am pleased to recognize Mr. Butterfield for his 5 minutes
of questioning.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much. I want to spend just
a couple of minutes talking about regulatory uncertainty. Ms.
Blackburn in her opening remarks a few minutes ago opined that
employers aren't hiring because of regulatory uncertainty, and
certainly we on this side of the aisle agree that regulations
should be reviewed and streamlined where possible.
However, it is misleading to suggest that regulatory
uncertainty has anywhere near the same importance in explaining
unemployment as the massive affect of this recession an
aggregate demands. The Bureau of Labor Statistics data tracking
mass layouts from '07, to the present support this conclusion.
These data showed that among employers forced to undertake
massive layoffs less than one-half of 1 percent cited
government regulation or government intervention as the reason
for the layoffs.
By comparison, a plurality of anywhere between 29 and 39
percent of employers cited lack of demand, and there was no
statistical difference between employer responses during the
Bush administration and the present Obama administration.
Let m go to you, Dr. Schmitt. Could you please discuss the
extent to which you believe regulatory uncertainty has slowed
the recovery?
Mr. Schmitt. I think that regulatory uncertainty has
probably played a very little if any role at all in the current
situation we are facing. We can look at the historical
experience of the United States at the end of the 1990s, which
in some people's mind was a period of higher, greater levels of
regulation, regulatory uncertainty say than the 2000s, even up
until 2007. And that was a period of extremely rapid economic
growth and extremely rapid job growth, in fact, the highest
rate of job growth in the last 30 years.
By contrast, if we look at the recovery in 2001 from the
2001 recession, we saw private sector job growth was actually
slower than private sector job growth in the current recovery.
So I don't think that there is--there is certainly an
opportunity for anecdotal experiences of people running into
problems with particular pieces of legislation, regulation, but
there is not any evidence of some economic affect that
dominates.
Mr. Butterfield. All right. Let me try Mr. Sirkin on my
second question. In your testimony, sir, you mentioned that
companies from other countries are recognizing that they can
more efficiently produce for the U.S. market by locating their
manufacturing in the United States. Some are even using or
considering using the U.S. as an export base.
Number one, can you or any of the other witnesses discuss
what parts of the U.S. manufacturing sector are growing? For
example, is it in automobiles, electronics, or power turbines
or the like?
Mr. Sirkin?
Mr. Sirkin. Yes. We are seeing this. The U.S. is a very
productive Nation. We are about one-third more productive than
Japan, and about 25 percent more productive per worker than
Germany. So we are very productive.
At the same time, given the currency shifts, the U.S.
worker is earning lower wages than in those countries for
similar tenures. That makes the U.S. a very attractive place
for companies to produce. At the same time we are the world's
largest market, and so if I can manufacture in Japan or in
Germany, I may choose to manufacture for U.S. consumption in
the U.S. because it is fundamentally cheaper, and I will be
more competitive.
At the same time when I do that versus producing in, let us
say, Germany, I may have the opportunity to export, and if my
factory in the U.S. is more productive and lower costs, it
makes sense to be producing in the U.S. So we have an
opportunity here because of the economic conditions that we see
that will allow foreign companies to produce in the U.S., and
we welcome them. We do not discriminate against foreign
companies in our country, and at the same time in the example
of Siemens for Saudi Arabia, we are exporting, Siemens is
exporting six power turbines to Saudi Arabia to generate
electricity from natural gas.
Mr. Butterfield. When you say we are strong, does that
include assembly plants as well?
Mr. Sirkin. There are assembly plants and then there are,
of course, the supply chains that go with it because the U.S.
is also lower costs. Consider Rolls-Royce manufacturing jet
engine parts now in the United States because the cost of
manufacturing in the U.K. or in Europe is far higher.
Mr. Butterfield. Can you discuss whether these plants are
mostly assembling parts that are made overseas, or are the
parts being made more and more here in our country?
Mr. Sirkin. Well, as we saw in the automotive business when
the Japanese came to the U.S. and the Koreans are coming to the
U.S., what happens is originally they become assembly plants,
and then the suppliers come over because the economics are
better. It does take some time for that to develop, but we
expect to see that in all these other industries.
Mr. Butterfield. All right. Thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Butterfield.
The chair now recognizes Dr. Cassidy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cassidy. Dr. Abowd, I am also an academic, so my gosh,
it is just fun to see Power Points, you know what I am saying,
and those are very nice ones. I couldn't help but notice there
seemed to be a strong correlation with green wherever there--it
was something I would consider an energy State. Oklahoma, for
example, my State, Louisiana, if you take out Hurricane Katrina
effect, Texas going up that sort of belt in the Midwest.
So can you comment upon the impact of development of
natural, of our domestic oil and gas resources and its affect
upon the job market, particularly for those blue collar workers
who have had the hardest time with employment?
Mr. Abowd. Certainly. I would be happy to comment on that.
We won't play the slides again. The point that I was trying to
make and I think the point that you picked up with the slides
is that the geographic variability in the way the recession
moved through the economy and the way the recovery is moving
through the economy is very striking, and so you could see that
at the start there was already much more activity in the south
and over on the southwest and up in a particular part of the
Atlantic Coast. And in the north and particularly in the north
and Midwest there wasn't, and those are long-term kinds of
patterns in the economy.
So when there is a vibrant labor market, what happens is
that the job creations are where the economic profit
opportunities are highest, and those have to be allowed to play
out, and the workers have to be able to get to those jobs, the
businesses have to be able to----
Mr. Cassidy. So I understand your point regarding churning.
My point, though, the geographic distribution seemed to be
strongly related to where there is domestic oil and gas
production. So, for example, both Louisiana, Oklahoma, Texas
had the good green most of the time, and going up through
Colorado, North Dakota.
Is that my imagination, or is that true?
Mr. Abowd. It is not your imagination, but I am not willing
to attribute it to natural resource production, although that
is certainly a possible cause. I am very reluctant to use the
colors to do a specific analysis.
Mr. Cassidy. Maybe associated by not causal.
Mr. Abowd. Things like that are----
Mr. Cassidy. Mr. Schmitt, your thing is hidden by the--you
may be a doctor. I can't tell because of the water pitcher. I
apologize.
I am struck that we have a problem with blue collar
unemployment, and yet the President continues to speak about
hiring more teachers and solar engineers, and you frankly kind
of echoed that. It seems a strange way to hire blue collar
workers is to put more money into programs which basically you
have to have a Ph.D. sometimes in order to qualify for.
So there seems to be a mismatch there. How would you
explain, how would you defend, if you will, more Solyndras when
our problem is blue collar workers?
Mr. Schmitt. I think that a key issue in terms of
addressing the problems of blue collar workers is to try and
get at the kind of infrastructure kinds of issues. I think that
is where we have an----
Mr. Cassidy. And you define infrastructure as?
Mr. Schmitt. Infrastructure, transportation, improving----
Mr. Cassidy. But you specifically talk about, you know,
putting more money into public service type employees, which,
again, I don't think of those as the people who are currently
being whacked by the recession.
Mr. Schmitt. I think that the impact of the recession has
been pretty broad, and I think, therefore, we need to use a
kind of----
Mr. Cassidy. But I am correct when I say the blue collar
workers, particularly non-college educated men, have been
disproportionately affected, whereas those with Bachelors and
upwards are frankly doing OK.
Mr. Schmitt. I wouldn't say they are doing OK, but they
have fared better in the recession than----
Mr. Cassidy. So, again, the prescription that I am asking,
and I don't mean to speak with compressed speech, but I have
limited time, if the prescription the President continues to
offer is more kind of, you know, OK, let us go to somebody who
makes solar panels and hires a bunch of Ph.D.s and engineers,
or let us hire more teachers or keep them employed--that seems
a mismatch, if you will, between those who are
disproportionately affected by this recession.
Mr. Schmitt. I think that on the other hand it is also the
case that there is an emphasis on trying to deal with the
physical infrastructure, whether it is roads and public
transportation or improving the physical infrastructure of our
schools, where I think there is a big opportunity for blue
collar workers.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, you mentioned also in your testimony that
the mean hours worked by employees and the mean wages remain
stable. Is that an average across the economy, or is that
industry specific? Because if you look at Petra Chemical where
there has been a huge expansion and they tell me that they
don't have enough trained workers for it, that if you looked at
that, do you see within that particular industry that there has
been an increase in the number of hours per worker or wage
growth?
Mr. Schmitt. I don't have access to the specific statistics
at Petra Chemicals, but what I would say is the numbers that I
did talk about are averages across the country, and I don't
doubt that there could be circumstances where there are some
industries that are facing difficulties.
My question would be do we see those same firms offering
more money or installing training systems to try and get the
workers that are.
Mr. Cassidy. And that is my question, too, because if we
are trying to find solutions for blue collar unemployment, we
should look where they are being employed, and, again, frankly
I think more public service dollars is kind of a mismatch.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much, Dr. Cassidy.
The chair is now pleased to recognize my friend from Texas,
Mr. Gonzalez, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Madam Chair, thank you very much, and I want
to thank the witnesses for their testimony this morning.
Dr.--is it Abowd?
Mr. Abowd. Abowd.
Mr. Gonzalez. Abowd. I am going to kind of--what I heard
you say, and if I am wrong, you can correct me, but in essence
jobs go where profits can be made. That is kind of a general
theory, isn't it, and it makes sense, it is practical, and so
on. Jobs are created where a profit can be made.
I mean, you are not going to create a job where you can't
open the door to your business in the morning unless a profit
is made. I think that is just--what I am getting at is I think
in my own opinion, and I want you all to comment on this
because I am going to go and read a couple of comments made by
a couple individuals that you have heard of, I think there is
something--the very nature of our economy is in trouble and has
been transformed over a number of years, and we are not going
to be undoing it in the very short term, and it is time for us
to get very, very serious about undoing it.
And this is what I am getting at. This is David Stockman
back in 2010. ``The third ominous change in the American
economy has been the vast expansion of our financial sector.
The combined assets of conventional banks and the so-called
shadow banking system, including investment banks and finance
companies, grew from a mere $500 billion in 1970, to $30
trillion in September, 2008.'' That is David Stockman.
Now, some figures--our GDP a year and a half ago or so, let
us say was at about $14.601 trillion. The total assets of the
Bank of America, JP Morgan Case, Citigroup, Wells Fargo,
Goldman Sachs, and Morgan Stanley stood at $8.977 trillion or
61.49 percent of GDP.
In the 1970s and 1980s financial firms comprised 15 percent
of all corporate profits. By 2006, that had risen to 33
percent. I believe we have just been investing in money. We had
been investing in financial instruments and not really
investing in that which truly creates jobs in this country.
Now, some commentators would agree with this, and now
former Fed Chief Paul Volcker, ``I have found little evidence
the vast amounts of innovation in financial markets have had a
visible affect on the productivity of the economy.''
The question is, Where are we directing our dollars, our
investments, whether it is my 401, whether it is a pension and
retirement fund? I don't think we are investing it in that
which really produces jobs in this country. What we got
addicted to was making money off of money, and it has not
served us well, but I am not sure that we have moved forward in
trying to remedy some of this in the past 2 years. Attempts
have been made.
So I am going to start with just Dr. Abowd, where are we
today with financial markets and the tremendous assets that
they represent, and do they truly create the jobs that all four
of you have been discussing and which members of Congress
obviously have a great attention to be paid to through policy
and legislation. And if you will just give me about 1 minute in
the remainder of the time to Dr. Schmitt to--for his comments.
Mr. Abowd. Thank you for the question. I will not take very
long with my answer. I did prepare a slide on the financial
sector that shows that it was also one of the sectors that
suffered stable job losses in the recession but not nearly as
badly as the construction sector, which basically is the bubble
that was inflated by the financial services industry.
I fundamentally agree with you that the growth of the
financial services industry wasn't entirely related to
productive profit opportunities in that sector. It happened,
and it happened for reasons, but it is going to take economists
awhile to sort out, but other sectors of the economy like
manufacturing and construction and trade also have to come back
and jobs have to be created in those places in all conditions,
recessions and booms. There are jobs being created in all the
sectors and jobs being destroyed in all the sectors, and that
removement of workers is what allows businesses that have
profitable opportunities to grow and flourish.
The fact that over the course of 2 decades the financial
services industry was pumped up by other factors is related but
not part of what I was talking about.
Mr. Gonzalez. Dr. Schmitt, just a few seconds.
Mr. Schmitt. The financial sector, I think, is a huge part
of the problem. I think if it was a lot smaller, there would be
more possibility for productive economic investment because we
are currently diverting resources that could be going elsewhere
into that sector.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you very much.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman, and the chair
recognizes Mr. Guthrie for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. Over here on the end.
Dr. Schmitt, you said--I just caught something you said
that unemployment, you said would increase--unemployment
insurance's evidence is only increased by a few tenths. And
that is not significant, the few tenths?
Mr. Schmitt. Well, if you are in those few tenths, it is
not very--it is obviously significant to you, but a few tenths
of a percent on 10 percent, which is where we stood at the
peak, is relatively small, and that is the negative effect on
employment, but as I also emphasized, the fact that we are
giving everybody or about 75 percent, 70, 75 percent of
unemployed people benefits means that we are actually
sustaining jobs in the communities where those unemployed
people are because we are giving them income to bridge the gap.
Mr. Guthrie. My question, it seems there has been an
agreement to extend those, but so I guess my question was if
unemployment increases just a few tenths, and that is not
significant, then for the last 3 or 4 months we have seen
unemployment drop just a few tenths, which, you know, we are
glad to see we are going in the right direction. Is that
insignificant? I mean, if you are saying increasing it a few
tenths isn't important, then decreasing it a few tenths, is
that insubstantial?
Mr. Schmitt. No. As I said, I think we have made some
progress since August. The unemployment rate has gone from 9.1
to 8.3, which is more than a few tenths than what I am saying
right now, but I also emphasize we are not out of the woods. I
think we have a long way to go before we get back to anything
approaching full employment.
Mr. Guthrie. Yes. That is what we are all here to talk
about. We want people to get back to work, and so one of the
things that I saw, I saw this a few weeks ago, I guess, is that
if you took the growth rate coming--my father lost his job in
the 1981-82 recession, so that is one that I remember, and
Japan and Toyota--my dad worked for Ford--so those were our
experiences. And so I have heard that if we had the same growth
rate in year 3 or year 4, I think we are in year 4 now, but
year 3 of the--same growth rate of year 3 of the '84, recession
or '82, recession now, that we would have over 10 million or
somebody even said 15 million new jobs. But even cut that by
two-thirds because that seems a big stretch, we would be at
full employment if we came out of the--if we were 3 years into
the recession with the same growth rate of the '82, recession,
we would have full employment today? Has anybody seen that or
agree with that or dispute that?
Mr. Berlau. If I may, there is some evidence that IPOs are
actually counter-cyclical, that when the debt market is tight
as it was in the early '90s recession with the S & L collapse,
IPOs actually increased. There were actually more than 300 IPOs
in 1991, and that is where you had companies that were
relatively small like Starbuck's and Cisco Systems, unlike the
big IPOs today that launch, they were able to utilize that
process when they couldn't get gas, when they couldn't get bank
loans, and that is what has been credited with helping the--
actually helping laying--going from a recession in the '90s to
the boom, but now a lot of these options are foreclosed because
of the Sarbanes-Oxley auditing mandates and Dodd-Frank, whereas
80 percent of the IPOs in the '90s were with companies with
market evaluations below 50 million. Today only 20 percent are.
Mr. Guthrie. And I want to get to a point we are always
getting at with, though, is as you moved out of the recession
in the early '80s, and then Japan went into theirs on the '90s,
and one of my concerns, I was a freshman here when we started
discussing the stimulus bill, it appeared to be a lot of the
same prescription that Japan followed in the '90s, which a lot
of people say Japan in the '90s had the lost decade.
So that was the concern. Are we at a point where we--the
American economy has been so adaptive. That has been our
brilliance. I mean, in the 1980s my father lost his job, we
were thinking Ford is out and never going to exist like it did
before, and here we are, you know, GM is now the number one
selling car again in the world, which is great.
But the question is we haven't recovered that quickly, and
are we putting in prescriptions and policy regulations and
borrowing 40 cents of every dollar to have a school teacher in
a classroom? Is that hurting our recovery?
I know that we are moving in the right direction, but would
we move far greater if we hadn't have--if we had gone down the
path that they did in the early '80s? I mean, that is really my
question.
And anybody is welcome to--but I do want to--let me stop at
that, because I do want Dr. Abowd, you said if we change
fluidity policies for labor, we are--what policies would you
prescribe, and I only have 40 seconds. I am sorry, but that is
interesting to me.
Mr. Abowd. I won't go through a litany list of them but one
of the big differences now from the recessions you were citing
is that it happened in--with a housing price bubble that
collapsed, and that definitely impaired the geographic mobility
of workers and also impaired the geographic mobility of new
businesses because they were caught up in some of the same
financing arrangements.
So that is a big difference, and that is something that
takes more than a few quarters to cure because of how much lost
value there was. So that is----
Mr. Guthrie. So a manager in Atlanta can't move to Fruit of
the Loom in Bowling Green for a job available because they are
underwater in their house in Atlanta. Is that where you are--
that kind of limits their mobility?
Mr. Abowd. That is the kind of thing I am talking about.
Yes.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Thanks. I am sorry. I wish I had more
time. I will yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes Mr. Towns for 5 minutes.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Appreciate you
having this discussion.
In the State of the Union, Mr. Schmitt, the President
described a blueprint to put Americans back to work, and of
course, when I go back to my district in Brooklyn, New York,
people are saying that Congress isn't moving fast enough to
create jobs, and I couldn't agree more.
If we follow your full policy recommendations, what
immediate impact do you think we would see in the job market?
Mr. Schmitt. I think the immediate impact will be to
continue to see some positive job growth in the private sector
that could see a continuation in the decline in the
unemployment rate nationally. But as I emphasized, if we do
just the things that I was proposing this morning, I think we
are still facing a very long road to recovery. We need to do
more than just those short-term measures.
On the other hand, I did mention in my written testimony,
not this morning when I spoke, that one thing we could do that
could have a long-term big impact would be to get the value of
the dollar at a more competitive level, which would help to
expand the manufacturing sector by making it more competitive.
Mr. Towns. Right. Thank you. If you panelists talked about
the importance of having a stable job and its impact on
consumption and demand, when I go back home, people talk to me
about finding a stable job. Traditionally jobs in manufacturing
have been very, very stable.
Mr. Sirkin, can you go into a little more detail about
reassuring and things Congress can do to make it more
attractive for manufacturers thinking about moving their
operation, you know, to other places?
Mr. Sirkin. Well, I think there are many things that we can
do to make it easier for companies to do that. The first is
awareness. One of the problems we have is that companies assume
that it is cheaper to manufacture in China than in the U.S. I
remember sitting in a boardroom one day with a company that had
about 80 percent of its manufacturing in China, a U.S. company,
and they were similarly just putting another plant in China
because that is what is logical to them. We forced the question
on the table, and their decision changed.
So the most important thing that we can do is get awareness
that, in fact, the economics of China are changing and that you
should be looking at it very carefully, and they shouldn't just
do the math on what it looks like today but look 3 or 4 years
in the future and take a look at it because you will find that
if you have a plant, it is going to last for 25 to 30 years.
And so making a decision today to put a plant in the ground in
China may not be the most economic decision 5 years out.
So companies need to be just more aware that the U.S. is a
reasonable option for the manufacture of many goods. In 2001,
the Chinese worker was making 58 cents an hour. It was a very
simple decision. It is getting more complicated now, and the
tide is turning back towards the U.S.
So if I have one thing that I could ask people to do is to
just build that awareness. We are a good place to manufacture.
It is why foreign companies are coming to the U.S. as well to
manufacture for U.S. consumption because it is more expensive
where they are.
Mr. Towns. All right.
Mr. Berlau. If I may.
Mr. Towns. Yes. Sure. Go ahead.
Mr. Berlau. The President's Job Council report and the
Kauffman Foundation have stated the findings that in some cases
100 percent of net job growth are created by firms 1 to 5 years
old. Firms older than 5 years old have eliminated more jobs
than they have created, and 90 percent of this job growth
occurs after an IPO. The problem is there aren't as many IPOs
for companies that are emerging growth companies, and you had
sponsored some of the early bills to ease some of the burdens
on smaller companies from Sarbanes-Oxley 404. Some of the IPOs
we are getting now are already more than market capital of $1
billion after the growth has occurred, so they need more--every
dollar a company can raise for an IPO is that less that they
have to borrow or beg from a bank and more that they can devote
to creating jobs and the companies most likely to create jobs.
Mr. Towns. Madam Chair, I see my time is running out, but I
would like maybe to ask in writing if you would just sort of
make a suggestion, a recommendation as what members of Congress
might be able to do and put it in writing and give it back to
us. I would like to just see that in writing as to what you
suggest that Members of Congress should do. Other words, let us
switch roles. Make me the economist and you a Member of
Congress.
Mr. Berlau. Glad to.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Be careful what you wish for, Mr. Towns.
The chair is happy to recognize Mr. McKinley for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Schmitt, I am just a little astounded with one of the
comments you made. I would like you to maybe expound a little
bit on it before I cut you off, but you said that the
uncertainty is really not a factor. I really wish if you could
provide us the information that supports that, some statistics,
because I am just looking--I just in scribbling here list some
of the companies that were in possibly within 20 miles of my
home. They are no longer. Banner Fibreboard, Fostoria, Viking,
Allied North, Solvay, Wheeling Pitt, Weirton Steel, Follansbee
Steel, Purina. There are just numbers of companies that when we
talk to them, they say it is absolutely the uncertainty that
they are facing.
We talked about a bill we passed out of here earlier this
year, that the Veritis Group said that without that bill
because of the intrusion of the governmental, the EPA, it was
going to cost 316,000 jobs. It was the Coal Combustion Residual
Bill, the Fly Ash Bill, because the Federal Government stepped
in and now they are threatening, they have got a stigma
attached to all the fly ash that is being produced around
America, and they want to call it a hazardous material.
So there is a stigma and uncertainly that is swirling
around all 316,000 jobs to be lost because of this. The
aluminum industry just last week, we had a meeting with them,
and they told us that it is uncertainty in their utility bills
that is causing them not to reopen and operate some of their
facilities. They want to know what is going to be our utility
costs.
We had the EPA back in February of last year pull a water
permit from an existing coal mine in West Virginia 4 years
after it had been in operation. I have never heard of that. It
is unprecedented. It is now in Federal court, and the courts
are challenging that significantly whether or not that
intrusion into the process after a permit has been granted, all
the hearings were held, 4 years operation, they had the right
to step in and pull a permit and shut a company down?
Yet you sit here and say uncertainty is not a problem in
America. I am not hearing that in my district.
Mr. Schmitt. I think it is important to say, to ascertain
what kinds of uncertainty, whether you are talking about
regulatory uncertainty or whether you are talking about all the
forms of uncertainty like exchange rate shifts, changes in the
interest rate, how your competitors are going to act relative
to you.
Mr. McKinley. Let me just--what your competitors are
acting, how they are going to--China. OK. Here we had for the
San Francisco bridge, they didn't use American steel, and it
was so flawed that we had to send inspectors over to retool,
remake a lot of that steel, yet because it was the lowest
price, they are able to buy that from China. Our turbines for
our wind turbines are coming from overseas. We have got even
the Keystone Pipeline, from what I am hearing from testimony,
that wasn't even manufactured--the steel didn't come from
America.
What are we doing then about this uncertainty? If you see
that this competition is coming in unfairly, and I mean that
word, unfair competition coming in, how does that create
certainty in the American manufacturer?
Mr. Schmitt. I certainly share your concern that the trade
agreements that we have agreed to and signed and ratified over
the last few decades have created a lot of problems for U.S.
manufacturers and for the particular cases that you are talking
about.
But I think the other issue to think about is that to a
certain degree that is a working the ref involved in these
kinds of conversations. Any individual firm is going to be
talking to the government officials that they deal with and
saying, look. We are having trouble here. You got to help us
out. When we look at the, not anecdotal data, but when we look
at the evidence, when we look at the broader data, we see, for
example, very rapid job creation in the '90s, and the other
issue is right now corporate profits are at record highs. So
the activity that firms are currently undertaking is actually
giving a very high return to those companies.
Perhaps uncertainty is hanging over business's future
decisions, but my point is just that the uncertainty around
whether there are going to be customers or not far outweighs
all of the other concerns at the moment.
Mr. McKinley. I am running out of time, but I have got a
lot so all I am asking is, please, if you could submit where in
God's name you came up with the idea that uncertainty is not a
problem to manufacturers, I would sure like to read it.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Berlau. I have an answer on regulatory uncertainty if
another panelist wants to ask the question.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. I, too, echo Mr. McKinley's
sentiments, too. I am confused myself about your answer, but I
am happy to recognize Mr. Olson now for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair for her continuing leadership
and calling this hearing. I would also like to thank our
witnesses for coming today and giving us your time and your
expertise.
We are talking about the current obstacles that stand in
the way of job creation and discussing the kinds of policies
that will help create new jobs right here in America. That is
what we all want to do.
Doubling down on the failed policies of wasteful spending
has made our economy worse. It is not the answer, and yet this
is exactly what our President is proposing in his 2013, budget.
I have said this in the past, and I will say it again, I
will say it until I probably meet Saint Peter, I have a three-
word solution to help fix this Nation's job performance.
American energy development. American energy development. That
is where the jobs are.
So I would like to start my questions today by asking all
the witnesses for their view on what they believe to be the
main obstacles for the creation of American energy jobs. And
specifically, is there one, one Federal agency or specific
regulations that in your views are hindering job creation in
the energy sector? Or to put it another way that my folks back
home can understand, which stallion do we need to break so we
can pull the wagon instead of pulling the wagon apart?
I will start with you on the end, Mr. Sirkin.
Mr. Sirkin. Sure. Well, I agree with you that American
energy development is very important for our economy. Being
more energy independent has lots of advantages both from the
economy standpoint and from a national security standpoint.
I have not looked at, you know, what are the barriers to
making this happen in our country. The economics of it are
quite powerful given oil prices that are now looking at least
over $110 a barrel, and obviously the natural gas reserves that
we now have 100 years worth is a very important aspect of
attracting businesses to this country because we have some very
low-cost natural gas, and that is bringing the chemical
companies who thought they would never come back to the U.S.
coming back to the U.S.
So there are many good things, but what the barrier is,
that is not something I have studied.
Mr. Olson. Thank you for that question. Just to follow on
those comments, though, I actually went out to the Eagle Ford
Shale Plate in my home State of Texas this past weekend, and
just to show you how not only jobs are being created there, but
what a tremendous impact it has on the local community. One of
our escorts was--they have a couple wells in Zapata County,
which is a relatively economically-depressed county in my home
State.
The gentleman told us that since they have been--the past 2
years they have been operating there, the sales tax revenue has
gone up 3,000 percent. The property tax revenue, which is what
we use to pay for our schools, has gone up 4,000 percent.
So, again, energy is not just about jobs. It is about
quality of life. And continuing on with, let us see, number
two, Mr. Berlau, again, the question, What agency of the
Federal Government is the biggest hindrance?
Mr. Berlau. Yes. Congressman Olson, thank you. Regulatory
uncertainty is a factor in the energy industry and many other
industries. My fellow witness had talked about surveys, firms
laying off workers, I think as important are the surveys that
much research has been on firms factors in whether or not firms
expand, whether they launch IPOs, and there you can see that
regulatory uncertainty is a big factor. Eighty percent of CEOs
of smaller companies said they were--some of their biggest
concerns about the implications of going public were the costs
and risks of Sarbanes-Oxley and other compliance requirements.
And in the energy sector, yes, you have the looming
regulations on fracking, on the delays in the Keystone
Pipeline, but I think in all energy businesses and in energy
sectors from Royal Exploration to green energy, its access to
capital that they can't launch, and it takes so long that you
have to be as big as Facebook to launch an IPO, and actually if
you simplify some of these regulations, it would be easier both
for companies in the green energy sector and into the
traditional energy sectors to get the capitals they need.
Mr. Olson. So it sounds like we need to form the tax codes
and get our sky-high corporate tax rates down.
Mr. Berlau. Yes, and our sky-high regulations.
Mr. Olson. OK. I am sorry. Mr. Abowd. Abowd. I apologize. I
got it written down there Abowd. My apologies, sir.
Mr. Abowd. Well, I think the long-term prospects are best
if we fix the energy distribution network so that more
electricity can be delivered, especially for transportation
purposes, stimulating growth in the production of alternative-
powered vehicles, which are a huge growth potential. They are
basically being held down by no standardized way to distribute
the electricity to them. That I think would be the--where I
would look for----
Mr. Olson. OK, and finally, Mr. Schmitt, and I am out of
time here, sir, so as fast, as quickly as possible.
Mr. Schmitt. I am a labor----
Mrs. Bono Mack. Please turn your microphone on.
Mr. Schmitt. I am a labor economist, and I don't follow the
energy sector, so maybe I will just take a pass.
Mr. Olson. OK. I appreciate that, and kind of following up
on some of the questions by our chairwoman earlier about
mentioning the bipartisan jobs that have been passed by the
House of Representatives and are sitting over there wallowing
in the United States Senate, I have got an updated list here,
just hot off the press, and it is from the Republican
Conference this morning, and I am happy to give you guys a copy
of this. I am sure our Conference would be happy to give it to
you so you can pull it out of your pocket like I did.
But this is a list of 29 jobs all across our economy
empowering small business by reducing government barriers,
fixing the tax code, boosting competitiveness for American
manufacturers, encouraging entrepreneurship and growth,
maximizing American energy production.
Again, I will get you guys this if you want it, put it in
your pocket, you can pull it out and use it just like I did.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman very much and thank
all of our witnesses.
As we conclude our first hearing of the year, permit to
also thank each and every one of our members for all of their
hard work and dedication to these issues and a special thanks
to my friend, Mr. Butterfield, who has been a joy to work with.
I am looking forward to a great year.
I remind members that they have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record, and I ask our witnesses to please
respond promptly to any questions they might receive, and the
hearing is now adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:30 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80106.052


