- ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF HAZARDOUS WASTE MANIFESTS: MODERNIZING FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF HAZARDOUS WASTE MANIFESTS: MODERNIZING FOR THE

21ST CENTURY
=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND THE ECONOMY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 21, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-154

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
80-936                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JIM MATHESON, Utah
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JOHN BARROW, Georgia
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy

JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
Chairman
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARY BONO MACK, California           JOHN BARROW, Georgia
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   LOIS CAPPS, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan (ex
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  officio)
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     6
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    21
Prepared statement...........................................    23

Witnesses

Suzanne Rudzinski, Director, Office of Resource Conservation and
Recovery, Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response,
Environmental Protection Agency................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Answers to submitted questions...............................    52
Lisa Silvia, Senior Waste Inspector, Virginia Department of
Environmental Quality, on Behalf of the Association of State
and Territorial Solid Waste Management Officials...............    29
Prepared statement...........................................    31
Answers to submitted questions...............................    55
David R. Case, Executive Director, Environmental Technology
Council........................................................    38
Prepared statement...........................................    40
Answers to submitted questions...............................    58

Submitted Material

Letter, dated March 28, 2011, from Scott Slesinger, Legislative
Director, National Resources Defense Council, to Hon. John
Thune, U.S. Senate, submitted by Mr. Green.....................     7
Letter, dated July 20, 2012, from Peter A. Molinaro, Vice
President, Federal and State Government Affairs, Dow Chemical
Company, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr. Shimkus................    28

ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF HAZARDOUS WASTE MANIFESTS: MODERNIZING FOR THE

21ST CENTURY

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 21, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:13 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John
Shimkus (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Shimkus, Harper, Green,
Butterfield, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Nick Abraham, Legislative Clerk; Charlotte
Baker, Press Secretary; Jerry Couri, Professional Staff Member,
Environment; Andy Duberstein, Deputy Press Secretary; David
McCarthy, Chief Counsel, Environment and the Economy; Chris
Sarley, Policy Coordinator, Environment and the Economy;
Jacqueline Cohen, Democratic Counsel; Greg Dotson, Democratic
Energy and Environment Staff Director; and Stephen Salsbury,
Democratic Staff Assistant.
Mr. Shimkus. We are going to start about 2 minutes early.
We do have votes pending that will be called fairly soon, so we
are going to try to make sure that we get people through the
cycle as fast as possible, get the testimony, and then move
forward. So we want to welcome you, and I call the hearing to
order. I recognize myself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Good morning. Today, our subcommittee will be looking into
the issue of hazardous waste manifests required under Section
3002 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, and whether it makes
sense to have these manifests submitted in paper form, or
converted into an electronic format. I think it undoubtedly
makes sense to modernize to electronic filing.
With the commonplace usage of laptops, computers, scanners,
PDAs, and tablets, the idea of having this information
maintained electronically seems like a no-brainer to me. I hope
this hearing helps us understand what good reason has prevented
us from using an electronic system, and if it is legal in
nature, how Congress can help encourage a transition.
When I first learned EPA was requiring multiple copies of a
paper manifest to track every movement of hazardous waste from
the generator through the transporter, and to final disposal
site, I was surprised a more user-friendly format was not being
used. When I then found out EPA required these same manifests
be sent via postal mail back to the original waste generator
and the State regulator to be kept on file, I was astounded at
the inefficiency of the system, and the cost to both government
and the private sector.
When the agency was last proposing revisions that would
standardize RCRA subtitle C manifesting data requirements,
EPA's Web site claims about 12 million tons of hazardous waste
per year was being manifested for shipment, involving 2.4 to
5.1 million RCRA manifests, requiring about 4.4 to 9.2 million
waste handling labor hours, costing about $187 to $733 million
annually. That is a staggering amount. Moreover, 34 State
governments reportedly spend $199,000 to 416,000 labor hours,
costing $6.3 to $37 million annually to administer the current
RCRA hazardous waste manifest program, which when added to
waste handler burden totals 4.6 to 9.7 millions hours, or in
terms of cost, $193 to $770 million per year in baseline
national paperwork burden.
According to EPA, the agency estimates the cost of the
paperwork burden on State and private entities from the current
paper manifest system to be from $193 million to over $400
million annually. Specifically, EPA's fiscal year 2013 budget
states a fully implemented electronic manifest system is
estimated to reduce the reporting burden for firms regulated
under RCRA's hazardous waste provisions by $76 to $124 million
annually.
Especially in a time of unacceptably high unemployment and
enormous Federal debt and limited State budgetary resources,
Congress should be looking for ways to lighten the fiscal
burden generated by the paper manifest system, but do so in a
way that makes sense for tracking enforcement and public health
concerns.
In addition to the regulatory and economic relief an
electronic manifest provides, proponents also believe
collateral benefit of an electronic system to include increased
transparency, access to critical public safety and security
information for first responders, better tracking services for
our citizens, improved data for informed policy decisions, and
program management and greater accountability for how hazardous
wastes are transported and managed.
The Senate has twice passed legislation with the support of
environmental advocacy groups, industry stakeholders, and State
regulators that created an electronic manifest system at EPA.
Their approach melded private sector expertise with technology
and EPA's concern for what a meaningful manifest system needed.
If the House is going to act on this issue, we need to
understand why this needs to be done, and how best to make it
work for Federal and State regulators, the regulated community,
and the U.S. taxpayer. Furthermore, if the industry wants this
system and is willing to pay for it, the system should be
viable, performance-based, and industry should not be forced to
overpay for the system, nor have their money held hostage by
Congress or the Executive Branch.
I am aware that there have been concerns raised about
various facets of the Senate-passed bill, including whether it
requires some spending offset, even though it would be fully
funded by user fees, and whether those funds, once collected,
should be appropriated. These are issues that we will
investigate fully and address to the extent that they need to
be.
I look forward to working with all parties, and I want to
thank the witnesses for taking time out of their busy schedules
to be with us. We appreciate your testimony and look forward to
being better educated by your experience.
Before I yield back, I want to finish this. I am going to
forward this so it is submitted for the record to Monica back
in the back. This is obviously a new technology, and we are
going to send it, and that is all we are asking for us to do
electronically to be able to follow this and in a very
transparent system.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.002

Mr. Shimkus. With that, I yield back my time and yield to
my ranking member, Mr. Green from Texas.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just so we don't get to
the point where you and I are e-mailing between us up here,
that we can sit down and talk to each other. We don't want to
lose the history of conversation by e-mailing.
But I appreciate the chairman calling the hearing today,
and welcome both our panels.
Commonsense change should have broad support in this
committee, with the Senate having already acting on the issue.
I hope we will move expeditiously to introduce legislation
establishing an electronic manifest system that ensures that
hazardous wastes are designated for and indeed arrive safely at
designated hazardous waste management facilities.
The benefits of an electronic manifest are obvious, ranging
from reduced paperwork, administrative burdens, and millions of
dollars such a system could save. That is why both EPA and the
regulating industry agree that we should develop legislation to
create an e-Manifest system and fund it through user fees. With
this kind of agreement and participation, there is no reason
why we cannot pass the bill into law this year.
So my goal for this hearing is to hear from any concerns
our witnesses have with Senate Resolution 710, if any, so that
we can address them and move forward with the bill in the
House.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous consent to
insert a letter in the record from the Natural Resource Defense
Council, showing their support for e-Manifest program.
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection, I am happy to receive this
from my friends at the NRDC.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.003

Mr. Green. I feel the same way sometimes.
With that, thank you again to our witnesses for appearing.
I look forward to hearing your testimony. I will just hand you
my statement.
Mr. Shimkus. I will see that. The gentleman yields back his
time. Does the gentleman from Georgia seek time?
Seeing no other members present, the chair now recognizes
Ms. Rudzinski from the Environmental Protection Agency.
Welcome. Your full statement is considered accepted into the
record, and you have 5 minutes for an opening statement. Thank
you for coming.

STATEMENT OF SUZANNE RUDZINSKI, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF RESOURCE
CONSERVATION AND RECOVERY, OFFICE OF SOLID WASTE AND EMERGENCY
RESPONSE, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

Ms. Rudzinski. I will focus my remarks on the need for and
efforts necessary to establish a national electronic manifest
system, or e-Manifest, to track hazardous waste shipments more
effectively and efficiently.
The uniform manifest to track hazardous waste shipments in
use today is a six-copy multiple paper form that documents the
chain of custody for waste shipment. Each person in the chain
must sign the manifest and then ultimately file a copy at their
own facility, as well as the final facility must file a copy
back with the original generator to confirm that the waste got
received.
Each year, hazardous waste generators prepare about two to
five million manifest forms. We believe it is time that this
paper-intensive process enter the 21st century with an
efficient e-Manifest system, but legislation is needed to do
so.
The administration believes there are very significant
benefits to an e-Manifest system, both in cost savings and
program efficiencies for the regulated community and the
regulators. Eliminating most of the manual processing steps is
expected to result in significant cost savings. The cost
savings that we would be estimating would be at least $75
million annually for users and State agencies. The savings
should be higher if updated to account for today's costs.
Additionally, an e-Manifest system would improve the
overall efficiency and effectiveness of the national hazardous
waste tracking system, providing increased protection to human
health and the environment. For example, the e-Manifest would
produce better data quality. Second, the e-Manifest system
would provide nearly real time tracking capabilities. Users
would no longer have to wait 30 days or more for paper copies
to be mailed, processed, and then finally learn whether or not
their shipment arrived. You could track delays and
discrepancies very quickly. Third, users could rely on a
national e-Manifest system as their single point of contact for
both their Federal and State required manifest data reporting.
Fourth, the e-Manifest system could reduce the need for onsite
labor intensive inspection of paper records. Finally, full
implementation of e-Manifest could foster new data management
and cost saving possibilities, such as simplification and
consolidation of existing requirements and systems for our
biennial reporting of hazardous waste.
The administration supports the development of a fee-based
centralized e-Manifest system. Legislation must be enacted to
make this a reality. Since manifest users would receive the
greater part of the benefits and cost savings from using the e-
Manifest, it seems fitting to the Agency and the users
themselves that the manifest users should fund the development
and operation of the system. On May 23 of 2011, the
administration transmitted to the House and Senate an e-
Manifest legislative proposal. Legislation would need to
authorize EPA to collect user fees for system related
activities, and to deposit those fees in a special Treasury
account from which funds could be expended only for system-
related activities. This authorization could explicitly provide
that the monies collected as user fees would be available to
EPA for use for the payment of e-Manifest system costs.
Additionally, legislation may need to clarify any
requirements for use of unique or unconventional contracting
arrangements for e-Manifest. If e-Manifest legislation or
related appropriation bills were to authorize and appropriate
funds to EPA to build the e-Manifest system, as suggested in
the administration's proposal, EPA would likely procure the
development of the system using conventional Federal
acquisition procedures and rely on user fees to cover systems
operations and maintenance costs. However, if Congress
authorizes use of a different contracting approach for the
system build, such as the ``Share-in-Savings'' type of
performance-based contract that was authorized in the
Electronic Government Act of 2002, then the contents and
requirements of such a contract may need to be addressed in the
legislation.
It is also important for the legislation to include
provisions that will ensure that the e-Manifest system and the
authorizing regulations developed by EPA be effective in States
on the same date, initially as a Federal requirement, but which
the States can subsequently be authorized for after enacting
the necessary State laws. The e-Manifest can be effective as a
cost savings tool for users and a profitable venture for
vendors only if it is assured that the e-Manifest will be
implemented consistently in all States on the same date.
We look forward to working with Congress to enact
legislation to provide for the development of an efficient,
effective e-Manifest system. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman,
for the opportunity to be here today. That concludes my
statement, and I would be pleased to answer any questions that
you or other members of the subcommittee may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Rudzinski follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.013

Mr. Shimkus. Great, thank you very much. It sounds like
there is much in agreement, and great possibilities forward. So
we indeed look forward to working with you.
Let me recognize myself for the first set of questions.
In 2006, the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee
received testimony that the hazardous waste manifest burden was
the most expensive paperwork requirement EPA imposes under
Subtitle C. Do you believe that that is still the case?
Ms. Rudzinski. I believe that is correct.
Mr. Shimkus. And in your testimony, you mentioned that EPA
first started analyzing the economic benefits of transitioning
to an electronic manifest system. The agency estimated that a
75 percent participation rate could result in an annual net
savings of $75 million to users and State agencies. How
realistic do you think that 75 percent rate in that evaluation
is?
Ms. Rudzinski. The 75 percent relates to not the generators
themselves, but actually the number of manifests that would be
covered, so that would be out of the two to five million paper
forms that are floating around every year. We think that is a
very realistic number initially and could go higher over time.
Mr. Shimkus. And I agree with you. I think people are just
itching to move from this to this, away from that.
So if given the authority to set up an electronic manifest
system, what is a reasonable and appropriate time frame for
finding a vendor, negotiating a contract, and issuing
implementing rules, and how much do you think this would cost?
Ms. Rudzinski. The length of time for the contract will
depend on what kind of mechanism we use, because there have
been different types of mechanisms suggested. If we use a very
conventional procurement approach, typically those contracts
for other things take in the range of 12 to 18 months. If in
the case of a novel contract, it may potentially take more
time.
Mr. Shimkus. And my last question is how much do you
envision it will cost a vendor to build a viable electronic
manifest system?
Ms. Rudzinski. At this point, we are estimated somewhere
probably between $7 and $16 million, but that is based on old
estimates that have not yet been updated, and would also be
dependent upon what the actual specifications are of the
system.
Mr. Shimkus. Great, thank you. That ends my questions.
I would like to yield to Mr. Green, the ranking member, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Rudzinski, you mentioned in your testimony that if e-
Manifest legislation or related appropriations bill were to
authorize and appropriate funds for EPA for the e-Manifest
system build as suggested by the administration's proposal, EPA
would like to procure the development of the system by using
conventional Federal acquisition procedures and rely on user
fees to cover the cost of system operations and maintenance.
Senate bill 710 instead does a ``Share-in-Savings'' approach,
and you indicate the EPA would need the contents and
requirements for such a contract to be addressed in the
legislation.
I really hesitate for Congress to pick winners and loser,
although I have to admit the Federal Government doesn't have a
good history of picking technology programs. The IRS is
probably the best at that.
But anyway, has EPA ever done a ``Share-in-Savings''
contract before?
Ms. Rudzinski. I am not positive, but I can certainly get
back to you for the record if you would like.
Mr. Green. OK. When the authority was available for these
contracts under the e-Government Act of 2002, EPA worked with
GSA to use a ``Share-in-Savings'' contract for e-Manifest. Is
that correct?
Ms. Rudzinski. That is correct.
Mr. Green. Can you discuss that further, what happened from
there?
Ms. Rudzinski. Basically we were in the process of working
on it with GSA. We were working on getting the necessary
regulations out that would enable us to do the ``Share-in-
Savings'' and I believe the Act expired before we were able to
implement.
Mr. Green. OK. Does Senate Resolution 710 adequately
address the requirements you will need for a ``Share-in-
Savings'' approach? If not, can you elaborate on what needs to
be done?
Ms. Rudzinski. The bill S.710 does address the
requirements. It has the basic needs in it for us, if that was
the bill that was going to be enacted.
Mr. Green. OK. Mr. Chairman, those are all my questions.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The chair,
without objection, would like to go into a colloquy with Mr.
Waxman. You have permission to do an opening statement, if you
would like to do so.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
appreciate the----
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Waxman [continuing]. Witness for your testimony. I want
to thank Ranking Member Green. We requested this hearing back
in January, and we are looking to see how we modernize the
tracking system for hazardous waste shipments in this country.
The goals of these efforts are to reduce burden, save money,
improve data quality. At present, the Federal manifest system
still relies on paper manifests, just as it did when the system
was established in 1980.
So we have got to bring this system into the 21st century.
Technology has advanced significantly over the last 32 years,
and we shouldn't be relying on carbon copies to track
potentially dangerous shipments. I think you would get a
unanimous agreement on that point from members of the committee
here.
The adoption of an electronic manifest system was proposed
by EPA more than 11 years ago. It has been supported by the
chemical companies, State agencies, environmental
organizations. But it still hasn't been adopted. Ironically,
there were technological concerns--questions about the
enforceability of digital signatures are one.
So I didn't hear your testimony, but I know that it has
been submitted in writing. So we are concerned about how this
program is going to be funded. For many years, hazardous waste
generators, shippers, processors have expressed a willingness
to fund the program through user fees. I hope we can adopt that
concept. I think we will hear legislation--about legislation
from the Senate that embodies the concepts that are widely
supported, authorizing an electronic manifest system with
regulatory authority for EPA, and a user fee to cover its
costs.
I think, Mr. Chairman, the rest of my statement I would
like to have in the record. I appreciate the courtesy you have
given me in letting me come in at this point in the hearing to
make these comments. In S.710--I think we ought to look at it.
The bill calls for a ``Share-in-Savings'' contract, and in a
standard ``Share-in-Savings'' contract, the contractor agrees
to bear the initial project cost. I think this is something we
ought to examine carefully.
I thank you for holding this hearing, and I hope we can
work together to solve this problem.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Waxman follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.015

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Waxman. Now would you like to
ask any questions of the witness?
Mr. Waxman. I am going to pass on asking questions and let
others who have been here longer have their chance, because we
are going to have votes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, sir. Now the chair recognizes the
gentleman from Georgia, who has no desire for questions.
Gentleman from North Carolina is recognized.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Director, for your testimony today. I will try to be as
brief as I can.
Protecting the public from hazardous waste is certainly a
critical mission of the Department of Transportation and EPA.
Both departments, in coordination with industry and State
agencies, have been vigilant in the treatment and transport of
hazardous waste because of the safeguards established by the
hazardous waste manifest system. Paper manifests provide
shipping information to help with the tracking of potentially
dangerous materials, and information about the contents of each
shipment for emergency responders. Since 2001, EPA has proposed
a nearly paperless manifest system which would reduce the
financial burden of paperwork on States and the industry by
more than $75 million per year.
I support improving the hazardous waste manifest system by
using information technologies. I look forward to transitioning
from the existing paper system while continuing to make safety
our top priority.
Let me just ask you, if I can, Madam Director. S.710
proposes a user fee on people who continue to use paper
manifests. Is that generally how user fees are allotted, or is
that tantamount to a tax?
Ms. Rudzinski. In terms of the user fees for paper, users
that want to stay with paper currently, in many States, do
actually have a user fee because at the end they have to submit
it to the State and the State oftentimes charges fees for
being--to enter that manifest data into a system.
In the system that is being proposed for electronic
manifests, a user would have an option of either going
electronically or continuing to use paper. At the end of that
time, you would still need to submit the paper--the final paper
form back into the system. So they will still be users of the
system and they will be appropriately charged.
Mr. Butterfield. I guess what I am getting at, would a
sliding fee scale be better?
Ms. Rudzinski. One of the things--that is an issue that we
would certainly look at if legislation is enacted so that we
could impose user fees, and we would certainly work with the
user community to try to make sure we knew what was
appropriate.
Mr. Butterfield. Just trying to mitigate the amount that
would be assessed to small businesses, you know. We are always
trying to protect small businesses and their bottom line, if we
can.
Do paper manifests get lost during transit?
Ms. Rudzinski. Paper manifests can get lost. They can have
data quality issues. You can have illegible handwriting so that
people don't know exactly what is there. E-Manifest offers a
far superior approach to that.
Mr. Butterfield. Is intentional fraud an issue with paper
manifest?
Ms. Rudzinski. How large an issue that is, I am not sure,
but I can get back to you.
Mr. Butterfield. All right. Those are my four areas of
interest. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Rudzinski. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time. Now the chair
recognizes the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Harper, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome. I
appreciate your being here today with us, and I have a few
questions.
If a vendor is operating the electronic manifest system on
behalf of EPA, how many EPA staff would be required to work
full-time on issues related to the electronic manifest system?
Ms. Rudzinski. Initially the number of people at EPA that
would be working on it would be working not only on procuring
the contract, and also developing the regulations that would be
needed, but that should go down over time because the
regulations, once they are actually in place, those staff would
no longer be needed. So it would depend on the actual nature of
the contract system adopted as to how many staff would be
needed. Initial estimates are about five to cover the entire
span of contracting and regulatory activity.
Mr. Harper. What would be the benefit to EPA or DOT of real
time tracking that the electronic manifest would provide, just
in general?
Ms. Rudzinski. Real time tracking allows you to know where
a shipment is, if there's a problem on the road, if the
shipment has been delayed you know immediately where you can
find it and can actually get help to it more quickly. It will
also allow you to--if there is some kind of an incident, it
will help first responders being able to get there.
Mr. Harper. All right. You had mentioned that the e-
Manifest system could foster new data management possibilities.
Could you quantify what the cost savings to EPA would be
through these possibilities that you mentioned?
Ms. Rudzinski. Qualitatively I can talk to you about it,
because it will be dependent upon what system is actually
adopted. The types of things that we are looking at right now
is you have got biannual reporting systems that for all
hazardous waste, a lot of that could be incorporated into the
e-Manifest system so that potentially you do not have to do
extra reporting. Things like our hazardous waste export
notifications could potentially be melded in as well, so you
could do away with other system requirements.
Mr. Harper. OK. Why does the administration believe that a
fee-based centralized e-Manifest system has the greatest chance
of succeeding, versus other methods?
Ms. Rudzinski. The industry and EPA have--and the States
have--all been working together, and indicated that user fees
are important because in these budget times, it is important to
find ways to fund the system. So the thought was that the
users, and the users themselves agree, that they should help
bear the cost of the system.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. I want to thank my colleague real briefly
before we let you go. The only system-related activities on
user fees is--I think that was a great point to raise. This
real-time tracking is like UPS, like FedEx, like the U.S.
Postal Service, so we should be able to get there. And by the
time I did my opening statement, sent it back to the clerks to
file, they had already sent me a confirmation that they have
it. That is really where we want to go and I think we can get
there, we just need to work together.
I appreciate my colleagues on the minority side. It looks
like there is something we might be able to do.
With that, we want to dismiss you. Thank you for coming,
and I call our second panel up.
Ms. Rudzinski. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. I want to thank the second panel. First I
would like to ask unanimous consent for a letter from Dow
Chemical in support of e-Manifest legislation. Is there any
objection? Hearing none, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.016

Mr. Shimkus. Now we also want to welcome Ms. Silvia--is
that pronounced correctly?
Ms. Silvia. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. Who is the Virginia Department on
Environmental Quality, the Senior Waste Inspector. Thank you
very much. Also joining her is David Case, Executive Director,
Environmental Technology Council. Your full statements are in
the record. We will give you 5 minutes to summarize, and we
will start with you, Ms. Silvia. So welcome.

STATEMENTS OF LISA SILVIA, SENIOR WASTE INSPECTOR, VIRGINIA
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY, ON BEHALF OF THE
ASSOCIATION OF STATE AND TERRITORIAL SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
OFFICIALS; AND DAVID R. CASE, PRESIDENT, ENVIRONMENTAL
TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL

STATEMENT OF LISA SILVIA

Ms. Silvia. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and members
and representatives of this subcommittee. My name is Lisa
Silvia, and I am a senior waste inspector with the Virginia
Department of Environmental Quality, Tidewater Regional Office
in Virginia Beach, Virginia. I am here today on behalf of the
Association of State and Territorial Solid Waste Management
Officials, ASTSWMO, to offer perspective as a regulatory
compliance inspector of a uniform hazardous waste manifest
system, in particular, the proposed development and enactment
of the electronic manifest system.
In addition to the views expressed in this testimony, I
would like to note that individual, State, or territorial waste
programs may have other perspectives based on their State
experience with the use and management of manifests.
ASTSWMO supports the development and enactment of a
hazardous waste electronic manifest system for many reasons,
including reason one, real time tracking of hazardous waste
from generation through transport to its final destination for
treatment, storage, or disposal. At each stop along this travel
route, a signature is collected and a page of the current
multi-copy paper manifest form is removed. Oftentimes, the
waste is transferred between transporters and they make many
stops prior to its final destination. The generator may be
unaware of the location of his waste along the route, although
he continues to maintain responsibility for it. Knowledge of
the waste being received and accepted at its final destination
is not certain until the generator receives a final signed
paper copy of the manifest from the destination facility. With
an electronic database, the waste could be tracked at each
stop, allowing the regulated community, that is, businesses,
government entities, and non-profits, as well as regulators and
other government officials, to know where the waste is in real
time.
Electronic tracking also provides an emergency response
benefit. Emergency responders would be able to access
information online of a transport vehicle's contents, or the
expected hazardous wastes at a facility, thus potential hazards
could be known or anticipated prior to or en route to a
transportation or facility incident.
Second, for the time and cost savings of the regulated
community as well as regulators from postage and paper form
acquisition and retention costs, to the time impact on
businesses as I, the inspector, review paper on site. During a
hazardous waste compliance regulatory inspection, inspector
will typically review 3 years worth of manifests. This time
includes reviewing the documents, but may also include time
waiting for the forms to be located and pulled. In addition,
the regulated community loses time while overseeing the
inspector as she completes her review on site. This is time
lost to the regulated community member's business. As an
inspector, I would prefer to spend the time on site with the
regulated community providing compliance assistance and
reducing hazardous waste generation as opposed to reviewing
paper.
Reason three, providing access to tracking information in
real time across State borders, something not readily
accessible under the current paper-based manifest system.
Four, giving an inspector access to information to
prioritize and focus inspection efforts through desktop
reviews. This allows for more productive use of the taxpayer's
dollar.
Reason five, electronic manifests would provide for a true
adherence to paperwork reduction. Virginia, like many States,
has moved toward electronic retention of all documents. This
not only reduces paper, but makes records more accessible to
everyone, most importantly, the public.
And finally, six, making compliance with regulatory
manifest retention requirements easier for business by having
everything in one place.
In conclusion, an electronic manifest system would ensure
national consistency and compliance, save time and costs, make
information more accessible, and provide for safer roads and
emergency response. ASTSWMO is committed to moving hazardous
waste management, like most every other government program,
into the 21st century.
That concludes my statement. I am open to questions, and
thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Silvia follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.023

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Case. Sir, your full statement
is in the record. You have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID R. CASE

Mr. Case. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Green, and members
of the subcommittee, thank you very much for your invitation to
testify this morning.
The Environmental Technology Council is the leading trade
association for the hazardous waste management industry, and
our companies produce two to five million manifests every year
in order to track hazardous wastes from the original point of
generation at our customer's facility, over the highways or
over the rail tracks, to eventually the recycling or treatment
or disposal facility that our member companies operate.
I, too, have a list of reasons why the electronic manifest
system is so important, but I have heard from the chairman most
of my list of reasons, and from the other witnesses this
morning. I think we are all in agreement that an electronic
manifest system is long overdue. Therefore, I would like to use
my 5 minutes this morning to address some of the other
questions that have been raised about the system, and in
particular, I thought I would focus first on the user fee.
Industry stepped up many years ago when we were first
planning an electronic system and said we would be willing to
pay for the system through a user fee. I know that raises
concerns about whether the user fee is a kind of indirect tax
on industry, but we don't see it that way. The important point
to remember is we already pay for the paper system. We pay an
enormous amount of money for the paper system. We have buy the
manifests, we have to bear the cost of mailing all the copies
through the U.S. mail. We have storage facilities where there
are reams and reams of file drawers containing paper manifests,
and we have to bear that cost. We see the user fee as a way of
obtaining a much more efficient and cost effective system that
will save us money. So in the end, the user fee is a way of
getting a net savings while also improving the operation of the
e-Manifest system.
The second question that has been raised is about our
proposal--our support for a ``Share-in-Savings'' contract as
the way of developing the e-Manifest system, and the reason we
support that is we think a ``Share-in-Savings'' contract
incentivizes the IT contractor to build a system that would be
best for all the users, otherwise, the contractor won't
properly get back its investment and its profit. The vendor
will only get paid if it develops an efficient, cost effective,
user friendly system. We much prefer that approach to a
standard government contract where the contractor simply meets
specifications that EPA issues in order to get paid. So we
think the ``Share-in-Savings'' contract is a preferable way to
go. We are not wedded to it. If the only way this bill could
move forward is if there were some conventional contract
requirement, we could live with that, but we just think a
``Share-in-Savings'' contract is a much preferred way.
The third issue that has come up has to do sometimes with
the security of the system. We recognize that paper manifests
are not particularly secure. They can errors, they can have all
sorts of problems associated with them, including not being
able to read handwriting, and we think an e-Manifest system
will provide a much more secure system. The vendor will have
security provisions in the software to avoid people hacking in
or whatever, and I think it will work out just fine.
Lastly, we have been asked why doesn't the industry develop
a system on their own? Why do you need legislation? Why do you
need EPA to do this? We thought very seriously about developing
our own system. As you can imagine, our industry, our companies
have already developed very sophisticated and innovative
business-to-business electronic systems. We do all of our
hazardous waste management, from the initial customer order to
waste profiling to waste receipts to invoicing, electronically.
The only thing that is not done electronically is the manifest,
and we could very easily integrate that into our system.
However, in our discussions with EPA and most particularly, the
Justice Department, they have emphasized that the manifest is
not just a data collection system, it is a very important
compliance and enforcement system under the law, and therefore,
it has to be designed, operated, and enforced by the
government, by EPA. It could not be done by a private entity.
I think those are the major questions, Mr. Chairman. I am
open to any other questions, of course, that the committee may
have. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Case follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.030

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Case, and Mr. Case does yield
back his time.
Let me just go briefly to a couple questions. First of all,
we understand storage here, and we understand digitization of
records. If you go to any member's office, especially in this
building, you have a whole wall of file cabinets, which I would
guess, other than Mr. Sarley's softball gear, I am not sure
what is being stored in there anymore because everything is
digital and filed away--and we just don't have that space. So
multiply that by numerous copies along the process of what you
put in. That is a very good point.
I think the other one is--and I would like to go to Ms.
Silvia, explain the real time--I guess your testimony talked
about real time, but you added the phrase ``across State
lines.'' So can you just expound on that, and the importance of
that for you?
Ms. Silvia. Well, I guess I will start with in Virginia,
the facilities that I inspect, most of that waste leaves
Virginia. It may be generated in Virginia but it leaves
Virginia, and in order for me to verify it has been received,
or if I want to check on the status, I would have to coordinate
with my counterparts in other State agencies, where with this
system, I would in theory be able to pull that information up
and see that it is there.
In some enforcement cases, there may be a requirement on a
generator to verify that they have removed some hazardous
waste. This would give them the opportunity of being able to
show me instantaneously when it was received in whatever State
it went to. So it would bring them back to compliance quicker.
So it is just--right now we don't have--each State does not
necessarily manage manifests in the same way when they are
received. A single system like this would allow me to see what
is going on across the country.
Mr. Shimkus. I think any young adult 25 years or younger
would be aghast at the file cabinets and carbon copy documents
that you have got to pull from file cabinets, especially in
your job inspecting, and I think your testimony also raised
that issue of when you are doing a 3-year back look, actually
going and grabbing and pulling the files out, that really
happens, right?
Ms. Silvia. Oh yes, it does.
Mr. Shimkus. Very time consuming?
Ms. Silvia. Very time consuming. There is no regulatory
requirement to keep the paper on site, so oftentimes there is a
need to coordinate to go get the paper from wherever it is
being kept. For smaller businesses in particular, they don't
know what these pieces of paper really mean so some pieces may
be in one department, another may be with another person, or it
may not have even been kept. So there is a time element just
waiting for them to locate those pieces of paper.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. I am going to end and I am going to
yield now to Mr. Green, the ranking member.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Silvia, you mentioned in your testimony Virginia has
established electronic shipping system to track medical waste,
and how was the upstart of that system paid for?
Ms. Silvia. I am afraid I can't answer that. I am aware of
the system. It was done at the request of a medical waste
transporter, but I don't work directly in the medical waste
program. But I would be happy to find that information out for
you, if you like.
Mr. Green. Yes, I would be interested because obviously
when we are talking about hazardous waste it would be similar
for medical waste, how it works and how it was created, a much
smaller system.
I know you represent a number of State governments, and I
have a very urban district in Houston, and industrial wastes
are part of our everyday life that we live. I have five
refineries and chemical plants. We try and recycle everything
that we can because you make money doing it, but there are some
things you just can't do, and so you do have to transfer it
though to different locations, including some, you know,
landfills.
I know we have a big effort in our area, both with our
State agency, our city agencies, going down the road our trucks
get stopped real often. When I am driving in my district I
see--whether it is Houston police, the country sheriff, or like
I said, Department of Public Safety, and I am sure they are
going to stop some of the trucks that are in our district.
Would that still be--comply with what most State laws require
to have that manifest on that vehicle with electronic waste?
Would your members who--I know I probably represent a bunch of
your members, but would they be able to do that with that
vehicle?
Mr. Case. The Department of Transportation, separate from
EPA, requires certain kinds of shipping papers to be on the
vehicle, and those would continue to be on the vehicle. The
manifest, though, is different. It has lots of very important
information on the hazard posed by the waste, the volumes, the
proper responses, so that unlike--you are describing kind of a
standard DOT stop----
Mr. Green. Typically it is weight issues, but they also do
a full inspection.
Mr. Case. Right. But even the larger concern, I think, is
if there is an emergency, if there is a fire on the truck, if
there is a spill. The current regulations require that the
manifest be kept on the vehicle. You can imagine if there is a
fire in the back of the vehicle, and emergency responder
doesn't want to crawl into the cab to find the manifest. We
would like them to be able to go on a laptop or use their
smartphone to find all the information they need for the
response.
Mr. Green. So that would be available to the regulatory
agency to the law enforcement who is having the response--the
first responders?
Mr. Case. Yes, indeed. The system as we envision it--and
another reason for a ``Share-in-Savings'' contract is it gives
us an opportunity to work with that vendor and make sure all
these features are in the system. We would like emergency
responders to have their own password and identities and
ability to access the information they need in the event of an
emergency.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I know I am almost out of time and
I want to have time for my North Caroline colleague, but like I
said earlier, I have some hesitancy about the Federal
Government picking a system, because we don't have a good
record of picking our own computers, much less one like that.
So I think ``Share-in-Savings'' may give us that kind of trial
and error, because we want to make sure it works when you pay
for it.
Mr. Case. Precisely.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time. Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Harper, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to you each
for being here today.
Ms. Silvia, I have a couple of questions I would like to
ask you first, if I may. You mentioned that you have
encountered problems with the regulated entities' paperwork,
including their inability to find the paperwork. EPA also
testified about the ability of an electronic system to
substantially reduce data problems.
So my first question would be, how prevalent is it that
regulated entities either cannot find their paperwork, the
paperwork is hard to comprehend, or the regulated entity has
had problems filling out the paperwork?
Ms. Silvia. Well, I will just state that from my own
experience as an inspector, particularly the smaller
businesses, they rely often on their service vendor to prepare
the form for them. They are unaware of what it means, what the
information on it says. It is all Greek to them, excuse the
term. And so they don't understand the significance of that
piece of paper, so it tends not to get the respect that it
would deserve and gets lost. It is a bill for them, for want of
a better term. And so oftentimes when I go to a smaller
business who does not have staff that just do environmental
compliance, they don't have this paper. That is a citable
violation, and so to have an electronic system that would be
already in existence. They would not have that violation--
apparent violation assessed against them.
Mr. Harper. So you obviously agree with the EPA's
assessment that the electronic system would certainly improve
that manifest data quality?
Ms. Silvia. Absolutely, and we see oftentimes because they
rely on a third party to complete the form for them, there may
be errors on the form because the person filling it out doesn't
necessarily have the firsthand knowledge that the generator
themselves have, and that too can lead to potential violations
for that generator.
Mr. Harper. Thank you.
Mr. Case----
Mr. Case. Sir.
Mr. Harper [continuing]. Our witnesses have mentioned the
benefit of the electronic manifest for first responders. I
wasn't here, I haven't heard anybody mention the case out of
Akins, North Carolina, and could you tell me how that e-
Manifest system may have been helpful in that instance?
Mr. Case. I would be happy to.
There was an incident in Akins, North Carolina, probably 4
years ago in which a small storage facility--we call them 10-
day transfer facilities--contained a variety of hazardous
wastes and a small fire began. We now think that the fire was a
result of pool chemicals that had been picked up and stored at
the facility, and that the fire was then accelerated by other
wastes that were present. When--as I understand it, when the
emergency responders arrived they did not have the manifest
information for what was in the warehouse. They didn't want to
go into the warehouse to try to find it, and so they evacuated
an enormous amount of people as a safeguard, and they let the
building burn down.
Our belief is the fire could have easily been put out
initially if the information about the waste was available
immediately, electronically and the emergency responders could
have had that information.
Mr. Harper. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time. The chair
recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Butterfield,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Case, let me just pick up where you left off there with
the emergency responders. Do you envision if we go to an e-
Manifest system that the responders will have that technology
in their vehicles onsite, or would they have to rely on a third
party for the information?
Mr. Case. We believe they will have ready access on their
vehicles to the electronic information. They case use an
iPhone, a smartphone, an iPad, as Mr. Chairman has in front of
him, any of the commonly available electronic devices----
Mr. Butterfield. And would you envision them getting all of
the manifest, or just relevant portions of it?
Mr. Case. An advantage of an electronic system is it would
be indexed by transporter, by generator, by any way you wanted
to index the information so you could easily access it. You
wouldn't be searching through lots of electronic documents.
Mr. Butterfield. Do you represent the smaller shippers or
the waste generators?
Mr. Case. As customers we do. Our companies are major
hazardous waste management companies, but we service dry
cleaning shops, gas stations, all of the small businesses
across the United States.
Mr. Butterfield. Would you speak to the sliding fee scale
that I mentioned earlier? Would a fee scale based on the amount
of waste be helpful?
Mr. Case. Yes. I think the vendor will have to come up with
a fee scale that promotes maximum usage of the electronic
system, and for those generators who have to use paper, we will
accommodate them and simply require some sort of fee for
transferring their data into the electronic system. It will
still be a lot cheaper for them than the current system.
Mr. Butterfield. Just thinking ahead about the small
businesses, I don't want them to be overly burdened with large
fees.
Mr. Case. Absolutely, and I think they will be able to take
advantage of the electronic system and the savings inherent in
that, and whatever paper manifests are still required will be
handled more cheaply.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time.
I will just finish by saying for the first-line responders,
which we work with very closely, especially in the Telecom
Subcommittee, and some of the pieces of legislation, whether it
is spectrum auction and whatever dollars go to, what we have
been trying to do is make sure that Federal dollars do help the
local first-line responders and so that the chief or the engine
does have the iPad or the iPad 2 where they can take pictures
or they can drill down and look at a building and see the
structure and stuff. So I do think working together that they
can have much more information than they have now, which they
really have zero now.
So this is very exciting. We look forward to working with
you. Thank you for your time. Thank you for the expeditious
nature in us getting through this, as they have just called
votes. Seeing no other members and hearing no requests for
time, I will call the hearing now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:04 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80936.038


