- CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE CYBERSECURITY: ASSESSMENTS OF SMART GRID SECURITY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE CYBERSECURITY: ASSESSMENTS OF SMART GRID

SECURITY
=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 28, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-120

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
76-641                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

7_____

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

CLIFF STEARNS, Florida
Chairman
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina     Ranking Member
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         GENE GREEN, Texas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana                 Islands
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Cliff Stearns, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Florida, opening statement..................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado, opening statement.................................     6
Hon. Lee Terry, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Nebraska, opening statement....................................     7
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     8
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     8
Hon. Phil Gingrey, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Georgia, opening statement.....................................     9
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     9

Witnesses

Gregory C. Wilshusen, Director, Information Security Issues,
Government Accountability Office...............................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    13
David C. Trimble, Director, Natural Resources and Environment,
Government Accountability Office \1\...........................
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Richard J. Campbell, Specialist, Energy Policy, Congressional
Research Service...............................................    31
Prepared statement...........................................    33

----------
\1\ Mr. Trimble did not offer oral remarks for the record. Mr.
Trimble and Mr. Wilshusen submitted a joint statement.

CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE CYBERSECU-
RITY: ASSESSMENTS OF SMART GRID SECURITY

----------

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:19 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Cliff
Stearns (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Stearns, Terry, Myrick,
Burgess, Blackburn, Gingrey, DeGette, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Carl Anderson, Counsel, Oversight and
Investigations; Todd Harrison, Chief Counsel, Oversight and
Investigations; Katie Novaria, Legislative Clerk; Andrew
Powaleny, Deputy Press Secretary; Alvin Banks, Democratic
Investigator; Brian Cohen, Democratic Investigations Staff
Director and Senior Policy Advisor; and Kiren Gopal, Democratic
Counsel.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CLIFF STEARNS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mr. Stearns. Good morning, everybody. I call the
subcommittee's second hearing on cybersecurity and critical
infrastructure protection to order.
My colleagues, America's infrastructure systems have become
more automated and more reliant on information systems and
computer networks to operate. While our systems are more
efficient, they also open the door to cyber threats and cyber-
attacks. Today, the subcommittee focuses on that part of the
critical infrastructure known as smart grid, which refers to
the information technology systems increasingly incorporated
into the Nation's electricity networks.
Smart grid technologies are designed to lower operation
costs, reduce maintenance costs, and expand the flexibility of
operational control relative to the current grid system. Their
operational efficiency and improved asset use is driven by
advanced communication and information technologies.
I believe that we must update our electric grid with better
technology integration, which is why I spearheaded the effort
to secure funding for Energy Smart Florida, the largest smart
grid demonstration project in the country. This initiative will
invest hundreds of millions of dollars in smart grid technology
and renewable energy in Florida and throughout the entire
county. Energy Smart Florida will revolutionize how people use
energy in their homes and enable them to make smarter choices
about energy consumption and better control their carbon
emissions. In addition, the widespread deployment of smart
meters will provide Floridians with more reliable electrical
service through an intelligent network that will be able to
detect potential problems and automatically reconfigure the
grid to minimize or eliminate outages.
But ask any expert in the national security field and see
what keeps them up at night. They would probably tell you, as
they tell me, that it is the increased possibility of a
devastating cyber-attack. This threat is real and is why it is
virtually important--vitally important for us to do what we can
to protect our critical infrastructure from these threats. We
have seen in the past decade what impact both man-made and
natural disasters have on our Nation's utility systems. Imagine
the impact of a cyber-attack to the electrical grid. How many
days could hospitals operate with onsite electric generation?
How would metro rail systems operate, if at all? How would we
recharge our smart phones or access the internet? The goal of
the smart grid is to improve efficiency, reliability and
interoperability. An equal goal, however, must be to improve
upon the security controls and to minimize the impact from a
man-made or natural disaster to ensure reliability and avoid
such possibilities.
Now, a recent report completed by the Pike Research company
estimated that utilities' initiatives to secure their
infrastructure will drive increasing investments to involve
cybersecurity systems and total roughly $14 billion from now
through the year 2018. While the Department of Energy has
emphasized investment in technologies such as smart meters,
among other technologies, we want to ensure that where there is
investment, there is not a cybersecurity gap. We want to
emphasize that there is also investment in securing control
system segments including transmission upgrades, substation
automation, and distribution automation systems.
Protecting critical infrastructure is a complicated issue.
We are talking about facilities and frameworks owned by private
companies, and by Federal, State, and local governments. They
are interconnected. Electricity powers water systems that cool
nuclear reactors, for example. They are vulnerable to threats
from a number of different sources, including nation-states,
criminals, and hackers.
The issues surrounding critical infrastructure protection
and security are complex. To help analyze these complexities, I
am pleased to be joined by our panel of experts in the field.
Today, we will hear testimony from two witnesses at GAO: Mr.
Gregory Wilshusen, Director of Information Security Systems,
and Mr. David Trimble, Director of Natural Resources and the
Environment. I look forward to their testimony, and getting a
better understanding of their extensive work examining
cybersecurity implications of the smart grid. I also would like
to welcome Mr. Richard Campbell, of the Congressional Research
Service, who has examined this very subject and we look forward
to his contributions today.
My colleagues, as I mentioned previously, this is the
subcommittee's second hearing in this Congress on critical
infrastructure protection and cybersecurity. The purpose of
this hearing, in particular, is to get an overview of smart
grid cybersecurity, and how it is working and what can be done
better. It is my intention to call the Department of Energy and
possibly other stakeholders to a future hearing for further
consideration of smart grid security.
I have enjoyed working with the Ranking Member, Ms. DeGette
and the Minority in these matters and look forward to working
with them on overseeing cybersecurity issues again. So I look
forward to this hearing, the perspectives of our expert
witnesses about the safety of this vital part of critical
infrastructure, and whether we are taking the right steps to
protect them from cybersecurity risks and threats.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stearns follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.002

Mr. Stearns. And with that, I recognize the ranking member,
Ms. DeGette.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DEGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this hearing on smart grid cybersecurity.
Last year in July, representatives of the Department of
Homeland Security came before this subcommittee to discuss
their efforts to protect and deploy Federal resources and to
coordinate with the private sector to prevent and respond to
cyber attacks. This hearing, as you mentioned, is an important
follow-up to that hearing.
Protecting our critical infrastructure from cyber attacks
is, of course, of vital importance. As our electric grid
evolves, we become more and more dependent on so-called smart
technologies to control, connect, and maintain this
interconnected system. This is a good thing. It will make the
grid more efficient and more reliable. For example, consumers
will soon be able to track the price of electricity minute by
minute and adjust electricity use accordingly, waiting, for
example, until prices are right to do the laundry or start the
dishwasher.
However, these investments also expose us to new threats.
These new technologies can be easy prey for hackers or
terrorists who seek to bring down unprotected networks. As the
smart grid becomes more interoperable, these attacks could have
debilitating effects nationwide, as you mentioned, Mr.
Chairman. In 2007, DHS ran a test known as Aurora, which
showcases just how dangerous grid vulnerabilities can be. They
used a dial-up modem to rewrite computer code and remotely
detonate an industry-controlled system generator. That is why I
am pleased we are having this hearing today. We as a Congress
must do everything in our power to ensure that the grid remains
safe and secure.
The testimony we hear today will help us understand our
successes and identify flaws in the current approach so that we
can understand what else can be done to protect the smart grid.
This hearing will also help us understand if Congress needs to
provide more resources or more legislative authority for key
cybersecurity agencies.
The administration has made cybersecurity a priority,
launching a comprehensive national cybersecurity initiative to
protect the digital infrastructure. The President's 2013 budget
includes $769 million to support the National Cybersecurity
Division within the Department of Homeland Security. These
funds are targeted at improving monitoring on Federal networks
to respond to cyber threats, and supporting cyber attack
responses for critical infrastructure owners and operators, and
for State and local authorities.
I commend this targeted focus on cybersecurity, but I am
hoping that today our witnesses will help us learn more about
any gaps in security that may still exist.
Mr. Chairman, as I said, I appreciate that you are holding
this hearing, and I am encouraged that you have announced that
we are going to keep looking into other areas where we can work
together in a bipartisan fashion. For example, we will hear
from witnesses today the issue of cybersecurity goes well
beyond the protection of the critical infrastructure. Consumers
entrust important personal information on their banks--to their
banks, their internet service providers, their credit card
companies, and the retailers from whom they purchase items from
online. These companies should ensure that they are protecting
this information and Congress needs to be doing its oversight
job to make sure that this is the case.
Every day we hear stories about e-mail accounts being
hacked, credit card information being hijacked, and Social
Security numbers or other important personal information being
stolen by cyber criminals. It has even happened to some of us
who sit on this panel. The loss of this information can be
costly and personally damaging. In September of last year, the
internet security company, Symantec, issued the Norton Cyber
Crime Report and calculated that cyber crimes cost companies
and consumers $114 billion annually. That same report found
that more than 2/3 of adults online had been victims of a cyber
crime.
As our use of internet services becomes more and more
integrated, using the same internet services for e-mail, social
networking, photo sharing, bill paying, and browsing and
search, we have to be more vigilant in ensuring the protection
of our personal information. Sites like Google, Yahoo, and
Facebook will be targets for hackers, and if successful, these
cyber attacks will have a major impact on the American public.
For that reason, Mr. Chairman, in addition to investigating
how the government can improve critical infrastructure
cybersecurity, I think this subcommittee should also look
closely at what the private sector is doing to prevent cyber
attacks and keep consumers' personal information safe.
I look forward to working with you on all of these issues,
Mr. Chairman, and with that, I will yield back.
Mr. Stearns. Thank the gentlelady and recognize the
gentleman from Nebraska, Mr. Terry, for 2 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LEE TERRY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEBRASKA

Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing. Of course, one of the cornerstone
responsibilities of this Committee is finding--determining
reliability of our electricity delivery system. In today's
world, that means when we are protecting the grid, it means we
have to look into the cyber attacks.
Let me just give you one quick story from University of
Nebraska at Omaha, PKI Institute of Information Assurance. They
set up as a class project in their master's program an electric
company fake Web site, and then tracked who would attack it.
Within about 48 hours, there was probably about 50 hack
attempts, most of them coming from a certain region in China,
but all over the world. This just shows how vulnerable we are.
Now as we move to more of a smart grid, that also means
that we have more vulnerabilities, whether it is from EMPs or
from cyber attacks. So looking at how we can strengthen our
ability to defend from these attacks is just part of our core
effort here.
So at this time, I would like to yield the rest of my time
to----
Mr. Stearns. The gentleman yields back the balance of his
time?
Mr. Terry. Yes.
Mr. Stearns. And so we have extra time here, and we
recognize Dr. Burgess for a minute and a half to 2 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman for the recognition. I
want to thank our witnesses for being here today, because this
is an issue of extreme importance. We are facing threats from
around the world, and certainly, all of us want to remain
vigilant.
From hearings that we have had in previous Congresses in
this subcommittee, and from talking to people who are charged
with protecting our country, defending our country in an
increasingly adverse cyber environment, we are well aware that
every day from around the world, as Mr. Terry mentioned, are
trying to break into our vital modes of infrastructure and
technology, and not the least of that being the electric grid.
We are also concerned about cost and that is why I am so
grateful that some of the testimony today has focused on the
effectiveness and the effectiveness of even the metrics that we
use in order to assess how we are doing, and I think that is of
critical importance, both as a consumer and certainly, it is
clear that the utility companies themselves will be interested
in knowing what the effectiveness of the measures that we are
asking them to implement--they have to be interested in the
effectiveness of those measures.
We want these to be informed decisions. We do not want them
to be emotional or political decisions, but we want them to be
based on the best possible information, so that is why I am
grateful, Mr. Chairman, that you called this hearing. I am
grateful for our witnesses to be here, and I will yield back to
the chairman.
Mr. Stearns. Gentleman yields back and we recognize the
gentlelady from Tennessee, Ms. Blackburn----
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you so much----
Mr. Stearns [continuing]. For a minute and a half.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you. I appreciate that. I do want to
welcome our witnesses.
We all know and we realize how very--how debilitating these
attacks would be. Some of the reports that I have read indicate
that we could see blackouts for 9 to 18 months in areas if we
were hit with a cyber attack, and certainly last year as we
have looked at the series of attacks known as Night Dragon and
how the hackers broke into and stole proprietary information
worth millions of dollars, we see how this has a direct impact
on not only U.S. but European energy companies.
I think that one of the things that concerns me is looking
at what we have found out with the increase from '06 to '10 a
650 percent increase in the number of attacks and the
incidences that have been tracked. So we welcome you and we
look forward to hearing what you have to say, and some of the
accelerated planning issues that are in front of us.
Thank you very much. Yield back.
Mr. Stearns. Gentlelady yields back and I recognize the
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Gingrey, for 1 minute.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PHIL GINGREY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF GEORGIA

Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for giving me a
minute of time. I was looking for an e-mail on my iPhone, but I
don't know how to use the iPhone so I couldn't pull up the e-
mail. But basically I received an e-mail on my iPhone just a
couple of days ago, purportedly from literally my best friend,
who happens to be of European descent, and it was this typical
e-mail, ``I am contacting you with tears in my eyes. We went on
vacation in Spain, we got mugged at the--we can't get home,
could you please e-mail us or wire us 1,600 Euros? God bless
you and thank you for your help.'' I mean, that kind of thing
is amazing. It is the first time I have ever received one of
those, but that is small potatoes, of course, compared to what
we are talking about here, but it just is a small example of
the seriousness of cyber attack on the smart grid, so I am
really looking forward to hearing from the witnesses and
learning more about this----
Ms. DeGette. Will the gentleman yield? Maybe your iPhone
doesn't work because you opened that e-mail from your friend
and now they have destroyed all your network.
Mr. Gingrey. I have been attacked.
Ms. DeGette. Yes.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you, Ms. DeGette.
Ms. DeGette. You are welcome.
Mr. Stearns. All right, our side is complete. With that,
recognize the Ranking Member of the Full Committee, the
gentleman from California for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your
holding this hearing, and I want to say, this is exactly the
type of oversight this subcommittee should be conducting,
ensuring that our government uses its resources wisely, and
that the private sector is taking appropriate steps to
guarantee the safety and security of our Nation's critical
infrastructure.
Today's hearing will give us an opportunity to learn about
the key challenges to ensuring the security of this Nation's
electric grid. As the grid becomes more technologically
advanced, it becomes more exposed to hackers, terrorists, and
foreign enemies. As the grid becomes more interoperable, the
potential effect of a cybersecurity breach becomes more
widespread.
The smart grid offers tremendous potential benefits.
Modernizing the grid will make electricity cheaper, more
efficient, more reliable, but at the same time, we must take
appropriate action to protect the electric grid and to improve
services and access for citizens across the Nation.
In 2007, Congress and then-President Bush approved the
Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007. This legislation
authorized the Smart Grid Investment Grant Program and the
smart grid Demonstration Program. The 2009 Recovery Act amended
these programs and provided funding to ensure their
implementation.
The first program, the Smart Grid Demonstration Program,
funded 32 projects to verify the viability of smart grid
technology and quantify the costs and benefits of these
improvements. The second program, the Smart Grid Investment
Grant Program, awarded grants for smart grid technology
updates. These grants have allowed the installation of smart
meters in millions of homes, implementation of automatic peak
pricing, response for commercial and industrial customers, and
the development of comprehensive demand response programs.
These programs provided 99 grants to recipients in 42 States,
the District of Columbia, and Guam. In total, the Energy
Department invested $3.4 billion in grants, which was matched
by $4.6 billion in private investments, for a total public
private investment of over $8 billion.
Today will give us an opportunity to evaluate what is
working and what can be improved in these programs. The
Department of Energy's Inspector General recently issued a
report on the Smart Grid Grant Program and identified some
reimbursement issues and concerns about approval of some
cybersecurity plans. Today's hearing will allow us to explore
those issues.
Beyond oversight, we must also do our part in protecting
the electrical grid. Both GAO and the DOE Inspector General
have acknowledged that Federal Energy Regulatory Commission has
only limited authority to ensure the grid is truly secure. In
fact, the Inspector General found that FERC does not have the
authority to develop its own standards or mandatory alerts,
even when new threats are identified. This gap in authority
creates serious potential risks.
Last May, the Subcommittee on Energy and Power held a
hearing to discuss the bipartisan Grid Reliability and
Infrastructure Defense Act, a bill that would give FERC
additional authority to protect the electric grid from
potentially dangerous vulnerabilities. Today's hearing will
again demonstrate why we need to act on this legislation
without further delay. We must continue to invest in making our
electric grid the best in the world. That includes investing in
standards and technologies so that the electric grid is secure
in the face of unexpected terror attacks or hacking attempts.
This hearing is an important step in identifying what can be
done to ensure that the electric grid is protected.
I have focused my opening statement on the electric grid,
but I hope this hearing produces some ways for members to learn
how to use their iPhones, and to be able to realize that when
they get e-mails asking for money, they had better think twice
about it. I nearly fell for that one myself. A good friend was
evidently not able to afford to leave Paris. Things could be
worse, but they wanted something worse, they wanted my money.
This shows that our security of our technology is very
important objective, and I think it is worthwhile for our
hearing to do it.
I am sure, since I have 19 second left, I want to comment
that I am sure by the end of this hearing, whatever we find we
don't like, the Republicans will blame on President Obama. Such
is life. But I think this is a good hearing and I compliment
the chairman for holding it. I will yield back my second.
Mr. Stearns. The gentleman yields back his second, and I
point out that sometimes we hear on your side everything is
blamed on Bush, so----
Mr. Waxman. Too late for that.
Mr. Stearns. All right. Let me direct my comments to our
witnesses this morning. As you know, the testimony that you are
about to give is subject to Title 18 Section 1001 of the United
States Code. When holding an investigative hearing, this
Committee has a practice of taking testimony under oath. Do you
have any objection to testifying under oath?
The Chair then advises you that under the rules of the
House and the rules of this Committee, you are entitled to be
advised by counsel. Do you desire to be advised by counsel
during your testimony today? If not, would you please rise and
raise your right hand?
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Stearns. You may now give your 5-minute summary of your
written statement, and Mr. Wilshusen, you are first.

TESTIMONY OF GREGORY C. WILSHUSEN, DIRECTOR, INFORMATION
SECURITY ISSUES, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, ACCOMPANIED
BY DAVID C. TRIMBLE, DIRECTOR, NATURAL RESOURCES AND
ENVIRONMENT, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE; AND RICHARD J.
CAMPBELL, SPECIALIST, ENERGY POLICY, CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH
SERVICE

TESTIMONY OF GREGORY C. WILSHUSEN

Mr. Wilshusen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Stearns, Ranking Member DeGette, and members of
the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today at today's hearing on cybersecurity for the smart grid. I
am joined today by David Trimble, who is the Director for GAO's
Natural Resources and Environment team. In addition, Mr.
Chairman, if I may, I would like to recognize John Logoson,
Mike Gilmore, and especially Lee McCracken for their efforts--
--
Mr. Stearns. Ask them to raise their hand. We are not
sure----
Mr. Wilshusen. For their efforts in developing our written
statement that we submitted today.
As you know, the electric power industry is increasingly
incorporating information technology systems and networks into
its existing infrastructure as it modernizes the electricity
grid. In 2007, the Energy Independence and Security Act
established that it is Federal policy to support this
modernization. Known as a smart grid, these nationwide efforts
are aimed at improving the reliability and efficiency of the
grid, and facilitating the use of alternative energy sources.
Smart grid technologies include smart meters that enable two
way communications between utilities and customers, smart
components that provide system operators with detailed data on
the conditions of transmission and distribution systems, and
advanced methods for controlling equipment. The use of these
systems may have a number of benefits, such as fewer and
shorter outages of electrical service, lower electricity rates,
and an improved ability to respond to attacks on the electric
grid.
However, the increased reliance on IT systems and networks
also exposes the grid to cybersecurity vulnerabilities. For
nearly a decade, GAO has identified the protection of systems
supporting our Nation's critical infrastructures as--which
include the electric grid--as a government-wide high risk area.
Mr. Chairman, the threats to these systems supporting these
infrastructures are evolving and growing. They include both
unintentional and intentional threats, and may come in the form
of equipment failure, as well as targeted and untargeted
attacks from our adversaries.
The interconnectivity between information systems, the
internet, and other infrastructures can amplify the impact of
these threats, potentially affecting the operations of critical
infrastructures, the security of sensitive information, and the
flow of commerce.
In January 2011, GAO reported on a number of key challenges
to securing smart grid systems and networks. For example, the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, or FERC, which has
responsibility for adopting cybersecurity and other standards
it deems necessary to ensure grid functionality and
interoperability, had not developed a coordinated approach with
other regulators to monitor industry compliance with voluntary
standards. In addition, we reported other challenges affecting
industry efforts to secure the smart grid. Specifically, the
electricity industry had not consistently built security
features under certain smart grid devices, established an
effective mechanism for our sharing cybersecurity information,
and created a set of metrics for evaluating the effectiveness
of cybersecurity controls.
GAO made several recommendations to FERC aimed at
addressing these challenges, and the Commission agreed with our
recommendations.
To summarize, Mr. Chairman, the electricity industry is in
the midst of a major transformation as a result of smart grid
initiatives. While these initiatives hold the promise of
significant benefits, including a more resilient electric grid,
lower energy costs, and the ability to tap alternative sources
of power, the prevalence of cyber threats aimed at the Nation's
critical infrastructure and the cyber vulnerabilities arising
from the use of new technologies highlight the importance of
securing smart grid systems. In particular, it will be
important for Federal regulators and other stakeholders to work
closely with the private sector to address key cybersecurity
challenges posted by the transition--posed by the transition to
smart grid technology. While no system can be made 100 percent
secure, proven security strategies could help reduce risks to a
manageable and acceptable level.
Chairman Stearns, Ranking Member DeGette, and other members
of the subcommittee, this completes my statement, and David and
I would be happy to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilshusen and Mr. Trimble
follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.020

Mr. Stearns. All right, and I understand, Mr. Campbell,
your opening statement is welcome.

TESTIMONY OF RICHARD J. CAMPBELL

Mr. Campbell. Good morning, Chairman, Ranking Member, and
members of the subcommittee, my name is Richard Campbell. I am
a Specialist in Energy Policy for the Congressional Research
Service. On behalf of CRS, I would like to thank the Committee
for inviting me to testify here today. I would like to request
that my written testimony be entered into the record.
Mr. Stearns. By unanimous consent, so ordered.
Mr. Campbell. My testimony will provide background on the
development of the smart grid, the Department of Energy's
vision for the smart grid, and plans for the cybersecurity of
the smart grid. I should note that CRS does not advocate policy
or take a position on specific legislation.
The electrical grid in the United States comprises all of
the power plants generating electricity, together with the
transmission and distribution systems which bring power to end-
use customers. The grid also connects the many public and
private electricity companies and power companies throughout
the United States. The modernization of the grid to accommodate
today's power flows, serve reliability needs, and meet future
projected uses is leading to the incorporation of the
electronic intelligence capabilities for power control and
operations monitoring. The smart grid is the name given to this
evolving intelligent electricity network. While these
intelligent components may enhance the efficiency of grid
operations, they also potentially increase the susceptibility
of the grid to cyber, that is, computer-generated, attack,
since they are built around microprocessor devices controlled
by software programming. The potential for a major disruption
or widespread damage to the Nation's power system from a large-
scale cyber attack has increased focus on the cyber security of
the smart grid.
The Department of Energy summarized its view of the
potential of the smart grid by the year 2030 as a fully
automated power delivery network that monitors and controls
every customer and node, ensuring a two-way flow of electricity
and information between the power plant and the appliance, and
all points in between.
Federal funding has been provided to help develop concepts
and technologies for the smart grid. The American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 provided $4.5 billion in funding to
the DOE for projects to modernize the grid. DOE's Smart Grid
Investment Grant program received $3.5 billion of these funds
with the expressed purpose of stimulating the rapid deployment
of advanced digital technologies needed to modernize the grid.
The SGIG is a cost-shared program, meaning recipients of
grants were to provide as much as 50 percent of a project's
total costs.
According to a recent report from the DOE's Office of
Inspector General, all the available grant funds from the SGIG
program have been awarded to 99 recipients, with awards ranging
in value from $397,000 to $200 million. An approach to
cybersecurity was required as part of the SGIG application
process. Recipients of awards were required to submit a
detailed plan addressing specific cybersecurity elements and
concerns. The DOEIG report observed that DOE approved these
cybersecurity plans even though weaknesses in the plans were
identified and not fully addressed. The DOE responded to the
report saying that it will require award recipients to update
their cybersecurity plans later this year.
The DOE funded the development of the recently released
Roadmap to Achieve Energy Delivery Systems Cybersecurity. This
Roadmap provides a plan to improve the cybersecurity of the
electricity, oil, and natural gas sectors.
The Roadmap recognizes the changing landscape of
cybersecurity, and the continuing need to seek out and address
cybersecurity gaps, and includes an implementation strategy for
cybersecurity built on milestones to be achieved by the year
2020.
The DOE has recently begun to update its vision for the
smart grid, focusing on three key attributes it sees as
desirable for the smart grid of the future: a seamless, cost-
effective electricity system; a system capable of accommodating
all generation choices; a system which enables customer choice.
According to this updated vision, the smart grid will still
see regional diversity in power choices, while allowing for the
development of a national framework. According to DOE, a
reliable, secure, and resilient grid will be the key to
achieving this vision.
In conclusion, it is the very features which can add
seamless integration and utility to the smart grid that also
add cyber vulnerabilities to electricity networks. Some assert
that the smart grid and cybersecurity systems will have to
develop along parallel but interconnected paths if the electric
grid of the future is to develop in a manner that can enhance,
and not impair, future economic development.
Congress could provide funding for research and development
of systems to bridge gaps in cybersecurity and build the smart
grid. Federal funding could also be used to bring government
and industry together in forums to address the needs and
directions of these developing systems.
Congress may also provide for a regulatory framework which
could achieve a basic level of cybersecurity. But due to the
constantly changing nature of cyber threats, it is unlikely
that effective cybersecurity of the grid will be achieved by
regulation alone. Some assert that electric utilities must be
focused on cybersecurity as keenly as they are on their current
obligation to serve or to provide shareholder value.
Thank you for the invitation to appear today. I will be
pleased to address any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Campbell follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76641.028

Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Mr. Campbell. I will start with my
questions.
Let us see if we get something that is current here. A 2011
bulletin by the Department of Homeland Security titled
``Insider Threats to Utilities'' stated that ``based on the
reliable reporting of previous incidents, we have a high
confidence in our judgment that insiders and their actions pose
a significant threat to the infrastructure and information
systems of the United States facilities,'' vis-`-vis the grid.
Mr. Wilshusen, are you aware of any specific power outage or
threat to the electric grid that has transpired in such a way
that is talked about in this Homeland Security report from
2011?
Mr. Wilshusen. You mean specifically from an insider
threat?
Mr. Stearns. Yes.
Mr. Wilshusen. I can't say I know of a specific incident
where that occurred; however, certainly insider threats are
very important and a threat that our agencies and entities need
to consider, because insiders typically have advanced knowledge
and even access to the systems and the types of systems that
contain information that they could have the ability then to
perpetrate, if they have malicious intent to cause disruptions
and damage. And it is not just those with malicious intent, but
also insiders who may be careless or who may be untrained that
conduct activities that also impair or harm their systems and
networks. But clearly, that is a key threat.
Mr. Stearns. Are you aware of any outsiders soliciting
people in the smart grid viable areas? Are you aware of any
outsiders that are trying to do this?
Mr. Wilshusen. In terms of corrupting----
Mr. Stearns. Yes.
Mr. Wilshusen [continuing]. And using insider threats? I
can't say I know of specific examples of where that occurs--
that occurred.
Mr. Stearns. Can you describe the controls and checks in
place at utilities to prevent these kinds of attacks?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, clearly one of the key controls that
utilities and, indeed, agencies should do is background checks
on their employees and those----
Mr. Stearns. Are they doing the background checks, in your
opinion, adequately?
Mr. Wilshusen. We haven't examined the--how the securities
are----
Mr. Stearns. So there has been no examination of how those
background checks have been done and how they have been
corroborated, or the credibility of those checks?
Mr. Wilshusen. No, we have not assessed that as part of our
review.
Mr. Stearns. Do you think that should be done?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well certainly it should be monitored and
checked, because I do believe that individuals that have
sensitive positions and hold--and have sensitive access to
systems should have some level of background investigation
performed. And there are other controls, too, that should be in
place to help restrict and limit insiders, either careless or
untrained insiders, as well as malicious from performing these
types of acts, and that includes by limiting their access to
only that level needed for them to perform their jobs, as
opposed to giving them broader access to systems.
Mr. Stearns. The MacAfee Corporation did a report in early
2011, another current report, in which they surveyed about 200
executives from critical electricity infrastructure across the
United--across the world, in fact. That found that 85 percent
had experienced network infiltrations, and 80 percent had faced
a large scale denial of service attack. Do you think that
number is correct? That is quite large, 80 percent of both
network infiltrations and 80 percent faced a large scale denial
of service attack. Do you think those figures are accurate?
Mr. Wilshusen. I have no basis to form whether they are
accurate or not, but I will say as it relates to Federal
Government agencies----
Mr. Stearns. Is that typical?
Mr. Wilshusen. In terms of those that have reported
security incidents, yes, most Federal agencies have done that
and as the Congresswoman mentioned earlier, the number of
reported security incidents within the Federal Government has
risen by 650 percent from 2006 through 2010.
Now, what one disparity or inconsistency with that comment
that you made, the statistics in that MacAfee report is that
within the Federal Government, there was only about 1 percent
or so of the reported security incidents were considered to be
denial of service attacks, which would be those that would
disrupt the----
Mr. Stearns. So I assume you reviewed the MacAfee report
yourself?
Mr. Wilshusen. No, I have not.
Mr. Stearns. How do these people get into cause these
infiltrations? I mean, do you have any idea how it actually
happens?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, there are a number of different attack
patterns----
Mr. Stearns. Just give me two quick, the most prevalent.
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, one would be, for example, if they put
malicious software on a thumb drive and then an employee of
that corporation----
Mr. Stearns. Puts that thumb drive into the computer?
Mr. Wilshusen. Pardon?
Mr. Stearns. He puts that thumb drive in the software?
Mr. Wilshusen. Puts the thumb drive into the computer and
then downloads the malicious software onto the computer. That
is one way.
Mr. Stearns. To the hard disk, yes.
Mr. Wilshusen. Another way would be if the attacker would
set up a malicious Web site and which would also then entice
employees of the service center to--or wherever--to go to that
Web site and download what appears to be an innocuous or an
attractive program, when in fact, that too contains malicious
code that could then allow----
Mr. Stearns. Could the facility put software in place to
prevent both of those from occurring?
Mr. Wilshusen. They can, and disable certain functions--
physical ports on the laptop or on the desktop to prevent that
from happening. And indeed, the Department of Defense had such
an attack on their networks based upon a thumb drive that led
them to disable the thumb drives on the vast majority of
their----
Mr. Stearns. Last question. Has the Department of Homeland
Security or the Department of Energy issued any guidance to the
electricity sector on best practices that we just talked about
in these two cases?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, as part of the Energy Independence and
Security Act, NIST, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, had responsibilities for developing security
guidelines in connection with input from a number of different
organizations that were then to be provided to FERC at
Department of Energy to either approve if there is a consensus
on those, and some of those controls would help to prevent such
attacks, or could.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. Mr. Wilshusen, were those controls,
in fact, promulgated by FERC?
Mr. Wilshusen. No.
Ms. DeGette. Why not?
Mr. Wilshusen. It determined that there wasn't a consensus
on those--development of those standards and cybersecurity
guidelines, and under the Act, there--in the process are
required to develop a consensus for----
Ms. DeGette. So now what? Are they developing standards?
Mr. Wilshusen. My understanding is that NIST is working to
gain such a consensus.
Ms. DeGette. OK. I want to talk with you a minute more
about FERC, because what I am wondering is if they need extra
authorities to protect the electric grid from these potentially
dangerous vulnerabilities.
Can you just give us a quick example of the types of
security flaws that might leave the grid vulnerable to hackers?
Mr. Wilshusen. One would be if they do not appropriately
assess the risk to those various different components of the
smart grid and implement the appropriate security controls over
that. For example, if the access controls are not appropriately
applied to different components of the grid, that could
potentially allow a path into----
Ms. DeGette. And of course, the development of this smart
grid increases this risk because it is more and more
computerized, correct?
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes, the increased use of IT systems and
networks provide additional paths and access points for
potential attackers to gain access to it. In addition, the
increasing interconnectivity of these systems and networks also
allow potential attackers broader range and access to other
devices.
Ms. DeGette. And yet at the same time that there is broader
vulnerability, the increased interconnection and the smart--
development of the smart grid, it is a really valuable part of
our system because it gives us--number one, it gives us more
efficiency so consumers can get better prices, and number two,
it allows us to use some of these renewable technologies that
the chairman was talking about in his opening statement,
correct?
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. And so here is my question. The GAO and others
have said that there could be gaps in the FERC's regulatory
authority to deal with development of these standards to
respond to new vulnerabilities. Can you talk about that for a
minute?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well in our recent report that we issued
back in January of 2011, we identified that FERC did not have
appropriate authorities, that their authorities were pretty
much--since they didn't have the appropriate authorities, their
authorities were limited to basically adopting and approving
standards that were developed by others for the smart grid, and
then primarily just at the bulk power level and bulk power
supply level, not necessarily at the distribution level where
certain smart grid investments and devices are being
implemented. And we made the recommendation to NERC that they
need to really work with these other parties and stakeholders
to include the State public utility commissions that do have
such authorities and responsibilities to monitor the
implementation of any standards that it adopts.
Ms. DeGette. So----
Mr. Wilshusen. And it had not done that.
Ms. DeGette. So do they have the authority to do that, or
does Congress need to give them more authority to coordinate
with those other operators?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, they have the authority to coordinate
with the other operators----
Ms. DeGette. OK.
Mr. Wilshusen [continuing]. And utility commissions at the
State level----
Ms. DeGette. OK.
Mr. Wilshusen [continuing]. But they don't have the
authority to mandate particular cybersecurity standards.
Ms. DeGette. Do you think they need that authority?
Mr. Wilshusen. We do not make that recommendation or really
go there. We just actually made the recommendation to FERC that
it determined whether, you know, what gaps overlaps exist, so--
--
Ms. DeGette. Yes, so if FERC determined that, they could
come to us----
Mr. Wilshusen. Right.
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. And ask for that authority.
Mr. Wilshusen. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. Now, there are some--do you know how many of
these local and State authorities there are that FERC would
need to be coordinating with?
Mr. Trimble. Well, you are--FERC is----
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Trimble?
Mr. Trimble. Yes, sorry.
Ms. DeGette. That is OK.
Mr. Trimble. FERC is--has jurisdiction over the bulk power
system, but once it gets into the distribution system at the
State level or at the local level, it falls to the State
utilities. So the----
Ms. DeGette. There are thousands of them, right?
Mr. Trimble. Right, so you are talking about 50 States plus
those that aren't under State control or under minimal State
control.
Ms. DeGette. Right, and then there is other agencies like
Homeland Security, Energy and National Security Agency that
also have oversight responsibilities over the critical
electrical infrastructure, correct?
Mr. Trimble. Um-hum.
Ms. DeGette. So all of those individual utilities would
have to work together to really address this, right?
Mr. Trimble. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Now, one last question, Mr. Chairman. I
have got a lot more questions in this line, but maybe I will
have an opportunity to ask then, but the Energy Independence
and Security Act of 2007 directed the National Institute of
Standards and Technologies to develop those standards, but
those standards haven't been adopted for the reasons Mr.
Wilshusen just explained, right?
Mr. Trimble. Right.
Mr. Wilshusen. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. And do we have any sense when they are going
to be adopted, now that it has gone back to the agency?
Mr. Trimble. We have not seen a timeline.
Ms. DeGette. OK, thank you.
Mr. Stearns. The gentlelady from Tennessee is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. I thank you all and appreciate so much the
time that you are giving us today, and continuing to work with
us through this issue.
I have found it so interesting, as we have worked through
these hearings, how our constituents are paying attention to
this, and how they come back to us, those constituents that are
working in informatics or in energy delivery systems, and they
have different things they want to add to the discussion that
we are having.
One question I do have on the smart meters that are out
there. Is there a way that someone's proprietary information is
being tracked or pulled or hacked into--what are the
protections that are on these meters? Can you give me just a
little bit of information on that, because some of our
constituents--and Ms. DeGette talked about this when she said
people can watch and find out when the electricity is going to
cost them less and then do chores at that time, but our
customers are saying now wait a minute. Is this--while it is
giving me information, is this going to be giving--what are the
protections, the privacy protections that are going to exist to
the consumer about protecting that virtual presence and
knowledge of themselves?
Mr. Wilshusen. Right, that is certainly an area of concern
insofar as that those meters need to have the appropriate
cybersecurity, information security controls built into them.
We convened a panel of cybersecurity experts as part of our
review that we issued a report back in January of 2011, and
they identified that there are control deficiencies in some of
those meters, to include not having the appropriate login
capabilities, which would help and--or the forensics
capabilities to determine how and whether an attack had
occurred.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK, then let me ask you this. With those
meters, would it be easy just to--is it very easy just to hack
into them? Should people consider there to be so much
transparency in these that they are not protecting their usage?
Help me with that.
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, I would just say that it really
depends upon the facts and circumstances of each individual
type of meter----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Mr. Wilshusen [continuing]. And the security
vulnerabilities or strengths relative to the individual meters.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Mr. Wilshusen, I want to ask you, May
'08 you made some comments about TVA's corporate network
contains security weaknesses that could lead to disruption of
their control systems, and of course, for those of us in the
Tennessee Valley and TVA as the main power generator, we are
very concerned about that. You had 19 specific recommendations
that you had for the TVA at that point in time. In your follow
ons, has TVA implemented these? Have they been responsive to
putting these controls in place? How are we doing with
tightening that system up?
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes, TVA has been responsive in implementing
not only the 19 recommendations that were made in the public
report, but also we made a number of other recommendations in a
limited distribution report----
Mrs. Blackburn. Exactly, yes.
Mr. Wilshusen [continuing]. That dealt more with the
technical controls over their networks and their industrial
control system networks. TVA has been responsive, has
implemented most, if not all, of our recommendations and we
have closed them out.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you. With that, I will yield back.
Mr. Stearns. Gentlelady yields back. Ms. Myrick is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Myrick. Thank you, and really, this is for any of you,
but it concerns giving the cybersecurity threats and the
weaknesses that were identified in the GAO report and in the
Inspector General for the Department of Energy's report. It
seems to be that cybersecurity is not a real high priority with
some companies today, and given the wealth of information that
is out there about the threats that exist--I am also on Intel
and we deal with this all the time. And it just seems apparent
to me that we--that companies really aren't taking this as
seriously as they should. Not just companies, of course,
dealing with the electric grid, but other companies as well
when it comes to how they fit into the big picture in the
country.
Is it because they don't feel that there is any incentive
for them to do it in any way? I am at a little of a loss, I
guess, because some of them just seem to be kind of blase about
it, even though they are so vulnerable. It is unreal and then
it affects the rest of us from a national security standpoint.
Mr. Trimble. I would answer in two ways. One, from our
expert panel that we convened one of the concerns that they had
was confusion and uncertainty over who is in charge in terms
of----
Mrs. Myrick. OK.
Mr. Trimble [continuing]. Where the guidance was given, the
complexity of the regulatory oversight. From--if you are
putting yourself in the producer of the utilities perspective,
they are faced with--so the standards haven't been adopted,
even though--even when they are adopted, they are voluntary,
and then if you are a producer under State control, you don't
have anything from the States. To recover those costs, to make
those investment decisions, those costs have to be recoverable.
There is no necessary guarantee that you will recover those
costs if you make those investments in this uncertainty.
So again, this goes back to our recommendation as to when
you adopt, you need to closely monitor to what extent these
standards are being followed and to what extent they are
effective, and make changes quickly. So it really, you know,
sort of asking the system something it hasn't done necessarily
in the past, which is act quickly and sort of more nimbly than
it has. But I think part of the answer is really I would just
put yourself in the shoes of the utility when faced with making
those decisions and trying to balance the cost and benefits and
risks that you are looking at.
Mr. Wilshusen. And I want to add to that. Also in some
instances these utilities may or may not be fully aware of some
of the threats and risks that are there, particularly certain
incidents. In many cases, some of the most actionable and alert
information may not necessarily be able to be shared with the
utilities because it is classified.
Mrs. Myrick. Right.
Mr. Wilshusen. And so the information sharing equation is
also a factor in terms of the agency--or the utilities
receiving timely and actionable information.
We issued a report a year ago or 2 years ago that dealt
with the expectations and the delivery of those expectations
between the public-private partnership model that is currently
in use, and many--this is not only just the electricity
industry, but also across other critical infrastructure
sectors, in that most of the respondents on the private sector
side indicated that--in fact, 98 percent of them said that
receiving timely, actionable, alert and threat information was
very important to them, but only 27 percent of them responded
and said that their Federal partners were greatly or moderately
providing that information to them.
Mrs. Myrick. So it is not a resistance or lack of
understanding on the part of the companies from your
perspective and what you are seeing, it is really that they--
that this aspect of who is in charge and who they report to and
how they get the information and what information they get is
really the problem?
Mr. Wilshusen. It is a contributing factor.
Mrs. Myrick. OK. Anybody else wish to comment?
Then I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Stearns. Gentlelady yields back. The gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Gingrey, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am going to
address my first question to all three of you, and I think I
will start with Mr. Campbell.
Each of you mentioned in the January 2012 report issued by
the Department of Energy's Inspector General that 36 of the 99
grant recipients did not have the sufficient security plans in
place to provide further risk determent, despite the fact that
the Federal Government has spent, I think you said $3.5 billion
in taxpayer money for this Smart Grid Investment Grant Program.
Now while I am disappointed that for scheduling purposes it
prevented the DOE Inspector General from being here today, I
would like to ask each of you your thoughts on these three
questions, and I will start with Mr. Campbell. What are the
potential implications of these insufficient security controls?
Mr. Campbell. Well basically smart grid devices are being
developed that may not have full cybersecurity mechanisms built
in. So if these devices do actually make it to market, there
could be problems with cybersecurity of the devices going
forward.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Trimble?
Mr. Trimble. Yes, I will--what I would add to that, and I
will defer to my colleague on the cyber aspect of this, that
one of the downsides if you end up with devices that don't meet
the standards or aren't sufficiently protected and then the
utility has to pull those out, you have created a problem in
terms of who is going to pay for that mistake, because they
will go to the public utility to recover those costs, the
public is not going to want to pay for the mistake, and so you
will have a very contentious situation.
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes, I would agree with both Mr. Trimble and
Mr. Campbell in that it could create opportunities where key
controls are not being implemented into these devices or not
being implemented in whatever the initiative and grant
initiative had was developing. One thing that was noted by the
IG is that these were approved even though the Department had
requested that the plans be updated, which they were, but not
in all instances were those key controls addressed and the
Department has to approve that.
According to the IG report, if I read that correctly--
again, I defer to the DOEIG on that--is that there was
apparently an emphasis on the part of the Department to make
sure that these grants were approved and gotten out.
Mr. Gingrey. We--as the chairman said in his opening
remarks, we had hoped to have the IG from DOE here today, and
hopefully we will schedule another hearing and hear from him.
But going back to Mr. Campbell, throughout the life of the
grant, is it feasible that these problems that exist could
still be corrected?
Mr. Campbell. The DOE's office has responded that it will
require the applicant grantees to update their cybersecurity
plans, I believe it is by April of this year.
Mr. Gingrey. All right, Mr. Trimble and Mr. W., you all
have some comments on that as well?
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes. I would just also add that in the
report, the IG indicated that the Department was also going to
be, as part of their annual review process of these grant
initiatives, were to review the recipient's implementation of
those cybersecurity controls in their plans.
Mr. Gingrey. And then the last part of this question, and I
see I am probably only going to get one question in in the
allotted 5 minutes, but with this report in mind, the DOE
Inspector General report, do you know of any instances in which
the smart grid for which the grant program was supposed to
bolster has been compromised from a security standpoint? Mr.
Campbell, any specifics there?
Mr. Campbell. I am not aware of any specifics.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Trimble?
Mr. Trimble. No, sir.
Mr. Wilshusen. No, sir.
Mr. Gingrey. OK. I do have a little bit of time left. Let
me go--let us see, back to--well that is all right. I will just
save that if there is a second round.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Stearns. All right, gentleman yields back. We will do a
second round and I will start.
Mr. Wilshusen, in your testimony you stated that Department
of Energy Inspector General found that under the Smart Grid
Investment Grant Program, recipients were not always complete
or lacked sufficient detail in security controls in their
submissions to Department of Energy. Is that correct?
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes, sir.
Mr. Stearns. Is that a big deal?
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes, it can be.
Mr. Stearns. And why, specifically?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, if those----
Mr. Stearns. Why is it a big deal?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, if it is----
Mr. Stearns. I think it is a big deal, but I just want you
to confirm it.
Mr. Wilshusen. If those plans are incomplete and do not
identify key controls that should be implemented on as part of
these smart grid initiatives, that could lead to vulnerable
devices and therefore, may subject those devices to increased
risk of being compromised.
Mr. Stearns. So you have a smart meter device being
purchased with government grant money that lacks the proper
security features and if the guarantees don't have specific or
detailed security plans when installing them into the
customer's homes, isn't that it?
Mr. Wilshusen. That could be a possibility.
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Trimble, is it conceivable that during the
life of the grant period, that these security plans are not
complete, are not implemented properly, unless made a condition
of the grantee to receive the funding? Should we do that?
Mr. Trimble. I believe that should have been a requirement
or----
Mr. Stearns. Do you have your mic on?
Mr. Trimble. I believe that is what the IG indicated, but
that was not our work so I can't speak authoritatively.
Mr. Stearns. Do you know of any specific examples that I
could hear from you, or Mr. Wilshusen?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well in the IG report, they identified three
of the five security plans that it reviewed. These were the
plans that had already been initially identified by the
Department as having deficient or shortcomings in the security
programs, and then updated by the recipient or the grantee
recipients, and they identified that three of the five still
had the shortcomings and did not contain complete information.
And some of that information dealt, as I recall, with the
auditing and some of the technical security controls associated
with those initiatives. But as far as more detailed
information, I did not review or have access to the work papers
supporting the report by the IG.
Mr. Stearns. Is this all primarily in the smart meter
technology? Is that where all this concern is?
Mr. Wilshusen. With the IG's report, I don't think it was
specific to that. I don't recall if it was specifically
mentioned.
Mr. Stearns. Isn't that where most of the investment is?
Mr. Wilshusen. That also I don't know.
Mr. Stearns. Yes, Mr. Trimble?
Mr. Trimble. I believe it was in a broader range. I thought
the bulk of the money was into other systems like phase
measurement units and things like that, but again, we haven't
done work in that area.
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Campbell, how many, in your opinion, smart
grid cyber incidents have there been?
Mr. Campbell. I am not familiar with the total number, but
from I have heard in discussion there has been quite a few
cybersecurity incidents.
Mr. Stearns. Under 10, under 100?
Mr. Campbell. Probably more than that.
Mr. Stearns. Under 1,000?
Mr. Campbell. I couldn't say with any specific.
Mr. Stearns. So you have no knowledge of how many specific
system cyber attacks there have been, incidents, then?
Mr. Campbell. No, sir.
Mr. Wilshusen. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Stearns. Yes, sure.
Mr. Wilshusen [continuing]. If I might add, I am not even
sure if there is a monitoring process or reporting mechanism in
place for that information to be reported and collected.
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Campbell, do you think that waiting 3
years for the grant recipients to implement vigorous
cybersecurity plans could lead to cybersecurity gaps and
subsequent compromises in the system integrity?
Mr. Campbell. It is my opinion----
Mr. Stearns. If you might pull the mic just a little
closer.
Mr. Campbell. It is my opinion that during the 3-year
period for development, there should be adequate time for the
DOE to take a look at the requirements in regard to
cybersecurity, but we should also note that cyber threats are
continuing to change, so any regulations that you may put in
place may not be adequate when the final product rolls out.
Mr. Stearns. OK. My last question, Mr. Wilshusen, are there
different cybersecurity challenges that are vulnerabilities for
government-run utility services, such as the Bonneville Power
Administration versus privately-run utility services?
Mr. Wilshusen. We haven't looked at the specific security
controls at private utilities. We have looked at them at TVA,
and identified a number of security vulnerabilities----
Mr. Stearns. At TVA?
Mr. Wilshusen. At TVA, yes, as this was the report that was
referred to earlier. But my understanding is, it is probably
likely that what we found at TVA will probably be--could be
found at other public utilities as well, you know, of a similar
type of electrical power generation and some transmission.
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Trimble, anyone else, do you have any
comments in reference to the private versus government-run
utilities?
Mr. Trimble. No, I would defer to Greg on that.
Mr. Stearns. Mr. Campbell, any suggestions?
Mr. Campbell. No, that seems to be a reasonable response.
Private utilities seem to have many of the same systems that
public utilities have.
Mr. Wilshusen. And one--if I may just add more broadly,
when we looked at other sectors, for example, we looked at
communications network operated by private sector
organizations, we found vulnerabilities in their networks that
were similar to the vulnerabilities that we find in the
networks of Federal agencies. Now while that is not exactly
electricity industry, but I would be fairly confident to say
that vulnerabilities identified in government systems are going
to probably be found in private sector systems in some respects
because the Federal Government security standards and
guidelines typically are as robust, if not more robust, than
private sector guidelines in many cases.
Mr. Stearns. Thank you. My concluding comment is if it hits
one sector, it hit government utility versus private utility,
it is probably the same kind of statistic.
Mr. Wilshusen. I would agree with that comment, which is
all the more reason why there should be an effective and robust
information sharing capability between the public and private
sectors.
Mr. Stearns. With that, my time is expired.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to follow up on the chairman's question about
reporting, because I think I shared his concern. Mr. Campbell
and Mr. Wilshusen, both of you--all three of you said we don't
have any kind of specific knowledge as to how many cyber
attacks there have been. And Mr. Wilshusen, you said that we
don't really have a systematic approach to reporting. Would it
be possible to develop that kind of systematic approach, and if
we did, how would it look, who would be in charge of it, et
cetera?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, we haven't done the work to come up
and just say definitively, but there are some reporting
mechanisms in place now. For example, the Department of
Homeland Security and the U.S. Cert Federal agencies are
required to report their security incidents that occur at their
sites to U.S. Cert, and then U.S. Cert collects that
information and makes reports on it, summarizes it, identified
trends, and also then provides alerts to other Federal
agencies.
Private sector organizations can also report through to the
U.S. Cert, although in terms of having something formal and
required, that is--presently does not exist.
Mr. DeGette. Well, so there is a structure that perhaps you
could do it, there is just no requirement to do it, is that
what you are saying?
Mr. Wilshusen. It may be a model that could be considered
if one was to develop such a reporting structure.
Ms. DeGette. Do you think it would be important to have
some sense of incidences of cyber attacks?
Mr. Wilshusen. Oh, I certainly do, yes.
Ms. DeGette. What do you think, Mr. Campbell?
Mr. Trimble. What I would--I am sorry, what I would just
jump in on this point is when we convened our expert panel, one
of the challenges and problems that the experts identified was
the lack of information sharing among the utilities and the
generators and the government on precisely these issues, the
cyber attacks, successful or not.
Ms. DeGette. So did--so now we have identified--and Mr.
Campbell, would you agree there is a problem?
Mr. Campbell. Yes, but I would also think confidentiality
of reporting would be a key factor in any system that is
developed.
Ms. DeGette. Right, so who would develop that system? I
mean, we are super good at identifying problems, but now how do
we move towards a solution? Anyone?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, within the Federal Government, you
know, DHS has the overriding responsibility as the focal point
for protecting critical infrastructures. Each of the 18
critical sectors--infrastructure sectors have sector-specific
agencies that monitor it for that particular----
Ms. DeGette. Yes, I understand all this, so you would say
it would probably be DHS to develop this?
Mr. Wilshusen. They have a model in place where Federal
agencies are required to. It would be a likely place to start.
Ms. DeGette. OK, thank you.
Mr. Campbell, I want to follow up on the point about
privacy that you just raised, because I don't know if the three
of you saw the story in ``The Washington Post'' today where
what it talked about was the National Security Agency is
pushing to expand its role in protecting private sector
computer networks from cyber attacks. The White House has been
concerned about privacy concerns, and then the story said ``The
most contentious issue was a legislative proposal last year
that would have required hundreds of companies that provide
such critical services as electricity generation to allow their
internet traffic to be continuously scanned using computer
threat data provided by the spy agency. Companies would have
been expected to turn over evidence of potential cyber attacks
by the government.'' So this really is an issue about how you
balance security versus privacy. We have been debating this
pretty much since September 11, 2001.
And so maybe, Mr. Campbell, you can talk to me if you have
some perspective on the tradeoff of cybersecurity versus
privacy.
Mr. Campbell. Well, I would say that cybersecurity versus
privacy is a key issue. Other than that, I would say that we--
CRS is looking at the issue and we would be happy to talk to
you about it at a later time.
Ms. DeGette. And you released--CRS released a report on
privacy and cybersecurity concerns earlier this month, did it
not?
Mr. Campbell. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. And so let me ask you, what information can
smart meters collect about the people in the households who
have them? I mean, what is the security issue?
Mr. Campbell. Well, smart meters collect information on the
use of electricity, and so the idea is that smart meters
conceivably could develop a profile of the use of electricity
within the home. Now if the information is accumulated at a
high enough level, then individual use of information could be
lost, but that is an issue that is under development and I
think in various States there are various rules concerning
smart meter----
Ms. DeGette. And that information, it could determine the
behavioral patterns of the residents in the home, correct?
Mr. Campbell. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. So like burglar could figure out--could use a
smart meter to figure if a family was on vacation or not,
right?
Mr. Campbell. If they were sophisticated enough to access
the information.
Ms. DeGette. Or a marketer could even use information about
what appliances a consumer might be using to target that
consumer, right?
Mr. Campbell. Possibly.
Ms. DeGette. So that--I mean, we wouldn't naturally think
that there would be security issues relating to these meters,
but that is something we need to consider and balance out,
right?
Mr. Campbell. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stearns. Gentleman from Georgia is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, as I sit here and think about this program and
the $3.5 billion worth of grant money going towards these
companies, grantees, 99 of them to help develop the smart grid,
I also think about the $19 billion that was in the stimulus
money for fully developing health information technology, you
know, the Offices of National Coordinator and his salary and
all the employees there to make sure that people, companies
small and large that got grants from that $19 billion pot to
help develop health information technology that is fully
coordinated, it just makes me concerned that these grantees
under this program to develop the smart grid are not following
the guidelines that they should follow and in the final
analysis 3 years from now we will have wasted a lot of money.
I want to ask you specifically, you mentioned--and maybe
some of my colleagues had asked a question about NIST's
involvement, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, the 850-3 program as compared, let us say, to the
North American Electric Reliability Corporation's critical
infrastructure protection standards. Now how do those two
compare and are they overlapping? Are they similar? Is one
better than the other? What standards should we require of
these grantees as they develop these programs with taxpayer
money? Mr. Campbell?
Mr. Campbell. My knowledge that the NERC reliability
critical infrastructure standards are just applied to those on
the bulk electric system, so when we are talking about the
Smart Grid Investment Grant Program, that is looking at
developing products, so I think what we are talking about is
two different types of requirements.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Trimble and Mr. Wilshusen?
Mr. Wilshusen. I will field that one. Also there is--we
actually compared the NERC's eight cyber--critical
infrastructure protections cybersecurity reliability standards
to the controls that are identified and NIST Special
Publication 850-3, and we found that of the 198 controls in
850-3 that the NIST or the NERC standards had about 151 of
those. One of the issues that the IG reported on in its report,
also in addition to what Mr. Campbell said, is that those
standards apply only to the bulk electricity supply, but there
further only apply to those assets that the entities within
that sector have designated as a critical asset. And so if the
entity has not identified any critical assets, then those
standards would not necessarily apply.
And the IG report also indicated that back in 2009, the
former chief information security officer of NERC did a survey
and identified that about, I think it was 36 percent of the
power generators, or those entities with power generation and
about 67 percent of those responsible for transmitting bulk
power had identified only--at least one critical asset. So that
left a fair number of--or at least a fair percentage of
entities that produce power or transmit it that did not
identify any critical assets.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Trimble?
Mr. Trimble. I would just--my expertise is not cyber, so I
will--so to simplify that, the issue as I sort of have come to
understand it is the NERC CIP standards apply to--for critical
infrastructure protection but it is limited because it is just
bulk power and it is just those that the industry have
identified as being critical assets. But industry self-
identification has not been exactly--has been identified as
comprehensively as it could be.
The NIST standards that we are talking about for cyber
pursuant to ISA are voluntary, primarily focused on
interoperability and cyber threats. The limitation there is
that FERC's sort of bailiwick is, again, bulk power so it
doesn't get into anything beyond sort of interstate
transmission, if you will. If you are getting into the State
level, those guidelines, those standards, even though
voluntary, don't kick in. If you get down to the city level,
like New York, they don't kick in. So you have got this
patchwork where there is a whole bunch of places with no
standards that kick in.
Mr. Gingrey. My time is expired, but I just want to say
that, you know, it is pretty much green eyeshades sort of
stuff, but hugely important, and of course, you are bringing
important information to us, the members of the subcommittee,
and I think this is very beneficial. I deeply appreciate you
being here today, and thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Stearns. Thank the gentleman and we are getting ready
to conclude the hearing, and I, as chairman, have the
opportunity to give a closing remark. I would say it has been
brought up here and also I remember in our July hearing.
Department of Homeland Security fields all this information
dealing with cybersecurity and then gives it to U.S. Cert
agency, and they offer the documentation, as I understand it,
to the private industry, so it sort of filters down that way.
Is that correct?
Mr. Wilshusen. I believe it is, yes.
Mr. Stearns. Well, my concern is, just like the 9/11
Commission said, there was not full communication between all
the government agencies as well as private industries on what--
to alert them of possible information it could have thwarted
and stopped the 9/11 attack. I see it is clear here today in
the conversation that there is not really full adequate
communication between the private sector and the government
sector dealing with utilities with cybersecurities, and I think
this is a warning that we should all take into effect or we
might be sitting here at a later date with something that is
very serious.
I want to thank the witnesses for their time and effort,
and the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:37 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


