- INTERNET GAMING: REGULATING IN AN ONLINE WORLD

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INTERNET GAMING: REGULATING IN AN ONLINE WORLD

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 18, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-105

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

75-777 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade

MARY BONO MACK, California
Chairman
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       JIM MATHESON, Utah
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
PETE OLSON, Texas                    MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      officio)
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Mary Bono Mack, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. G.K. Butterfield, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina, opening statement.....................    11
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................    12
Hon. Charles F. Bass, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New Hampshire, opening statement............................    13

Witnesses

Hon. Barney Frank, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts..................................    14
Prepared statement...........................................    17
Hon. Frank R. Wolf, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Virginia.......................................    24
Prepared statement...........................................    26
Hon. John Campbell, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California..................................................    35
Prepared statement...........................................    37
Mark Lipparelli, Chairman, Nevada Gaming Control Board...........    44
Prepared statement...........................................    47
Charles McIntyre, Executive Director, New Hampshire Lottery
Commission.....................................................    57
Prepared statement...........................................    59
Answers to submitted questions...............................   285
Frank J. Fahrenkopf, Jr., President and Chief Executive Officer,
American Gaming Association....................................    62
Prepared statement...........................................    64
Rachel A. Volberg, Senior Research Scientist, NORC at the
University of Chicago..........................................   236
Prepared statement...........................................   238
Answers to submitted questions...............................   287

Submitted Material

Memo, dated November 7, 2011, from Hon. Alfonse D'Amato to Mrs.
Bono Mack, submitted by Mr. Barton.............................   258
Letter, dated November 18, 2011, from Mr. Butterfield to Mrs.
Bono Mack, submitted by Mr. Butterfield........................   275
Testimony, dated November 18, 2011, of Robert Martin, Chairman,
Morongo Band of Mission Indians, submitted by Mrs. Bono Mack...   279

INTERNET GAMING: REGULATING IN AN ONLINE WORLD

----------

FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:03 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mary Bono Mack
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Bono Mack, Bass, Harper,
Lance, Cassidy, Guthrie, Olson, McKinley, Barton, Butterfield,
and Towns.
Staff present: Paige Anderson, Policy Coordinator, CMT;
Charlotte Baker, Press Secretary; Brian McCullough, Senior
Professional Staff Member, CMT; Gib Mullan, Chief Counsel, CMT;
Katie Novaria, Legislative Clerk; Shannon Weinberg, Counsel,
CMT; Felipe Mendoza, Democratic Counsel; and Will Wallace,
Democratic Policy Analyst.
Mrs. Bono Mack. The subcommittee will now come to order.
Good morning, this is our second cover the waterfront hearing
on whether Congress should allow Internet gaming to take sail.
Today we will hear from three of our colleagues as well as from
a respected panel of experts. Let me be clear about one thing
from the beginning. I am taking a very careful approach when it
comes to this issue, and I want to examine all of the relevant
facts before deciding whether or not to proceed.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARY BONO MACK, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

When it comes to the debate over legalizing Internet
gambling is it time for Congress to let the genie out of the
bottle, or is the genie already out, online, with a pile of
chips playing Texas Hold 'Em? As chairman of the subcommittee,
this is an important issue which I have been following very
closely in hopes of making certain that everyone involved is
dealt a fair hand.
Today we know this, the vast majority of Americans have
gambled at some point in their lives, and the number of people
who tried gambling is going up every year. Currently the only
two States without legalized gambling are Hawaii and Utah.
Forty-eight other States allow charitable gaming, 43 States and
the District of Columbia have lotteries, 40 States permit
parimutuel betting, 29 States have Indian casinos, while
another 28 States have standalone casinos or racetrack casinos.
Today as we continue to look at whether Congress should
legalize Internet gambling, there are a number of questions we
will be raising. For example, how effective is the current
enforcement of online gaming in jurisdictions that have
legalized it? How are States preparing to deal with the issue?
What, if any, forms of interstate online gaming should Congress
consider allowing? What consumer protections exist for online
gaming, and what new protections are needed? How would any
easing of legal restrictions on Internet gaming affect American
consumers and other stakeholders, especially federally
recognized Native American tribes.
Gaming policy and regulation is generally handled by the
States, although the Federal Government has been involved in
shaping the boundaries of what is permissible under current
law.
In 1988, gambling across the United States began to
proliferate after Congress passed the Indian Gaming Regulatory
Act addressing the jurisdiction and authority of tribes to
establish gaming on their lands. Since its passage, tribal
gaming operations have seen tremendous growth with revenues
last year exceeding $26 billion. Of the 565 federally
recognized tribes across the U.S., nearly half of them operate
casinos which provide a critically important source of funding
for tribal operations and governance.
In my own congressional district tribal gaming has been a
huge plus with seven casinos supporting thousands of jobs
during these very difficult economic times. The tribes have
been great neighbors, too, contributing regularly to charities
and civic events.
So as this debate continues to unfold, it is very important
to remember how tribal gaming has improved the lives of
thousands of Native Americans and I want to make certain that
they are not adversely impacted by online gambling, legal or
otherwise.
Congress has had to step in before. In 2006 to combat
proliferation of illegal Internet gaming, the Unlawful Internet
Gambling Enforcement Act was adopted. This effectively outlawed
interstate online gaming in the U.S. by prohibiting gambling
related businesses from accepting payments in the form of
checks, credit card payments or electronic funds transfers
relating to unlawful Internet gambling. The law also
establishes fines and penalties for banks and financial
companies that process such payments.
In April of this year three of the top poker Web sites were
shut down and 11 people indicted for bank fraud and for money
laundering, raising new questions about the law.
Proponents argue that the statute has not reduced Internet
gambling, it has simply driven it underground and offshore
where shady operators play by their own rules.
Legalizing Internet gaming, they argue, would actually
allow the government to provide greater protection for
consumers. But those who want to keep the ban on Internet
gambling in place argue that repealing the current law will
expose more Americans to serious problems such as compulsive
gambling. They are also worried about an increase in fraud,
money laundering and organized crime. Still others have
expressed concern that State budgets could be harmed by the
loss of lottery and gaming revenue, and they point to huge
potential impact on existing legitimate gaming operations.
While most States have taken no action regarding online
gaming, seven States, Illinois, Indiana, Washington, Louisiana,
Oregon, Montana, and South Dakota, have now enacted express
prohibitions on Internet gambling. Other States have
interpreted Federal laws permitting intrastate online gaming,
and they are beginning to authorize different forms of remote
gaming. Nevada, for example, has already provided remote
intrastate sports wagering through BlackBerry enabled mobile
phone devices, and the State is also forging ahead with plans
to begin licensing online poker sites.
So in many respects the genie is already out of the bottle.
And now it is up to Congress to decide whether Internet
gambling across State lines should be legal or illegal.
And I look forward to hearing all of today's testimony.
With that, I am happy to recognize the gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Butterfield, the ranking member of the
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade, for his
opening statement for 5 minutes.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Bono Mack follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. G.K. BUTTERFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA

Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. I thank the chairman for
holding this hearing and what I hope will be a series of
hearings on this very important subject of Internet gambling.
This is a very important issue. I think we can all agree on
that, and it deserves careful consideration, as you referenced
in your opening statement.
Let me thank the three witnesses, my colleagues, for coming
today and we will try to make this as painless as possible.
According to one estimate, any action we take regarding the
legal status of Internet gambling could impact an estimated 10
to 15 million people who already participate in Internet
gambling on a regular basis.
Serious revenues estimated to be as high at $49 billion
over 10 years could be realized at both the State and Federal
levels. But we must remember the policy decisions we make here
and in the full committee could also impact people who have
never been exposed to Internet gambling, potentially opening
the door for dependence and addiction. That is why it is so
important, so important to address potential consumer
consequences in any legislation that we consider.
With estimated revenues in the billions we must set aside a
portion of that to reduce the social cost of problem gambling.
In our previous hearing on this topic I was particularly
struck by Mr. Keith White's testimony. Mr. White indicated that
6 to 8 million adults and 1/2 million teens meet the criteria
for gambling addiction, with ethnic minorities more likely to
become addicted. He also estimated that the annual social cost
of gambling related addiction at $7 billion, resulting from
increases in crime, divorce and bankruptcy and other things. An
ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure, and any
legislation must include, must include sufficient funds to
carry out education, treatment and research services related to
problem gambling.
We must also include common sense safeguards for consumers
like a self exclusion list, gambling time limits, monetary
deposit limits and privacy, and data security requirements,
just to name a few.
Two of our colleagues, Mr. Campbell and Mr. Frank, are here
today to testify about their bill. The Internet Gambling
Regulation Consumer Protection Enforcement Act, H.R. 1174. That
bill would give the Department of the Treasury the
responsibility of implementing a national licensing regime for
Internet gambling sites. This bill provides for fair and
balanced entry into the Internet gambling marketplace and does
not restrict permitted gaming to just poker. It would also
would encourage State lotteries, Indian tribes and others to
innovate their current businesses so they can take part in the
new industry and further raise revenue.
H.R. 1174 is just one of the bills currently on the table,
but regardless of which proposal we are looking at, any
legislation that moves through this subcommittee and that could
ultimately become law will involve tasking one or more Federal
entities with implementation and oversight. It is critically
important that in addition to the experts we have here today we
also hear from those Federal entities. These could include
Treasury and Commerce, the Federal Trade Commission and the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. We need to learn about
any concerns that these agencies might have and potential
consequences for them if they are tasked with implementing the
new framework.
With an estimated 1,700 international Web sites allowing
play and accepting wages from individuals in the U.S., it is
critical that we act to protect American consumers by
legalizing Internet gambling here. The tremendous revenue that
would be realized through legalized Internet gambling at the
local, State and Federal levels would be a tremendous boost to
our budgets. And most importantly, American workers are poised
to take advantage of this new industry through well paying jobs
that could be created, software engineers and financial experts
and consumer service representatives, web developers,
scientists and electrical engineers who all would need to be
supported by the industry.
Considering the fragile and struggling state of our
economy, I strongly believe that all potential revenues should
be considered to spur more robust economic growth. But if we
are going to do this, Madam Chairman, if we are going to
recognize gambling as legal, we must do our very best to get it
right.
Thank you for listening. I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman, and the chair now
recognizes the chairman emeritus of the full committee, Mr.
Barton, for 3 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Barton. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I am delighted to
welcome our three colleagues here, Mr. Frank, Mr. Wolf, and Mr.
Campbell. The bill that I have introduced builds on the work
that Mr. Campbell and Mr. Frank have already done. And with
regards to Mr. Wolf, I have worked with him on many issues over
the years and am glad that I am not in the White House Office
of Science, Space and Technology right now or he would be
cutting my budget, too, and I am glad he is not.
Congressman Kenny Hulshof, former Congressman, is in
audience and I think former Congressman John Porter is in the
audience. We welcome those two former colleagues.
I want to make one comment on Mr. Butterfield's opening
statement. I support everything he said. I want to point out
that the bill that we are hoping to mark up in this
subcommittee deals only with Internet poker, it does not deal
with generic gaming or gambling, it is just Internet poker. And
as everyone knows, poker is a game of skill. Over time the best
poker player will win the most money. I am living proof of
that, having been much poorer by trying to play against players
better than myself and having them laugh as they take my money.
We have an interesting situation here in this country in
that it is legal to play poker online, it is impossible,
though, to handle the financial transactions winning or losing
that result from it because of a law called UIGEA. UIGEA in my
opinion is unenforceable, needs to be reformed. The bill that I
have introduced will do that, H.R. 2366. I have had a number of
meetings with all the stakeholders and thanks to the skill of
our chairwoman and ranking member we are going have a good
cross-section of those on the second panel today.
I think there is general agreement there are still some
things to be ironed out. I would point out the bill I have
introduced is a States' right bill and it allows the States to
make the decision whether citizens in their State can play
poker online. If the State doesn't want to do that or an Indian
tribe doesn't want to do that, they simply inform the
Department of Commerce they don't want to participate. We are
not trying to telling the States how to run their businesses,
but for those States that do we are trying to have a
comprehensive plan to make it fair and ethical for everyone.
So I look forward to the hearing, Madam Chairwoman. I want
to thank the three Congressmen for taking their time to
testify. I know how many things they could be doing and to have
them give time, especially 9 o'clock on a Friday morning, is
important.
I also want to welcome Mr. Frank Fahrenkopf, who will
testify on the second panel. I have dealt with him on some
political issues for many, many years. When I was a young
Congressman he helped me quite a bit in some of my political
travails earlier in my career, so I appreciate that.
With that, Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman, and the chair is
pleased to recognized Mr. Bass for 2 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CHARLES F. BASS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE

Mr. Bass. I thank the distinguished chairwoman for holding
this hearing, important hearing. I also want to welcome my
three colleagues to the main hearing room of the most powerful
and finest committee in the Congress, welcome here. This is an
important hearing.
On our second panel, we will be hearing from Charlie
McIntyre, who is sitting in the front row here, Executive
Director of the New Hampshire Lottery. As highlighted in my
comments in a previous hearing, the New Hampshire lottery just
delivered funding, almost a billion and a half dollars, for our
State's education. It is the primary form of funding from the
State level for education since its inception in 1964. So as
our committee continues to examine online gambling, I believe
that we should consider fully the experiences of existing forms
of legal gaming. I am pleased to have Mr. McIntyre and our
other witnesses available to us today to speak to the
competencies of our gambling regulators, as well as the
potential benefits and challenges posed by an online gambling
world.
So I am looking forward to both panels and with that, Madam
Chairman, I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman. And we turn our
attention to our panels. We have two panels today joining us.
Each of our witnesses prepared an opening statement and it will
be placed into the record. Each of you will have 5 minutes to
summarize that statement in your remarks.
On our first panel we are very pleased and we welcome the
Honorable Barney Frank of Massachusetts, the Honorable Frank
Wolf of Virginia, and the Honorable John Campbell of
California. We welcome you all to the Subcommittee on Commerce,
Manufacturing and Trade. We are very pleased you are here.
At this point we are happy to recognize Congressman Frank
for 5 minutes for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE BARNEY FRANK, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS

Mr. Frank. Thank you. Thank you for having this hearing.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Can you make sure the mic is on?
Mr. Frank. Sorry, it was not.
I thank you for this hearing and I appreciate the work of
my colleague from Texas, Mr. Barton, in this. And yes, I will
say to my neighbor from New Hampshire it is nice to be in the
Energy and Commerce room and to be seated in front of a
portrait of John Dingell, which I think is probably older than
the average Member of Congress--the portrait, not Mr. Dingell.
I want to begin with the basic principle arguments.
Obviously once we decide to do this, there are specific
legislative details, and I think in a bipartisan way we can
work them out. I will say Mr. Barton, Mr. Campbell and I have
already had some meetings, and we think it is possible to come
to an agreement on a lot of these specifics. But I say once we
decide to do this, let's define what this is. This is allowing
adult Americans to spend their own money as they wish in a form
of recreation that they enjoy. I cannot understand how anyone
would think that it is the role of the Federal Government to
prohibit them from doing that. Regulating the way in which it
is done, dealing with abuses, those are inevitable aspects of
the economy we live in. But let's get to the threshold
question, is it the business of the government to tell adults
no, we don't think you should gamble with your own money? That
is a principle which frankly I would think there should be
bipartisan support on.
And I hear people talk about the nanny state. I hear people
saying we should not be telling 8-year-olds what to eat for
lunch. Leaving that aside, if we don't want to tell an 8-year-
old what to eat for lunch, why are we telling the 8-year-old's
parent, a 28-year-old, no, you can't gamble, we don't think
that is appropriate?
Some of it I must say is moral disapproval, I know that
creeps in sometimes. Apparently there are people who are better
biblical scholars than I who have found somewhere in the Bible
a prohibition on gambling. I haven't found it myself nor have I
found a footnote to it which exempts bingo. But the fundamental
principle remains the same.
The second problem we have here is that it violates a
principle, I thought held very strongly, frankly even more so
by my friends on the Republican side; namely, hands off the
Internet. As somebody said, we are putting special restrictions
on things done on the Internet. I thought that was the reverse
of what people were talking about, because the legislation that
unfortunately passed the Congress came out of the Committee on
Financial Services enforces the prohibition on gambling,
telling adults how dare you gamble with your own money, by
restricting the use of the Internet. And again I am shocked by
that.
Finally, the current regime is one of the most intrusive
regulations on the banking industry that you can find. If you
talk to the bankers, they very angry at this because the way in
which we now make it illegal is to impose on financial
institutions an impossible obligation; namely, to figure out
what the payment was for. So again from the principles of my
Republican friends, don't have a nanny state, don't interfere
with the Internet, don't unduly burden private sector, I am
very surprised that this is maintained.
Now, one of the arguments against making it illegal, some
adults will abuse it and some children will do it. Let me start
with the latter one. As I understand it, we have alcohol made
available on the Internet, we have cigarettes made available on
the Internet. The notion there are sex oriented materials that
are for adults only, the notion we should ban in a society for
everybody things that are OK for adults because children might
get to them is the end of freedom. If we aren't able to
maintain some distinction between adult permitted activity and
things we want to prohibit to children, then a lot of us will
have a lot of time on our hands because we will have banned a
lot of things that adults ought to be able to do and it is in
fact inconsistent. That is why I go back to say that inevitably
it seems to me that an element of this notion that we should
make gambling illegal altogether is a moral disapproval, which
I think is inappropriate.
I have had people say, well, are you for the government
being pro-gambling? No, let's be clear what the role of the
government is in a free society. There are some things that are
damaging to others and the government should prohibit. There
are some things which are especially beneficial and the
government should want to encourage. But the great mass of
human activity is none of the government's business. We should
neither encourage it nor discourage it. And not making
something illegal is not an encouragement of it or an
endorsement of it.
And I note the gentleman from New Hampshire mentioned a lot
of reasons. I appreciate that, and we want to make sure that we
draw on their experience. But some suggested that we should not
allow this because it would detract from the revenues that
lotteries get. The gentleman did not suggest that, I don't even
put that word in his mouth, but again from the standpoint of my
Republican colleagues any suggestion that we should ban private
sector entities from engaging in activity because it might
detract from the revenue that public sector entities get; in
other words, we should give a monopoly to the public sector,
would seem to be quite far from what I would hope would be the
prevailing philosophy here.
I think we can deal with the addiction issue here. I will
say that the addiction issue here does not seem to me different
from the addiction issue with alcohol and other things.
And finally, I would say with regard to college students,
there was an argument when we did it in our committee that
somebody cited a study how terrible this was for college
students and leading to suicides. The author of that study
said, no, that is not what I said. And if we were going to ban
things because students might get addicted to them, my guess is
we would probably not start with Internet gambling, we would
start with video games. There is a great problem of addiction
of video games and the way a rational, free society deals with
addiction is to allow the great majority of people to do it and
to try to treat and help the people who are addicted.
So I hope this committee will go ahead with the basic
principle, and I look forward to our working out the specifics.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Frank follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Congressman Frank. And at this
point, Mr. Wolf, thank you very much for coming today and you
are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE FRANK R. WOLF, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA

Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Madam Chair. I know that some members
of the committee are aware of my strong concerns about the
spread of gambling in our society. I can spend all day
cataloguing story after story of ruined families, bankruptcies,
suicides and official corruption. Gambling is harmful activity,
and study after study has shown that many in our society there
is no question it is strongly addictive. Following the
enactment of the hard fought ban on Internet gambling in 2006,
I never thought I would see a day that a Republican House would
even consider weakening this law. For a party that champions
families and traditional values, I assure you that Internet
gambling is contrary to those values.
The legalization of Internet poker will enable the spread
of gambling to every computer, every iPad, every iPhone, every
BlackBerry, every Android and Windows phone in the country. It
will send a signal to Americans that gambling is to be
encouraged. It will be a windfall to the most powerful gambling
interests in the country at the expense of American families
and taxpayers.
There is no question that social and economic effects fall
disproportionately on three groups, the poor, the elderly and
the young. Notably these are the same groups of Americans that
have been hardest hit by the recession.
Although some have championed this legislation as a
potential budget windfall, I assure you that what tax revenues
it will generate will overwhelmingly come out of the pockets of
the vulnerable population. Gambling is no budget panacea. What
little tax revenue it will generate taxpayers will pay out far
more in the criminal justice systems, gambling treatment
program and social services.
The New York Times July 2010 article said the social cost
of gambling outweighs the revenue by 3 to 1. Reports done in
both the 1990s and 2000s have shown the increase in legalized
gambling have led to a significant increase in suicide rates. A
2008 report by a sociologist at Temple University found that,
``The odds of suicide among Las Vegas residents was at least 50
percent greater than among residents elsewhere in each of the 3
decades we observed.''
Gambling, according to the July 20, 2011, Daily Finance
article:When it comes to severity, Americans' gambling
addiction is not too far behind the Nation's drug problem. And
it is growing. It says in 2007 Americans lost more than $92
billion gambling, about 9 times what they lost in 1982, and
almost 10 times more than what movie goers in the U.S. Spent on
tickets that year.
Bell University Professor Earl Grinols estimated that
``addicted gambling cost the U.S. Between $32 billion and $58
billion a year.
I have long been concerned about the predatory nature of it
and I strongly support the recommendations of the National
Gambling Commission, including the 2006 Internet gambling ban.
This law was important because it dramatically limited
convenience, I use the word ``convenience'', gambling in the
U.S. The important distinction between destination gambling and
convenience gambling is that by its very nature destination
gambling is entertainment and is generally limited to vacations
for most Americans. This limits the opportunity for addiction
to develop and reduces the risk of regular gambling. However,
online gambling is the ultimate, it is the ultimate in
convenience gambling. Internet gambling is the crack cocaine of
gambling, according to the CEO of Promises Treatment Center,
the crack cocaine of gambling. It is like having a casino at
your fingertips 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. People can
gamble in their bathrobes, in their family rooms, at work or in
college dorms.
And with the explosive growth of smart phones, tablets,
mobile broadband, the potential availability of Internet poker
has grown exponentially in the last 5 years since it was
outlawed. People will be able to gamble whenever and wherever
they want. In addition, pathological gamblers will become
easily addicted to online gambling because of the Internet's
easy access and instant results. It will result, it will result
in an epidemic. We will read stories about this if this bill
passes. It will be a constant theme.
According to CitizenLink, should the current law be
overturned, ``The estimated cost of Internet problem and
pathological gambling addictions among adults each year in the
U.S. will be 18 billion. It would be a total cost $7 billion
for those under age 16.
Gambling leads to increases also in public corruption. Has
this Congress forgotten the Abramoff scandal? Gambling was
involved in the Abramoff scandal. Has the Congress learned
anything from it or is it just like the Simon & Garfunkel song,
man hears what he wants to hear and disregards the rest?
I have more, Madam Chairman, but in respect to the
committee I see my stop sign has come in. I think the passage
of this will increase addiction gambling and I think it will
increase suicide and I think the Congress will rue the day if
it ever passes.
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wolf follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank the gentleman. The chair is pleased
to recognized my colleague from California, Mr. Campbell, for 5
minutes. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JOHN CAMPBELL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Campbell. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, Mr. Butterfield,
members. I appreciate the invitation to be here. It is kind of
funny that I am here because I actually don't gamble. Not
because I think there is any evil about it, I just don't find
any fascination with it. I don't even know the rules of poker,
what is better than what, which means Mr. Barton wants to play
with me all the time and thus far I have resisted those
invitations.
But you know, we are not here to talk about what we
personally want to do, we are always here to do what Americans
want to do. The fact is that millions and millions, hundreds of
millions of Americans enjoy gambling and they want to do it and
they are doing it. And in 2006, as was mentioned, we passed
UIGEA and basically banned or tried to ban Internet gambling.
Since that bill was passed, and Mr. Wolf mentioned this in his
comments, he said the availability of Internet poker and other
things have exploded. More than the availability has exploded,
the actual amount of Internet gambling has exploded. I think
Mr. Butterfield mentioned 15 million people. There are millions
and millions, tens of millions of Americans gambling online now
after we passed a bill supposedly banning it. And what they are
doing is they are using illegal offshore sites. When they do
that, there is a lot of talk about revenue, not only do we
obviously not get any revenue, but these people are
unprotected. There is no regulation, there is no oversight.
They don't know if they are going to get the money they are
betting, they don't know if the game is fair, they don't know
all kinds of things. But they are doing it and they will
continue to do it because they want--it is an activity they
want to do and they can access it online regardless of what we
do or don't do here. And so we actually by banning it have
expanded what is going on.
Now Mr. Wolf talks about problem gambling and I get that.
In fact I am a cosponsor of his bill relative to problem
gambling. There is problem gambling and there will be problem
gambling whether we make Internet gambling legal or illegal.
But we can deal with it much better if it is legal, if it is
regulated, if it is understood, and if we know whose doing it,
then in the current situation where people are going off on
these totally unregulated sites--I mean there is been a lot of
talk about this Full Tilt Poker and the recent Department of
Justice invasion there. To me that is the reason we ought to be
legalizing this, because millions of Americans were on that
site and they were not being treated fairly. And we can make
sure that they are going to be treated fairly.
Now when Mr. Wolf comments that we shouldn't allow this
because there is problem gambling, you can look at drinking and
many Americans don't drink, most drink responsibly, some have a
problem. We tried making that illegal. We tried prohibiting it.
It didn't work. We forced a lot of honest Americans, because
they were going to do it anyway, into a dishonest and illegal
practice. And so prohibition was ended. We essentially have
that kind of prohibition now. And we will have a better handle
on the situation if we legalize it and regulate it than if we
leave the current situation as it is.
And I understand the protections we can have online. You
can have better protections than you do with brick and mortar
gambling. If someone is a problem gambler you can put them on a
list and you can have the Web site, the name, the credit card,
various things on a list so that your regulated gambling sites
have to not allow those people on their sites. We can verify
age. There is technology now where we can verify the location,
so those States, as the chairwoman mentioned, who wish to not
have gambling in their States can not have gambling from their
residents because the regulated sites can stop that from
happening.
And they can be audited. In the bill that Mr. Frank and I
have proposed the servers are required to be in the United
States specifically so they can be audited, so that we know
that the games are fair, that the amounts that gamblers are
promised are being paid out, et cetera.
In conclusion, I want to give you four reasons I think
whether it is the bill Mr. Frank and I have, the bill Mr.
Barton has or something we have in between, that this committee
should pass. First of all freedom. This is really about
allowing adult Americans to do a practice that they have done
for eons and want to do and will do.
The second is protection. They are going to do it, they
ought to be able to do it in a protected and fair manner where
they know what they are getting into and they understand the
risks and rewards.
The other thing is jobs. We are talking about jobs around
here. Right now all these things are off site. If we do this
where the servers and everything has to be in the United
States, which we can do in our bill and under WTO regulations,
then we are actually going to create jobs in the United States.
And then the final reason is the one everyone mentions is
revenue. I don't think it is the top reason, but it is one.
There is no question that if you do this you can't tax it.
Gambling in every jurisdiction it is, is taxed and that will
bring in revenue to the Federal Government.
And with that, I appreciate being here and thank you, Madam
Chairwoman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Campbell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank all of our colleagues for your
testimony this morning, and I will turn to the panel if any
members have any questions for our panel. Mr. Barton, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you. I will try to be brief.
Mr. Wolf, in your comments you repeatedly said gambling,
you never once said poker. I mean you do recognize that poker
is a game of skill I presume.
Mr. Wolf. If the gentleman would, I also want to say that
in the testimony which I didn't finish, it said according to
the Annenberg Public Policy Center within 1 year of the
Internet gaming ban enactment card playing for money among
college age youth 18 to 22 has declined; weekly use of the
Internet for gambling also has declined among this age group.
Both declines are statistically significant.
And it will not stop with this. If this bill passes, in 5
to 10 years you will now have come in fourth as many States----
Mr. Barton. My question is do you understand----
Mr. Wolf. I think it will lead to other broader aspects and
I think there will be problems with regard to corruption. And I
think there will be a lot of problems.
Mr. Barton. But that is not the answer to my question. You
and I play poker. I don't know how good a poker player you are,
but over time whichever one of us is the best----
Mr. Wolf. Actually I don't, but I don't think--let me just
take the question. I am not here to tell you that poker is
wrong. That is not my ability. What I am here to say is if you
put this on Internet gambling in college dorms and people will
literally in a few short minutes will be bankrupt and broken.
And I believe, and I remember the case of the young kid from
Lehigh University up in Allentown that committed suicide. It is
not my role to say poker is not right or wrong. And God bless
you, Joe, I think you are a fine Congressman. And so I am not
in the position to be the judge. I think that Internet gambling
will bring about suicide and problems, and so I hope you win
the next time you play poker and I hope you can bring this guy
in to play with you.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Frank.
Mr. Frank. Let me tell you first, I am not going to praise
you because I agree with you. Around here you only praise
people when you disagree with them. So there are no negative
inferences. I just don't have to say how wonderful you are
before I say you are wrong. But I would just make the point----
Mr. Barton. You and I agree that each of us disagree about
98 percent of the time.
Mr. Frank. On this issue, though, and obviously poker is
different than other forms of gambling and it is much more
skill and much less luck. But I would say I just want to
emphasize what Mr. Wolf is saying. I had thought there was a
consensus in this Congress, particularly strongly held by my
Republican colleagues: Hands off the Internet, don't interfere
with the Internet. The premise of this, as Mr. Wolf makes
clear, is that there are activities that may be OK elsewhere in
this society, but we should particularly ban them from the
Internet, and he talks about convenience gambling. Well, I am
not around here to make life inconvenient for the people I
represent, but that I want to make clear is the nub of this. Do
we single out the Internet for specific prohibitions and
restrictions? As I said, I thought that went contrary. By the
way if you are going to do that for gambling, my guess is there
are other things that people would say, well, it may be OK in
general but don't we don't want them to be too convenient. And
that is the major precedent that is set here. You set the
precedent of putting specific and harsh restrictions on the
Internet more than anywhere else in the society.
Mr. Barton. Well, I am going to yield back, Madam
Chairwoman, because I know we want to get to the second panel.
But to the extent we have studies on problem gamblers and
addictive gambling, it is somewhere between 1/2 of a percent
and maybe as high as 2 percent. So it is an issue. Congressman
Wolf is totally right to make it an issue, but it is not an
overwhelming issue that cannot be dealt with, in my opinion.
And this at least my bill is simply on Internet poker, it is
not slot machines and roulette and scratch lotteries and all
that. It is just Internet poker.
I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman. The chair now
recognizes Mr. Butterfield for 5 minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman. And
again let me thank the three witnesses for their testimonies. I
am going to start on my left. Mr. Frank is always on my left
and so I am going to start with you and maybe end with you. But
Mr. Frank. The bill that is proposed by our friend from Texas,
Mr. Barton, would legalize only one form of Internet gambling
and that is poker, and he painfully explains that every time
that he speaks. His bill speaks to one, one form and that is
poker.
The bill introduced by you and Congressman Campbell allows
Internet sites that are licensed to accept bets and wagers
without limiting it to poker. Only bets or wagers on sports
events would be prohibited under your bill. The scope of
gambling activities authorized under your bill is obviously
much broader. Can you please discuss with us the broader scope
of your bill and why you think allowing bets and wagers on
activities other than poker is the preferred approach?
Mr. Frank. Thank you. That is a very important question.
First, let me say I agree with Mr. Barton and others. And I
don't gamble myself and I don't play poker myself, but I am for
letting other people do a lot of things I don't do. The fact is
that I don't think we should ban either poker or anything else
that is voluntary, doesn't hurt anybody else, including
gambling.
Now, it does have a prohibition on sports betting. Frankly
that was a practical fact. I was pushing this bill in the
committee I chaired. We couldn't get it through over the
objections of mostly the National Football League. I will
report to you that the National Football League believes that
if we were to allow Internet gambling people might start
betting on football games. You might find that a shocking
possibility, but I will tell you that that is the position of
NFL. Let us not get into the position where people might start
betting on football games. At any rate, I accepted that
reality.
But beyond that, yes, our bill, Mr. Campbell's and mine,
does say, as Mr. Campbell said, adults should be allowed to do
on the Internet what they prefer to do and I don't see any
reason for banning gambling. There is a narrower issue on
poker. I will say I am for as much freedom as I can get for
people as long as they are not hurting others. If all we could
get is poker, I would be for it. I am for the broader issue. I
don't think we should be restricting people's freedom to do
other things.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. Also, Mr. Frank, let's talk
about oversight. The bill proposed by you and Mr. Campbell puts
the responsibility for regulation on the Department of the
Treasury. Under Mr. Barton's proposal it is the Department of
Commerce that is tasked with this responsibility. Will you
speak to that, please? Which is the preferred agency for
oversight?
Mr. Frank. Let me be very honest. The chairman of the
Committee on Financial Services, which has jurisdiction over
the Treasury Department, hates this bill and won't let it come
up. The Department of Commerce is under the jurisdiction of
this committee. And frankly I don't think it makes a great deal
of moral or practical difference which agency does it. The
reason, by the way, we originally talked about Treasury, is the
concern here was that Internet gambling, like other Internet
activities, could be a front for money laundering, for
terrorism. I should note, by the way, as to that fear that it
could be a front for international illegal activities,
terrorism, et cetera. The chairman of the Homeland Security
Committee, the gentleman from New York, Mr. King, is a strong
supporter of our bill. So he believes that we have in fact
solved that.
But the reason for doing Commerce rather than Treasury
frankly is committee jurisdiction. I think it can be done as
well in one place as another. I did it with Treasury because we
did have this situation where there was a concern about money
laundering, and that is under Treasury. Later on when it goes
to the floor, committee jurisdiction is not binding, an
amendment could be made in order if people thought it made more
sense with Treasury. But it is in Commerce to get it before
this very distinguished panel. Mr. Paul says this is the best
committee that ever existed and I just was glad to have a
chance to come here.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you, Mr. Frank. This is my third
question. A key concern for many online gamblers is that they
be treated fairly and that operators minimize the risk that
they will be defrauded by other players. After reviewing the
testimony of another gentleman, it appears that the American
Gaming Association is confident that the technology exists to
prevent automated programs or poker bots from being used
against unsuspected human players. It also seems judging from
last month's testimony that site operators are similarly
confident that their software can determine when collusion or
fraud is taking place.
The Campbell-Frank bill indicates several requirements to
ensure the integrity and fairness of the Internet gambling.
You have 20 seconds to respond.
Mr. Frank. Well, first, I would say that we were so careful
to put this kind of regulatory oversight in that I lost Mr.
Paul's vote in committee because he as a libertarian thought we
were getting too pushy with regulation, or he voted present.
But secondly, yes, we do think, as Mr. Campbell said, a lot of
this is going to go on, we do know when you try to prohibit
adults from doing what they want to do you to some extent just
push it into illegal channels, et cetera. Prohibition of an
entirely voluntarily activity rarely works in a free society,
certainly with something as expansive and accessible as the
Internet. We believe you will get much better consumer
protection, you never get perfect, if it is lawful and
therefore regulated than if it is totally unlawful.
I will say a lot fewer people die from bad booze today than
died from bad booze in the twenties when we had prohibition.
That doesn't mean there was never a problem, it does mean that
legalization is the prerequisite for effective consumer
protection regulation.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Are there members seeking time? With that,
we thank our panel very much for being here today, and the
subcommittee will take a very brief recess while we seat the
second panel, and thank you to our colleagues for their
testimony.
[Recess.]
So with that, we will resume the hearing. It was very, very
brief. We welcome our second panel. Each of our witnesses has
prepared their opening statement and it will be placed into the
record. Each will have 5 minutes to summarize that statement in
your remarks and we do try to stay as close to the 5-minute
mark as humanly possible.
Joining us on our second panel are Mark Lipparelli,
Chairman of Nevada Gaming Control Board; Charles McIntyre,
Executive Director, New Hampshire Lottery Commission; Frank
Fahrenkopf, Jr., President and CEO of the American Gaming
Association; and Dr. Rachel Volberg, Senior Research Scientist
at the University of Chicago.
Good morning to each of you, and thank you again for
coming. You will be recognized for the 5 minutes. I think you
can see the timers there and when it hits yellow that means to
start getting close to wrapping it up. And please remember to
turn your microphone on and bring it close to your mouth so
that the TV audience, and C-SPAN or whoever might be viewing it
eventually can actually hear you at home.
So with that, Mr. Lipparelli, we are pleased to recognize
you for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF MARK LIPPARELLI, CHAIRMAN, NEVADA GAMING CONTROL
BOARD; CHARLES MCINTYRE, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NEW HAMPSHIRE
LOTTERY COMMISSION; FRANK J. FAHRENKOPF, JR, PRESIDENT AND
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, AMERICAN GAMING ASSOCIATION; AND DR.
RACHEL A. VOLBERG, SENIOR RESEARCH SCIENTIST, NORC AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO

STATEMENT OF MARK LIPPARELLI

Mr. Lipparelli. Thank you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Mark Lipparelli. I am Chairman of the
State Gaming Control Board in Nevada, and I appreciate the
opportunity to come and comment on what has become a very
important topic in our State as well as the gaming industry in
general.
My perspective is one from a regulator. I have been on the
Gaming Control Board for 3 years now, appointed 3 years ago by
our governor, and no sooner did I get appointed that the topic
of Internet gaming became of high importance, given the
interest in our industry and the potential for partnerships of
our licensees in foreign markets.
It has been my experience in the last 3 years, traveling to
many of the relevant jurisdictions that are known for Internet
gaming, that there is a substantial amount of gaming going on
in the United States today. As much as we would like to think
that the laws that are passed today prevent such activity from
occurring, the U.S. is seen as a robust marketplace for these
Internet operators. And ironically from our experience as
regulators, when we put our licensees through rigorous
standards, rigorous audits, many of the operators in these
foreign markets don't have the same kinds of obligations, nor
do they have the same kinds of voluntary compliance that is at
the bedrock of our activities as regulators.
In the State of Nevada in my comments I pointed out that
almost $140 billion a year is put at risk in Nevada casinos
that results in $10 billion in revenue. And over a span of
time, over 30, 40, 50 years, we have enjoyed great success and
increasing sophistication in the way we approach gaming
regulation. I have found in my travels overseas that many of
the fundamental kinds of regulations that we have in place
don't exist in these foreign markets. Robust audits,
suitability investigations of primary owners, and the
protection of people from problem gaming, compulsive gaming,
don't exist in the robust forms we have them today.
The challenge for our operators as they try to consider how
to enter these markets is to compare how they will approach
these marketplaces with that as part of their corporate
culture, that as part of what they have developed with their
patronage and bring those kinds of talents to the marketplace.
I just returned from a meeting with the International
Olympic Committee just 2 days ago where the subject of Internet
gaming was part of our conversations. The concern of the
International Olympic Committee and many other sports leagues
around the country, or around the world relates to how can they
get a better handle on these Internet sites that are illegal.
They are impressed by the controls that we have in place in
regulated markets. And they were asking us as regulators how to
impose those same kinds of standards on the sports leagues. So
it is ironic that that meeting just occurred 2 days ago.
I think there was a comment made about Nevada's efforts to
legalize Internet gaming within the State of Nevada, and it is
true we have begun that process. We began through legislation
10 years ago legalizing Intranet gaming but there had never
been an impetus to drive regulatory efforts to actually bring
that about. Approximately a year ago, 2 years ago, our
legislature actually passed a mandate that we adopt
regulations. I am confident that the work we have put in to
establishing regulatory reform, internal controls and technical
standards that we have as part of our regular businesses in
Nevada will be the basis for sound regulatory control of
Internet gaming in the future.
A lot of questions have been raised about whether the areas
of concern around Internet gaming can be effectively
controlled. In my travels one of the things become noticeably
interesting to me is that Internet gaming provides detailed
information about gambling activity at the transaction level.
When you get down to that level the ability for regulators to
impose standards and requirements on operators is very robust.
You can identify customers, you can identify play patterns, you
can identify the people who are accessing the Internet from
what device they are accessing the Internet. In the brick and
mortar businesses that is very difficult. Gaming is a voluntary
activity, it is often an anonymous activity, and we have
substantial controls in place to look in large measure at what
goes on in a casino environment.
In an Internet world it is down at the transaction level.
Accounts are established, internal controls have been developed
among Internet operators today to identify where someone is
playing, from what machine or device they are playing. They can
establish the play patterns of an individual from time of day
to amount wagered. There is an ability to set up individually
self-regulated controls over how much money can be wagered in a
week, how much money can be lost in a day, how much money can
be lost over a period of time. Those kinds of tools do not
exist generally in the brick and mortar businesses.
My observations are with the combination of regulatory
control, compliance programs, and sound regulation that these
kinds of things can be done very successfully.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lipparelli follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much. Mr. McIntyre, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHARLES MCINTYRE

Mr. McIntyre. Good morning, Madam Chair. Good morning,
Ranking Member Butterfield. If it please the subcommittee, I am
Charlie McIntyre and I have the honor and privilege of being
the Executive Director of the New Hampshire Lottery.
Let me boast for a second about the State I call home. New
Hampshire is a state of firsts, the first presidential primary,
and they hold that first in the Nation status religiously,
fervently. To suggest that they are proud of it is an
understatement.
In my area it is the first modern lottery in the U.S. the
State representative from Keene, New Hampshire, after 5 tries
and 10 years of efforts, passed a law in 1963 signed by
Governor King to have the first lottery in the U.S., first
modern lottery in the U.S.
Governor John King bought the first ticket which I brought
with me, show and tell. This is the first lottery ticket in the
U.S. that was purchased. Governor King bought it. Unfortunately
he did not win. The director that sold it to him was named Ed
Powers, a retired FBI agent. And he started what is a long
tradition in the lottery world to have law enforcement, current
or retired, serve as lottery directors, which I myself am a
proud member of law enforcement. I served as senior state
prosecutor of the State of Massachusetts with organized crime
as my focus under District Attorneys William Delahunt and
Willaim Keating, both having been, one, a former Member of this
body and the second being a current Member of this august body.
Since 1964, when the lottery became enacted, New Hampshire
has realized $1.5 billion in education funding, as Congressman
Bass correctly out. And 100 percent of our profits go to
education, 100 percent of our profits go to education.
When we needed to add liquidity to games, we joined with
Maine and Vermont and created the first multi-state game in
1985, 26 years ago, and that game still exists today and we
still run it today. New Hampshire now finds itself engaged in a
casino debate in the right place, and it is now the twelfth
year of the sixth legislative session in which that debate is
being engaged. And whether it passes or it fails, it is being
waged in the correct place, in the statehouse of New Hampshire;
similarly, the question whether to expand gambling offerings on
the Internet and via mobile devices should be decided by each
individual State.
This belief and ideal has long roots within the confines of
codified law regarding gambling. But its roots are even more
basic than that. A State should maintain its right to determine
its level of tolerance for the expansion of gambling within its
own borders, being the moving party for that expansion.
As the history of New Hampshire points out, it took 10
years to become a lottery. Maybe the answer is no for a while
until it is yes. But it should be posed to those whose lives it
most directly affects, citizens of that State and those elected
directly, which New Hampshire is quite large, being 40 members
in the House of Representatives in New Hampshire.
Internet access is global. New Hampshire has the second
highest penetration in the U.S. So each State, given that,
should decide its own time and pace, its tolerance for that
expansion. And as for the question of whether it is yes or no
for the State of New Hampshire, then the operational questions
can be asked related to payment, PCI compliance, age
verification, compulsive gambling and geolocation.
The New Hampshire lottery for almost 50 years has been in
control of lottery gambling within its own boards and all
manner of operation and consistent with wishes of the State
without significant controversy or issues. The lottery has
adopted and integrated changes in technology over that time,
and if the State of New Hampshire elected officials allows we
will consider the Internet the next step on that path.
An important point not to be overlooked. Please. As
director of the State lottery in New Hampshire, I am required
to transfer $70 million of net profit by this fiscal year, $72
million next fiscal year. Any impact, any encroachment upon
that gambling space in New Hampshire without execution and
planning materially places those revenues at risk.
Mr. McIntyre. Finally, this committee is an excellent
example of the tolerance, the spectrum upon which gambling
exists--Utah, having no lawful gambling within her borders, and
New Jersey having robust gambling presence. But both exist
within each State's determination as to what is best for the
citizens.
I certainly thank the committee for its time here today and
certainly welcome any questions or comments you may have. Thank
you, Madam Chair and Ranking Member.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. McIntyre.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McIntyre follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Welcome, Mr. Fahrenkopf, you are recognized
for your 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF FRANK J. FAHRENKOPF, JR.

Mr. Fahrenkopf. Thank you, Chairman Bono Mack and Ranking
Member Butterfield for the opportunity to provide testimony
today on behalf of the American Gaming Association which
represents the commercial casino entertainment industry here in
Washington.
Our industry operates in 22 States, directly and indirectly
is responsible for the employment of 875,000 men and women, and
accounts for about $114 billion in spending last year, which
equaled nearly 1 percent of the entire 14.5 trillion U.S. GDP.
We support Federal legislation that will allow States and other
appropriate authorities to license and regulate online poker,
while also ensuring that each State, such as New Hampshire, has
the right to determine whether such activity should be
permissible by residents of their State.
We believe the best approach to making that happen is to
modernize and strengthen the Wire Act of 1961 with conforming
amendments to the Unlawful Internet Gaming Enforcement Act to
unambiguously outlaw and hopefully eliminate illegal Internet
gambling. The AGA asks that any gambling legislative proposal
establish Federal guidelines so there are consistent
regulations for online poker in all jurisdictions that choose
to have them.
In addition, the AGA asks that the legislation pass three
tests. Number one--and I think this is very important--it must
not create competitive advantages or disadvantages between and
among legal commercial casinos, Native American casinos, State
lotteries, and parimutuel wagering; no form of gaming that is
currently legal should be made illegal; and the legislation
must respect fundamental States rights in an appropriate
manner.
Now, we for many years were opposed to all forms of
Internet gambling because we did not believe the technology
existed to properly regulate it with appropriate law
enforcement oversight. That has changed in the last few years.
There are now new technologies and processes that have proven
effective for regulating and overseeing Internet gambling in
First World Nations such as Great Britain, France, Italy;
within the next month, Spain and Denmark, and in provinces of
Canada today.
The registration processes and advanced technologies used
are very similar to those used by Major League Baseball and
CBS, for example, to determine game blackout areas as well as
Apple, Amazon, and the online banking industry to facilitate
secure eCommerce. These new registration processes and advanced
technologies allow the online poker company to determine where
the player is located via advanced geolocation technology and
determine whether the person playing is who they say they are,
using advanced biometrics or other tools to prevent underage
gaming.
There is urgency to this issue, as you have heard from a
number of the witnesses already, because 10 to 15 million U.S.
consumers annually bet online and are at risk and have been
exploited, as we know from the full-tilt activity against them
by the Justice Department. By these unregulated offshore
companies, licensing and regulation would ensure U.S. residents
areprotected.
Now our member companies who are interested in providing
these services have agreed to abide by a code of conduct which
incorporates the key elements of the successful regulations
which are followed now by U.S. land-based casinos. That code
requires companies to do the following: submit to extensive
background investigations of the company and key personnel;
ensure proper identification of every U.S. online poker player;
submit to regular testing and auditing of online poker
software; implement effective player exclusion processes;
incorporate the effective, responsible gaming protections; and
implement effective anti-money-laundering procedures.
I would like, before I conclude my testimony, to take the
opportunity to address this question of problem gambling that
came up with the earlier panel and which was before you in the
last hearing.
It is settled science--and I say that again, it is settled
science--that at any given time about 1 percent of the U.S.
adult population are pathological gamblers, and that is a
figure that has not changed despite the dramatic expansion of
gaming opportunities during the last 35 years. Researchers also
have found no evidence that online gamblers are more likely to
be pathological gamblers when appropriate allowances are made
for participation in other gambling activities.
In fact, a major British study found no increase in the
rate of pathological gambling between 1999 and 2007, even
though Internet gambling became widely available during that
period. Similar studies emerged in a study of Swedish gamblers,
but the most definitive and recent research on this topic has
been conducted by the Division of Addictions at the Cambridge
Health Alliance, an affiliate of Harvard Medical School.
Their study of the actual transactions and behaviors of
40,000 online gamblers directly contradicts the belief that
Internet gambling breeds excessive and problematic gaming
behavior. This comprehensive research, the largest study of its
kind, found that the mast majority of online gamblers play
responsibly and can moderate their behaviors.
Researchers have also found that online gaming
participation decreases over time, saying that they did not
find evidence to support claims that Internet gambling will
cause escalated or even sustained rates. I have got more, but
my time is up and perhaps during the questions and answers we
can get to them.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Fahrenkopf.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fahrenkopf follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Bono Mack. And Dr. Volberg, it is your 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RACHEL A. VOLBERG

Ms. Volberg. Good morning, Madam Chairman, Ranking Member
Butterfield, and members of the subcommittee.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Can you please pull your microphone a
little closer?
Ms. Volberg. OK, is that better?
Mrs. Bono Mack. Yes, thank you.
Ms. Volberg. My name is Rachel Volberg. I am a sociologist
at NORC at the University of Chicago, and I have been doing
research on gambling and problem gambling for 26 years.
The Internet gambling market is large and growing rapidly.
Poker is the most popular form of online gambling, and accounts
for 60 percent of online gambling activity but for only 23
percent of online gambling revenues. The majority of Internet
poker players are young men with relatively high levels of
education, and perhaps a few older men as well.
With regard to problem and pathological gambling, there is
substantial research showing that prevalence rates are three to
four times higher among Internet gamblers compared to non-
Internet gamblers. Now, critics argue that Internet gambling
does not cause problem gambling, but that instead problem
gamblers are attracted to Internet gambling and add it to a
repertoire of other gambling activities.
Results from a new longitudinal study in Canada show that
while both of these things happen, the most common pathway is
actually for Internet gamblers to develop problems subsequent
to beginning to gamble on the Internet.
Now, most things that go up usually come down, and this is
true in epidemiology as well. Research shows that problem
gambling prevalence does eventually level out and decline, even
if accessibility does continue to increase. Among the likely
contributors to such declines are greater public awareness,
decreased participation once the novelty has worn off of a new
form of gambling, increased government and industry efforts to
provide gambling more safely, expanding services for problem
gamblers, the increased age of the population, and,
unfortunately an outflow of problem gambling cases due to
severe personal or financial crisis, criminal charges or, in
extreme cases, suicide.
H.R. 2366 provides for Federal oversight of State and
tribal agencies that will issue licenses for online poker, but
leaves responsibility for setting consumer protection standards
to the States and tribes. This arrangement virtually guarantees
that programs to prevent and mitigate problem gambling will
vary significantly across jurisdictions. And while the
competition among online gambling providers will ensure a cost-
efficient and appealing consumer product, a free market is
likely to come at the cost of less player protection.
Beyond requiring licensees to establish self-exclusion
programs, I believe some additional minimum requirements are
needed. These include a requirement for players to set limits
with regard to time and money, a 24-hour cooling off period
before changes to limits can be made, monthly financial
statements, and self-assessment tests.
It would be best if these measures, as well as the self-
exclusion program, were operated by a third-party independent
organization. Such an approach offers many advantages. One
significant one is that it would allow players who wish to
self-exclude to visit a single site and exclude themselves from
all of the domestic sites at one time, rather than having to go
to each gambling site individually.
Finally, even these measures will be insufficient without a
mechanism to adequately fund prevention, treatment, and
research on problem gambling in the United States. I agree with
the National Council on Problem Gambling that a minimum of $50
million in new Internet gambling revenue must be dedicated to
these programs.
Unfortunately, the United States lags far behind other
countries in this regard. State funding for problem gambling
services per capita is approximately one-twentieth the level it
is in countries such as Australia and Canada, and there has
never been a Federal agency with primary responsibilities to
address problem gambling. I therefore also urge you to support
H.R. 2334, which designates SAMHSA as the lead Federal agency
on problem gambling.
Online gambling is here to stay and will continue to
evolve. The question is what governments can and will do to
create a safety net for their citizens, to minimize the likely
increase in the number of problem gamblers, to provide
treatment for those afflicted, and to ensure that research is
undertaken to understand the impacts of Internet gambling on
society.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to answering your questions.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Dr. Volberg.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Volberg follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Bono Mack. And I thank the entire panel, and we will
now turn to questioning, and I will recognize myself for 5
minutes.
And I would like to ask Mr. Fahrenkopf this question first.
If Congress were to enable Internet gaming, do you support the
right for States to opt-out of such a system and to limit any
online gaming participation by their residents to entrust State
online operations under that State's own control?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. Absolutely. We are supporters, and always
have been, that the Tenth Amendment States rights must be
recognized. States should always have the right to determine
what type of gaming they are going to allow in their State, how
they are going to regulate it, how they are going to tax it. So
we have no problem with States opting out if they don't want to
participate.
Mrs. Bono Mack. And then once they're opted out again, just
to be clear, that you can opt out and offer intrastate solely?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. Well, some of the discussion, Mr. Campbell
was saying that UIGEA was the purchase--the purpose of that was
to outlaw Internet gambling. It really wasn't. The purpose of
UIGEA, or UIGEA, as we call it, was to interfere with the
financial transactions that went on. The bill clearly did not
say what was legal or illegal.
But there is within UIGEA an intrastate exemptionfrom
UIGEA. There would still be a determination, as you know. The
Justice Department to this day says that Internet wagering of
any sort is illegal under the 1961 Wire Act. I don't
necessarily agree with them. It is hard for me to believe that
anyone in this august body who was serving here in 1961 ever
thought that there would be a worldwide Web, that there would
be the intent. So clearly there is is an intrastate exemption
from UIGEA for States to do intrastate activity, which would
not violate that law. I am not going to pass judgment on what
the Justice Department is going to say. I happen to disagree
with their interpretation that that would be illegal.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. And much of what you are talking
about, you are speaking to the ability to regulate, to have
particular Web sites and those Web sites only. Yet in Congress
we are often dealing with rogue Web sites that are selling, you
know, bad prescriptions, bad pharmaceuticals. There are rogue
Web sites that are selling pirated intellectual property.
How do you propose that you make sure that the consumer can
truly know that this is a real Web site and a safe Web site,
because we are are dealing with this in so many other areas
right now?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. Well, as I said in my remarks, I think that
the way to go about this, in the wisdom of Congress, Internet
poker should be legalized. We have got to back, reiterate the
1961 Wire Act, as well as adjust UIGEA to make sure that it can
be used as the vehicle to keep track of what, you know, other
Web sites there are. Now, I happen to believe that the free
market will make a determination.
Mrs. Bono Mack. But the free market right now is suffering
from rogue Web sites and from all of the bad prescription drugs
again, and from rogue Web sites that are coming from offshore
where the consumer has no concept whether it is a legitimate
Web site or not.
So let me move on to Dr. Volberg, though, because time is
so limited. All of you have expressed a desire to keep children
and problem gamblers from gambling online. If Congress chooses
to legalize any particular or all online gaming, how would you
prevent problem gamblers or minors from continuing to go
wherever they can place the wager, including the unregulated
offshore operations I was just talking about? Wouldn't the
dangers for these vulnerable segments still persist?
Ms. Volberg. Well, the dangers would persist, but there are
ways to mitigate the dangers by placing sort of roadblocks in
the way. Certainly I am not an expert on how to do age
verification. You heard a speaker, or someone testified last
time on that front.
The issue that I am most familiar with is the question of
exclusion programs and pre-commitment programs. And the thing
to do, or the step that we believe is most effective, is to get
people before they begin to gamble, to set up the constraints
in terms of how much money per day or per week or per month
that they want to spend, how much time they want to spend on
those particular Web sites, and to set that up ahead of time so
that in the middle of sort of the excitement of the action,
they are not sort of going to lose control and keep going
longer than they wanted.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Mr. Lipparelli, I would like to change the
subject a little tiny bit toward travel gaming. I believe you
have some travel operations in Nevada.
Mr. Lipparelli. We do, in fact.
Mrs. Bono Mack. OK. Can you explain briefly how they are
regulated?
Mr. Lipparelli. Each of the tribes, I believe there are
two, have entered into State compacts where they have agreed to
abide by the State regulatory structure, so they follow our
State regulatory regime.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you.
Mr. Fahrenkopf, back to you. Should online gaming sites be
required to help pay for the services needed to treat problem
gambling, or should the State use the revenue it receives to
pay for the services, or both?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. Well, most of the experience that we have
had with land-based casinos as well as lotteries and the
parimutuel industry, it varied State by State. In some States
there is a--for example, in the States that have river boat
gaming, you have to pay a fee to go on the boat, and a portion
of that fee is set aside for responsible gaming work.
So it varies from State to State, but either way it could,
you know, be effective if it was clearly drawn as a means to
develop the revenue. I might say that there is some real
question, however, of what adequate treatment is, and Rachel
has been involved in this business, as others, for 20 or 30
years as to what the proper treatment must be.
For example, you have a State like Iowa that has had casino
gaming since 1989, they have raised a tremendous amount of
money, but in some cases they don't know how to effectively
spend it. And that is why research is really the key where most
of the money should go, at least in the immediate future, along
with some of the programs that Rachel has talked about.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. And my time has actually expired
a while ago, so I am happy to recognize Mr. Butterfield for his
5 minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. I thank the chairman. Both bills that we
are talking about here today seek to prevent children from
accessing gambling sites, and that is certainly a good thing
and we can all agree on that. However, these two bills take
different approaches toward achieving the goal.
Mr. Franks' bill and Mr. Campbell, 1174, gives the Treasury
Secretary broad regulatory and enforcement authority to
implement a licensing program for Internet gambling sites. This
authority includes a requirement that the Secretary make sure
that those licensees have various processes in place to prevent
underage gambling.
Mr. Barton's bill, 2366, allows States to license gambling
sites. The bill requires the relevant State agencies to, quote,
ensure to a reasonable degree of certainty that the individual
placing a bet or wager is not less than 21 years of age, end of
quote.
Let me this time go to my right. Dr. Volberg, would you
have any concerns with a State by State or even a tribe-by-
tribe approach to preventing children from accessing gambling
Web sites?
Ms. Volberg. Well, I think actually the issue of preventing
children from gaining access to Internet gambling Web sites is
an important one, because while the technology may exist on a
State-to-State level to implement those steps--and this applies
to problem gambling as well--there is not equal political will
in every State to implement those measures.
And so what you will get, as I mentioned in my testimony,
you will get variability across the States in terms of what
they are willing to do, what they are able to do. And as a
result, I think that some States will do a very good job, but
other States are going to do a much less good job of protecting
both underage gamblers and problem gamblers or people who are
at risk.
I think another issue that I have great concern about
because I have done a number of adolescent surveys, is the
number of youth that access the Internet to gamble is
extraordinarily high. In the survey that we did in Oregon, 30
percent of our adolescents had actually gambled on the
Internet. But most of those had gambled for entertainment and
not for money. And so when you are talking about sort of
educating young people about gambling, part of it is occurring
on the Internet, and I would like to see some prevention
measures and some education that goes along with, you know,
preventing them from actually gambling for money.
Mr. Butterfield. Do you think that this issue could be
addressed through consistent across-the-board requirements at
the Federal level? And if it should be at this level, would you
have concerns if more than one agency provided oversight?
Ms. Volberg. I think when it comes to prevention and
treatment, or certainly prevention and research, that we have
not seen the States step up to the level that they have or that
governments have in other countries around the world. So I
would say that those two areas in particular do require a
stronger Federal voice.
Mr. Butterfield. We are going to have to have oversight if
this goes into law, I am just trying to find out what agencies
should be involved and could it be multiple agencies?
Ms. Volberg. I absolutely think it should be multiple
agencies. I think that--I have seen models internationally
where that does happen very effectively, but it does require
the legislation to actually say that you have to coordinate
these--you know, these departments have to coordinate.
Mr. Butterfield. Should any proposal in this area include
some additional minimum requirements to ensure that licensees
don't target children? For example, should any legislation
include standards for general advertising and marketing
practices and online sites, the specific targeting of minors,
the system used by the site to verify that the user is of legal
age before they are allowed to sign up? Would you quickly speak
to that in 30 seconds?
Ms. Volberg. Yes, I believe there is a need for that.
Mr. Butterfield. All right, thank you.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentleman and recognize Mr.
Barton for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Chairwoman. I have a letter from
Alfonse D'Amato that was written to you on November 7, 2011,
and it is copied to all members of the subcommittee. I would
like unanimous consent to put that in the record. It has been
shared with the minority.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Barton. I want to ask my first question to Professor
Volberg. You kind of just alluded in passing that your study of
people that play poker on the Internet, they often tend to be
young men with high educational levels; and then you looked
directly at me and said, ``and a few older men.''
And I want the record to show that I am 62.
Mrs. Bono Mack. With objection.
Mr. Barton. That classifies as old, I guess, but I have
never played online for money. I play online for play money,
but not for money. But I respect those that do play for money,
and a number of young men in my district play professionally
and make a living.
Could you comment a little bit more on the demographics of
the average online poker player?
Ms. Volberg. Well, I will be happy to do that. I would just
would like to say that I said older, rather than--I did not
mean any disrespect.
In terms of the characteristics of online gamblers, this is
not actually a study that I have done, it is a study that--a
number of studies that have looked at online gamblers and
online poker players as a subclass of online gamblers. And the
E. Koeger study is the specific one that I was referring to
here, where they found that--they looked at the demographic
differences between online poker players and online casino
gamblers. And what they found, that while the online poker
players tended to mostly be, or the majority of them were young
men between the ages of 18 and 24 with relatively high levels
of education and income, in contrast the online casino gamblers
were primarily or a majority were older women with relatively
lower levels of income and education.
Mr. Barton. But on the poker player demographic online, my
experience is that they tend to be very sharp. They all know
the probabilities, they all know the permutations. Most of them
excel in math.
If you watch the World Series of Poker, which is not
online, but if you watch the World Series of Poker on ESPN,
they all appear to be MIT engineering people. I mean, they are
not people, though, that you would tend to say could be taken
advantage of, that don't know what they are doing, that need to
be protected. I mean, they are folks that are fully aware and
feel that they have the ability to have a competitive edge.
Wouldn't you agree with that?
Ms. Volberg. I think that that is certainly characteristic
of the individuals that you described as professional poker
players, people who make a living.
I think there are lots and lots of young men out there and
some young women who also are very smart and also are very well
educated.
The issue is not so much the folks who, you know, know the
odds and know what they are doing, it is people who are coming
into an activity where they sort of think that they have gotten
pretty good because they have been playing on a free play site,
and then they decide to do it for money and they go in and
their expectations are a little unrealistic because the free
play sites are set up differently.
Mr. Barton. I have only got about a minute left. I want to
ask the chairman of the Nevada Gaming Commission, in your
opinion would online poker, would it hurt or help mainline
brick-and-mortar casinos?
Mr. Lipparelli. I think it is been our experience that if
there is an impact, it is already reflected in operations.
Clearly there is a lot of online gaming happening now. It has
exploded in the last 7 years, so if there has been a direct
impact, it is probably already being felt.
I think the industry participants that we talk to
frequently see an opportunity there, but they see it as a
compliment rather than something that would impact their
businesses directly.
Mr. Barton. OK. And my last question to Mr. Fahrenkopf.
There obviously are some very delicate issues in terms of
sovereignty of the Indian tribes and their casino operations
and their regulatory approach versus for-profit casinos.
Do you feel that those issues can be handled in a fair
fashion so that the Indian tribes concerns, because of their
status, can be addressed in a fair way?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. We totally respect the sovereignty of the
tribes, and that is why, as I indicated in my initial remarks,
I have been doing this for 17 years, and for 17 years I have
been saying that no law should treat any type of legal gaming
different than the others. So no one should get a leg up or be
hurt between whether you are talking about our industry,
whether you are talking about Native American gaming, whether
you are talking about the parimutuel industry, or whether you
are talking about the lottery business.
Mr. Barton. OK. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you Mr. Barton. The chair recognizes
Mr. Towns for 5 minutes.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. And of course
I want to thank you and Mr. Butterfield for having this hearing
in terms of bringing the very stakeholders together to have a
discussion to determine whether, you know, whether we move
forward or not, and if we do move forward to make certain that
we are doing it in a very effective manner.
Let me begin with you, Mr. McIntyre. I want to make certain
I understood your testimony. You appear to be concerned about
the loss of State revenue, you know, being diverted from the
lottery play to online casino play. Wouldn't ensuring that the
share of tax revenue from online poker make up the difference?
Mr. McIntyre. One of the difficulties is, Mr. Congressman,
is there is no State tax in New Hampshire, so there is that
issue. There is no State income tax and there is no gaming tax
in New Hampshire.
But one of the difficulties we have is our research
suggests that 32 percent of our players--strike that--30
percent of the New Hampshire citizens visit a casino once a
year, 45 percent of our players have visited within the last
year, and 53 percent of our regular players have visited one or
more times a year. So I firmly believe they draw from the same
wealth.
I don't think it would have an impact directly,
immediately. I think it would be over the long term, given the
statistics suggested, in terms of the demographic that it is a
younger player. Lottery lives and breathes in the demographic
of 35 to 60 years old, and that is not where even a poker
player is now. It is where the folks who are in Internet poker
will be in 20 years.
So it is not for me that I make this case. It is for my
successor or my successive successors in terms of the impact on
lottery revenues, Congressman.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much. Let me go to you, Mr.
Lipparelli.
Given the longstanding role of States authorizing and
regulating gaming within their own borders and the fact that
New York State, which I come from, has a very sophisticated
regulatory structure for gaming, are the States best positioned
to handle this new formal wagering?
Mr. Lipparelli. I think it has been our consistent position
since this topic came up that we actually support a national
model that gives the States some degree of framework to
regulation. Given that this is an activity that crosses State
borders, it is important to have some amount harmonization
among those States. I think there can be particular levels of
additional scrutiny that any State might want to impose, that
there ought to be some ability to try to harmonize what would
be a national business. Today, as you might know, there are 48-
some different regulatory structures. And from a private
industry perspective, many of which operate in our State, it is
become increasingly problematic and increasingly expensive to
be responsible, to be answerable to 48 different regulatory
regimes. So our position from the State of Nevada is that we
clearly support some kind of national solution.
Mr. Towns. To you, Mr. Fahrenkopf. Again, a little over a
minute left. Has the ban on online gambling prevented Americans
from gambling online? Has there been any----
Mr. Fahrenkopf. No. I think, Congressman, as the testimony
from actually all three of them, your fellow Members of the
House who were here on the earlier panel, Internet wagering has
just exploded. It actually started back early around 2003 and -
4. The passage of UIGEA, which was with all good purpose trying
to put a dent in that, we have seen has really not been as
effective as it should be. And that is why we believe that has
to be amended to make very clear what is legal and not legal.
And regulation, taxation, is the best way to protect those
people who might be vulnerable to the things that Dr. Volberg
is talking about and what Congressman Wolf is concerned about.
Mr. Towns. Let me announce I am not a poker player, but how
would I know, if I am playing, that I am not playing against a
machine?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. We submitted some additional testimony to
the panel after the last hearing that got into that question,
because there was some discussions of the use of bots and other
types of mechanical, if you will, players, rather than regular
players.
And the technology that we have seen from those
jurisdictions primarily in Europe, they have developed software
which can--and Mr. Lipparelli probably knows more about this
than I do--software that can monitor the way bets are being
placed--actually, believe it or not, where the mouse is and
where it is being pushed on a certain period of time to
determine whether or not there is a problem.
But interestingly enough, most of the bots that have been
discovered have been discovered because other players, human
players, have realized that something id not right with the way
the game is going and report it.
But maybe Mr. Lipparelli can tell you a little more about
how the bots can be handled.
Mr. Lipparelli. Mr. Towns, I spent a better part of 2-1/2
years looking at the various technologies that exist, and one
thing that is becoming abundantly clear to me is that you can
probably get away with trying to cheat a system or trying to
play as an underage gambler or trying to utilize the services
of the bot, but you will be uncovered fairly quickly. The
analytical tools that are now being deployed as part of these
systems have become very robust, so you might be able to get
away with it once, but you are going to leave big fingerprints
behind.
Mr. Towns. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Towns, I appreciate it. And
recognize Mr. Bass for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bass. Thank you, Madam Chairman, this is a quick
follow-up to Mr. Towns' question. Are bots illegal?
Mr. Lipparelli. Well, I think the only way I could answer
that is depending on what that it is. You would have to define
it. There are many people that will use the player's aid on
another computer to give them basic strategy play. That would
probably not be illegal in most people's mind. The use of some
kind of an electronic device to gain an advantage, which is how
we define cheating a game in Nevada, would probably be illegal.
Mr. Bass. But the bill wouldn't address that, would it? Or
does it?
Mr. Lipparelli. I am not sure whether it does or doesn't.
Mr. Bass. I have a general question for all the witnesses.
I believe that Mr. Barton's bill limits licensees to gaming
facilities, I don't know what the definition is, casinos and so
forth.
Mr. McIntyre is here today from the New Hampshire Lottery.
Lotteries, as he testified, have been around a long time. They
have their own infrastructures and so forth that guard against
cheating and fraud and corruption and so forth. Why shouldn't
they be able to run online poker if they chose to do so? I am
directing that to any member of the panel.
Mr. Fahrenkopf. As I said, any piece of legislation must
treat all the legal gaming entities the same, lotteries as well
as land-based casinos, Native American tribes and the
parimutuel industry. So if the State wants to have their
lottery offer online poker, I have no objection with that. I
don't think that that would violate the rule.
Mr. Bass. Others?
Mr. McIntyre. Congressman Bass, certainly I thank you for
your comments and I certainly believe that we would be able to
handle that function similar to our neighbors to the north, the
two Canadian lotteries that run this now, the Atlantic Lottery
Corporation, representing our neighbor directly to the north,
as well as the British Columbia Lottery, which runs that
function very well.
Mr. Bass. Mr. Lipparelli.
Mr. Lipparelli. Yes, I share the views of the panelists,
that I as a regulator--we abide by what our State law says. So
in our case we would obviously follow that.
The only comment that I would add to the question posed by
Mr. Towns and McIntyre, there are several foreign markets that
are experiencing the impact of a failure to regulate on
existing money-raising kinds of organizations. There are
several lotteries and other kinds of organizations that in
large measure rely on the proceeds of gaming activity and have
highlighted the fact that illegal gaming activities are
starting to have a real negative impact on their revenue flows.
So given, you know, the kinds of organizations that are out
there that benefit from gaming, it is a huge question to them
as to why not regulate.
Mr. Bass. So, in conclusion, none of you have any objection
to amending the bill to expand the scope to allow or to give
the opportunity for State lotteries to participate on an equal
level and not have the 2-year hold-harmless period before they
could be involved in the same online poker activities as the
casinos would be allowed to do upon enactment of the bill?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. Well, I am not here representing anyone
supporting either of the pieces of legislation. We have not
made a determination--I would say, however, that one of the--
anyone who knows anything about online poker knows that for it
to be successful there must be liquidity, which means you have
to have a lot of players.
And whether or not a State as small as Nevada or New
Hampshire or other States could generate the liquidity with an
intra-State online poker operation to really make it worth
their while is a real question that is out there. Now maybe
States as California, Florida, some of the bigger States, you
would have that liquidity. But again, as I say, I have no
opinion on either of the pieces of legislation that are now
being considered.
Mr. Bass. Well, any other comments?
Mr. McIntyre. Certainly if the legislature of New Hampshire
authorizes us to do so, we would welcome it. And liquidity is a
matter to be determined based on the players of New Hampshire.
But about 5 percent of our players and 5 percent of the State
play now online currently, so it is about 60,000 people. So I
imagine, based off of our brand recognition, which is 72
percent favorable amongst the citizens of New Hampshire and 85
percent favorable rating amongst our players, I would imagine
that would increase.
Mr. Bass. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Bass. Mr. Harper, you are
recognized now for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Madam Chairman. And I appreciate the
witnesses being here and taking their time to enlighten us.
And if I may start with you, Mr. McIntyre, I believe you
said earlier that the State of New Hampshire received, I
believe, $1.5 billion towards education since the lottery
began; is that correct?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Harper. OK. And how much money has been sold or
received for the sale of the lottery tickets, the total amount
spent?
Mr. McIntyre. Within State?
Mr. Harper. Out of the 1.5 billion that went to education,
what was the total amount bought or spent on lottery tickets
during that time?
Mr. McIntyre. It is difficult to characterize because the
amount of prizes going back to the players has varied over 50
years. But currently, of a dollar spent, 67 cents goes back to
the players in terms of prizes. We keep about 25 cents on the
dollar in terms of profit.
Mr. Harper. Just a curiosity. Do you have to physically go
to a vendor to purchase the lottery ticket, or is that done
online?
Mr. McIntyre. It is done through a computer system that
communicates through multiple methods, and you purchase it at a
convenience store, supermarket, and the rest.
Mr. Bass. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Harper. Certainly, I will yield to the gentleman from
New Hampshire.
Mr. Bass. Mr. McIntyre defines online as being on a
telephone line. You are talking about the Internet. Internet
sales are not----
Mr. Harper. I will certainly clarify my question. Are there
Internet sales, or does an individual buying a lottery ticket
in New Hampshire have to go to a store vendor to buy it?
Mr. McIntyre. 99.6 percent of our sales are through a
store. A very, very, small portion of our sales, what we call
subscription sales, which are done through the Internet, and it
represents less than half of 1 percent of our overall sales.
Mr. Harper. Thank you. You know, one of the concerns, as we
look at this, is, for instance, in my district we have the
Mississippi Band Chocktaw Indians, who have land-based casino
gambling. And it is hard for me to envision how opening this
up, which would require more players, would require folks to do
that for it to be a profitable venture, how that will not have
a negative impact upon destination gambling. And I would like
to hear a response on that from whoever would care to answer?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. Congressman, some years ago we at the
American Gaming Association, which is most of the land-based
casinos in the country in the commercial area, looked very
closely at this. The question is cannibalization. If, in fact,
Internet poker was allowed, would it cannibalize the business
of the brick-and-mortar companies?
We looked at, for a very, very long time, we came to the
conclusion that it would not; or if it did, it would be very
marginal because we are only talking about poker. Our position
is it should only be poker.
We are more in line with the Barton bill's approach than we
are with the Frank-Campbell bill's approach.
Mr. Harper. OK. Well, let me stop you for just a moment. If
we are looking over all at a broader bill, more than just
poker, would that not expand or increase the probability that
it is going to hurt destination gambling?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. It could, although the demographics of the
people who play online, as Dr. Volberg has talked about,
particularly young men who are between the ages of 18 and 24,
higher education, they tend to not be the same people who go to
land-based casinos.
Mr. Harper. OK.
Mr. Fahrenkopf. So our position was that the end result
would be it would be a new profit center rather be very much of
a deterioration in the business of land based.
Mr. Harper. All right. One of the arguments that has been
used to support Internet gambling in the U.S., legal, is that
we have these offshore sites that can't be controlled.
Well, if we do this, how--are we still in the situation of
not controlling what is that problem? How are we controlling
that? Why shouldn't we first look towards coming out with a way
to perhaps block all payments to them before we look at
expanding it here, because I don't see how we are going to do
that. And Dr. Volberg, I believe, has had some, maybe in your
written testimony, is you are going to have a higher cost for
the regulated version versus the offshore unregulated version,
and what is to keep players from still going offshore?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. I would answer that in two ways. As I
attempted to answer earlier to the chairperson's question, the
market will take care of some of that, not all that. In other
words, people who are going to gamble online, whether or not
they would rather gamble with the brands they know, U.S.
companies that they know, rather than going offshore to some
outfit that is located in the Caribbean island or somewhere. So
the marketplace will take care of some of that.
The other step will be going back and strengthening UIGEA.
The original purpose of UIGEA was exactly what you pointed out:
how to block these transfers offshore. We have to go back and
strengthen that act by making clear what is legal and what is
illegal to give guidance to American banks and financial
institutions so they can effectively block those.
Mr. Harper. Shouldn't we do that first before we proceed
with anything else?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. Well, I am not sure which should be first.
I think you can both do it at the same time.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you Mr. Harper. Mr. Lance, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much and good morning to you all.
This is very interesting to me, and I want to thank the
director from New Hampshire regarding his remarks concerning
New Jersey. And New Jersey certainly has learned a great deal
from New Hampshire.
And to Director McIntyre, it is my understanding that
regulatory bodies here in this country and also abroad often
rely on the independent testing laboratories for confirming
that equipment used in gaming is fair for consumers. I am also
told that some foreign jurisdictions that currently allow
Internet gaming have similar testing requirements, not only for
fairness issues but also for verification and location matters.
My question to you, and perhaps to others on the panel as
well, is to what extent, if at all, do you think that statutory
change here should include such requirements?
Mr. McIntyre. I mean, certainly--Congressman, thank you for
your comments and you have a wonderful lottery. One of the
concerns we have is integrity, and we test and retest and
retest, and we use outside testing firms. We use outside
testing firms to test the testing firms for that very reason,
sir.
So I think in terms of an outside firm like Gaming
Laboratories or the rest that offer the services and the
protocols to test systems, I think that is actually an
excellent idea.
Mr. Lance. Yes, thank you. And would others on the panel
have a opinion, the director in Nevada?
Mr. Lipparelli. Certainly, Mr. Lance. I spent 20 years in
the industry, 18 of which was submitting products to testing
labs around the country. And I have some colleagues that
operate in other jurisdictions that don't see as much value in
pretesting. I see incredibly high value in that, and I don't
think there would be any regime that we would consider that
would allow someone to deploy gaming technology that is not
subjected to high assurance and pretesting.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. That was my view as well, and I would
hope it might be included in the legislation or at least in
some provision that would permit that based upon rule and
regulation.
On another area, on cannibalization, I am concerned to some
extent whether this would be competition, not only for various
aspects of the regime but also, for example, for State
lotteries.
And to the two gentlemen who are certainly involved in
this, do you think that there might be only a certain gaming
amount, a pie, and would this lead to cannibalization of
lotteries, obviously an issue of importance to those of us in
New Jersey who rely on our State lottery?
Mr. Lipparelli. Well, I guess it is more my personal views
than my role as a State regulator, but as a State regulator we
do have the economic health of our industry to consider. I
think what is ironic about the circumstances that exist today,
the legitimate licensed operator who cares for their patrons
and establishes policies, is that this distinct disadvantage to
those who are really under no penalty of prosecution for
playing in this field today.
So we have got this incredible imbalance, people we enjoy
great relationships with, people who take lots of time and
energy and money to keep their operations aboveboard, competing
against those that have no view of that. And so I think to the
extent that there is, again, an erosion of market share, that
is occurring today without abatement.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. Mr. McIntyre, Director McIntyre.
Mr. McIntyre. Yes, Congressman. I certainly use the example
frequently related to the gambling pie and suggest that Nevada,
in its own decisions, has no State lottery. And they have
avowed repeatedly that it is because they don't want to
compete. So I certainly believe that in terms of there being a
finite number of dollars, I believe that to be true.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. And Chairman Fahrenkopf?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. Congressman, if a State is concerned about
cannibalization of the lottery, its State legislature and
Governor can make a determination to opt out and therefore
their lottery will not be in danger.
Mr. Lance. Yes, thank you. That would be my view as well.
And regarding pies, to all of you, a happy Thanksgiving.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank my sentimental colleague and
recognize Mr. Guthrie for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I was kind of
interested, and I have looked through the testimony written,
and Mr. Fahrenkopf and Dr. Volberg, both of you cite credible
studies, looks like the people who did the studies have good
curriculum vitae, but you come to different conclusions about
expanded online gambling and expanded access for problematic
gamblers or people who are addicted to gambling.
Could you gentleman explain, you both had studies that
showed completely two different results. Do you want to explain
your study, and then your study, Dr. Volberg----
Mr. Fahrenkopf. Well, I think the important words that I
said with regard to online gamblers, they are not more likely
to be pathological gamblers.
If you take into consideration what I call the allowances
that are made for participation in other gambling activities,
and that is one of the problems with some of the studies that
have been done and have been cited by Dr. Volberg.
I also realize that her studies, one of her studies had 139
people or 135 gamblers, another had 179, and that is why I used
the Harvard studies, 40,000 gamblers online in Europe who have
been examined. And I just think the weight of the evidence goes
that way.
But Dr. Volberg herself admits that you have got to be
careful with your sample to make sure that you don't oversample
with young men who are more likely to be those individuals
included. And I am not sure whether in those surveys that she
cited in her written documents----
Mr. Guthrie. The 40,000 Harvard study had the same
percentage of psychological gamblers; is what you are saying
they had the same percentage? So there was not an evidence of
an appreciable different percentage of problem gamblers online
as it is in a casino.
Mr. Fahrenkopf. I think the numbers were very different
with regard to the conclusion as to whether or not just
Internet gaming itself is going to create more problem gamblers
or whether or not, as Dr. Volberg has quoted in a number of her
studies, it is just another element that a problem gambler is
going to play; in other words, they are going to----
Mr. Guthrie. Dr. Volberg, do you want respond?
Ms. Volberg. With all due respect to Mr. Fahrenkopf, the
very small sample that he cited there, it looks like those
results are from the Nevada survey that we did in 2002.
Mr. Fahrenkopf. No, it was a California study, 135 Internet
gamblers.
Ms. Volberg. One hundred thirty-five Internet gamblers out
of a total sample of 7,121.
The part that, you know--it is very difficult in a forum
like this to get down into the nitty-gritty of research
studies, and I would invite all of you to come to the National
Council's annual conference and listen to these things be
debated.
I think that in my mind, there is very clear evidence that
problem gambling rates amongst Internet gamblers are extremely
high. They are three to four times higher than they are amongst
people who do not gamble on the Internet but do other forms of
gambling.
The issue is that most people who gamble on the Internet
also do other types of gambling. They are casino players, they
play the lottery, many of them are horse betters, and so on and
so forth. And so when you do an analysis it is very important
to control for those things.
In the California survey that Mr. Fahrenkopf has just
referenced, we found that only that very small number or very
small proportion of about 2 percent of our sample had gambled
on the Internet, but 11 percent of them scored as pathological
gamblers and an additional 20 percent of them or 19 percent of
them scored as subclinical problem gamblers.
And when you did a statistical analysis that controlled for
the demographics for co-morbid disorders, for other types of
gambling, the Internet gamblers were actually 10 times more
likely to have a gambling problem than the people who were not
gambling on the Internet.
Mr. Guthrie. Wouldn't you say that because you can do that
anonymously, because some people do things on the Internet they
don't do in public--I mean, that is what we--is it because they
can do it anonymously? Is that why you see it at higher rates
or access, because nobody sees you walking into the casino and
gambling, see you are on the Internet, and other forms of
behavior people have done on the Internet you can't believe
they have done. We have had a problem in Kentucky State
Government where people are doing stuff on the computer that is
just unbelievable. And is it because of the anonymity of it all
that you don't think somebody can find you?
Ms. Volberg. I think it is the anonymity. It is also the
ease of access. It is the fact that, you know, there are no
external controls in terms of, you know, being socially visible
to other people. I think that there is a number of different
features of the Internet gambling that are of great concern to
people who are concerned about the issue of problem gambling.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. I see my time has expired. I yield
back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. Dr. Cassidy, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cassidy. Again, this has been a very informative panel.
I think at least a couple of you must have read some of the
questions I had last time. If not, you are incredibly
intuitive, in which case I want to gamble with you on your
side, not against you.
On the other hand, Dr. Volberg, you and Mr. Fahrenkopf
actually pose some different conclusions. I think I read in
your testimony that worldwide there is about 4 billion played
on Internet gambling, and Mr. Fahrenkopf estimates that there
would be 2 billion in tax revenue generated. Now, those numbers
seem incompatible unless you are imagining, Mr. Fahrenkopf,
that there would be a dramatic escalation in the amount of
online gambling, or if you disagree with Dr. Volberg's
statement that there is 4 billion only.
Mr. Fahrenkopf. One of the problems with anyone
guesstimating what the tax revenue that is going to be
generated is, is we are dealing with an unregulated industry.
So what we are doing, any of us who are trying to estimate it,
would be we are dealing with offshore companies that are trying
to give us estimates.
For example, there was a PriceWaterhouseCoopers report that
was actually filed in the Financial Services Committee in the
last cycle that said there would be $49 billion in revenues.
Well, there were a lot of assumptions you had to make. It was
that every State would opt in. I mean that it would include
sports wagering. I mean, you have got to look at it carefully.
I tend to go on the low side because I just don't feel
there has been sufficient evidence out there of exactly what
the bottom line would be, plus we don't know what the tax
structure would be if legislation would be passed.
Mr. Cassidy. But if it were taxed too much, it would drive
people to the illegal offshore sites. So, that is----
Mr. Fahrenkopf. That is the problem they are have right now
right now, Congressman, for example, in Great Britain. In Great
Britain, they put in place such a high level of taxation on
Internet gaming companies that most of the companies have left
and have gone to the Isle of Man, have gone to Gibraltar, have
gone to other places to locate because----
Mr. Cassidy. Now, that is a nice segue, just because I am
out of time, and I am going to be out of time.
Dr. Volberg, your testimony also points out that in places
like France and in Britain, 25 to 33 percent of the people
still are offshore, if you will, at illegal sites.
Ms. Volberg. It is actually the opposite way around. It is
only about 25 to 40 percent of domestic players in those
markets who play exclusively with the domestically provided and
regulated sites, and it is the remainder of the market, as I
understand it, or the remainder of the players who actually
continue to play either on out-of-jurisdiction sites or use a
mix of domestic and nondomestic.
Mr. Cassidy. So we really shouldn't view this as a cash cow
for State treasuries because if we tax it too much we will just
drive people offshore. That is a fair statement?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. Well, I think--that is why I say we have to
tighten up UIGEA and give the banking facilities in this
country the guidance that they will need to stop financial
transactions with those offshore operations. That will stop it.
Mr. Cassidy. Although going back to what Mr. Frank said, if
people wish to do so in this age, it is hard to imagine you can
somehow keep them--although I enjoyed some of your testimony
about the online protections you could create, and thank you
for adding those.
There is also a little discrepancy. Dr. Volberg, you
mentioned, one of the things--I don't have my glasses on, I am
sorry, I can't see. Fahrenkopf?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. Yes, it is.
Mr. Cassidy. I apologize. Mr. Fahrenkopf, you mentioned
that in one of your references that only 2.5 percent of college
students play online Internet. But Dr. Volberg, I thought maybe
you or someone else I saw referenced said 30 percent of high
school--of college males are online. Do I have my numbers
totally confused?
Ms. Volberg. I think there might be some confusion about
the numbers because----
Mr. Cassidy. What is the prevalence of Internet gambling
amongst college males?
Ms. Volberg. I wish I could answer that because we do not
have any recent surveys that tell us what Internet gambling
participation rates are in the U.S. population.
I would estimate, based on what we have seen in some of the
recent State-level studies, like the California study that came
up earlier, is that probably while about 2 percent of the
general population gambles on the Internet, amongst college-age
males it is probably going to be closer to 8 to 10, possibly up
to 15 percent.
Mr. Cassidy. OK. It is different from the 2.5 percent of
all students, even if it is 50 percent female/male.
Mr. Fahrenkopf. There has been a recent study of 10,000
college students.
Mr. Cassidy. That is the one I am quoting.
Mr. Fahrenkopf. Yes, they found that almost 2.5 percent had
gambled on the Internet and only six-tenths of a percent did so
monthly or more frequently. That is from LaBrie.
Mr. Cassidy. Now that prevalence is far lower. That is why
it seemed odd.
Ms. Volberg. No, that is 2003 that it was published.
Mr. Fahrenkopf. 2003. That is right.
Mr. Cassidy. I see. That is dated data, if you will.
Mr. Fahrenkopf. Yes.
Mr. Cassidy. Well, I have other questions, but I am out of
time. I yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Dr. Cassidy. And the chair
recognizes Mr. Olson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chairwoman for hold this hearing and
also thank the witnesses for your testimony, your time, and
your expertise. It is almost over.
I would like to limit my comments this morning as to what
is going on in my home State of Texas in regards to legalizing
gambling, issues with UIGEA, and one question, as my colleagues
have touched on most of my questions previously.
In March of this year the Texas House Committee on
Licensing and Administrative Procedures held a hearing on nine
bills which propose a variety of options for legalizing gaming
in Texas.
Currently, gambling in Texas is limited to State lottery,
three federally recognized Native American tribes, and gambling
at horse and Greyhound racetracks. Supporters of gambling in
Texas point to legalizing poker, casinos, and slots as a way to
help with State's budget issues in the form of nontax revenue,
as you allude to up there, the success you have had in New
Hampshire.
Many folks in Texas also talk about the potential for
thousands of new jobs that could be created. Others argue that
gambling preys upon the poorest Texans and creates bigger
social problems. This is an important debate that my State is
having, and I also appreciate our committee is exploring this
issue of interstate online gaming and the current issues with
UIGEA.
Mr. Olson. [Continuing.] I have heard from a very, very
vocal and savvy group of Twitter and Facebook constituents in
the 22nd District who are very much in favor of legalizing
online poker. I would like to read one email from one of these
constituents. This is from Valerie in Houston, Texas. And she
said, Dear Representative Olson, the UIGEA slaps the Internet
with unnecessary government regulation and oversight that
limits innovation and growth. The act may have been intended to
stop unlawful Internet gambling, but because it never actually
spelled out what that meant, UIGEA ushered in unintended
consequences that put the government in the role of Big
Brother. In particular, the act has the effect of turning
online payment transaction companies into informants and
enforcers for the Federal Government, raising privacy concerns
as well as cost to consumers. Sincerely, Valerie, from Houston,
Texas.
Many people believe that if you are going to play Internet
poker you should not follow the Federal Government's model of
managing your budget.You should do it with money you have
earned and not money that you expect to earn or hope to earn.
As you know, legislation has been introduced in the House which
would prohibit the use of credit cards from making deposits in
Internet gaming accounts.
My question is for you, Mr. Fahrenkopf and any of the
witnesses who wants to get involved, do you think most
companies would be willing to limit themselves to debit cards
and electronic checks?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. I mean we haven't taken a position on the
whole question of credit cards. It was a major issue in the
Frank bill in previous legislative sessions. The original bill
did provide for the use of credit cards. However, when the bill
was being voted out of committee, that was removed. At this
point in time, we don't have a position one way or the other on
that from the standpoint of the American Gaming Association.
Mr. Olson. Anyone else want to comment? Mr. Lipparelli.
Mr. Lipparelli. In the State of Nevada the use of credit
cards is illegal for gaming.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Fahrenkopf, any comments?
Mr. Fahrenkopf. I already did.
Mr. Olson. I apologize. Mr. McIntyre.
Mr. McIntyre. Certainly I am under the direction of the New
Hampshire legislature and the governor's office, so whatever
they would say to do I would do heartily.
Mr. Olson. Sounds like my marriage, yes, sir. And Dr.
Volberg.
Ms. Volberg. I think that there would be a lot of arguments
in favor of prohibiting the use of credit cards for Internet
gaming. So I would be in favor of that.
Mr. Olson. Thank you very much. That is all my questions. I
yield back.
Mrs. Bono Mack. I thank the gentlemen, and the chair now
recognizes Mr. Butterfield for the purposes of a unanimous
consent request.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much. I am going to ask
unanimous consent to have this letter dated November 18th,
2011, included in the record. The letter simply reiterates the
necessity to hear from Federal agencies who will be impacted by
any bill we pass relating to the legalization of Internet
gaming.
Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Bono Mack. Without objection, and I, too, have
received written testimony from Mr. Robert Martin, Chairman of
the Morongo Band of Mission Indians, that has been shared with
minority counsel. I understand they have no objection to
including it in the record of today's hearing. Therefore, I ask
unanimous consent that it be included in the record of this
hearing.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Bono Mack. With that, I am happy to thank my
colleagues for their participation today. I thank the panel
very much for your help in shedding light on what is clearly a
very complicated issue. I look forward to our work together if
this moves forward.
As we conclude our hearing today and prepare to depart to
the four corners of our great Nation to celebrate Thanksgiving,
please permit me to say what a blessing and an honor it has
been to work with all of you this year on so many issues which
are so important to so many people. Travel safely and I hope
everyone enjoys our unique American holiday.
I remind members that they have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record, and I ask the witnesses to please
respond promptly to any questions you might receive. And with
that, the meeting is now adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:09 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


