- THE IMPLEMENTATION AND SUSTAINABILITY OF THE NEW GOVERNMENT- ADMINISTERED COMMUNITY LIVING ASSISTANCE SERVICES AND SUPPORTS (CLASS) PROGRAM

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE IMPLEMENTATION AND SUSTAINABILITY OF THE NEW GOVERNMENT-
ADMINISTERED COMMUNITY LIVING ASSISTANCE SERVICES AND SUPPORTS (CLASS)
PROGRAM

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 17, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-23

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-089 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ANNA G. ESHOO, California
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
Vice Chair                         GENE GREEN, Texas
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JIM MATHESON, Utah
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              Islands
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  officio)
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     3
Hon. Frank Pallone Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     4
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Hon. Phil Gingrey, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Georgia, opening statement.....................................    11
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    12
Hon. John D. Dingell, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Michigan, opening statement.................................    13
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................   130
Hon. Edolphus Towns, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New York, prepared statement................................   135

Witnesses

Kathy Greenlee, Assistant Secretary, Administration on Aging.....    25
Prepared statement...........................................    28
Allen J. Schmitz, Principal, Consulting Actuary, Milliman,
American Academy of Actuaries..................................    70
Prepared statement...........................................    73
Joseph Antos, William H. Taylor Scholar in Health Care and
Retirement Policy, The American Enterprise Institute...........    78
Prepared statement...........................................    80
Mark J. Warshawsky, Social Security Advisory Board, Director of
Retirement Research, Towers Watson.............................    95
Prepared statement...........................................    97
William Lawrence Minnix, Jr., CEO, LeadingAge, Chair, Advance
CLASS, Inc.....................................................   104
Prepared statement...........................................   106
Anthony J. Young, Senior Public Policy Strategist, NISH,
AbilityOne.....................................................   112
Prepared statement...........................................   114

Submitted Material

``Running Out of Time, Money, and Independence?,'' article dated
January 2011, by Michael Ogg, Health Affairs, submitted by Mr.
Pallone........................................................     6
Statement, undated, from The Jewish Federations of North America,
submitted by Mr. Waxman........................................    15
Statement of AARP, dated March 17, 2011, submitted by Mr. Dingell    18
Report, undated, from the National Council on Aging, submitted by
Ms. Schakowsky.................................................    51
Report, dated March 15, 2011, from Congressional Research
Service, submitted by Mr. Gingrey..............................    61

THE IMPLEMENTATION AND SUSTAINABILITY OF THE NEW GOVERNMENT-
ADMINISTERED COMMUNITY LIVING ASSISTANCE SERVICES AND SUPPORTS (CLASS)
PROGRAM

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 17, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:30 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R.
Pitts (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Burgess, Shimkus,
Murphy, Gingrey, Latta, Cassidy, Guthrie, Barton, Pallone,
Dingell, Towns, Capps, Schakowsky, Weiner and Waxman (ex
officio).
Staff present: Clay Alspach, Counsel, Health; Howard Cohen,
Chief Health Counsel; Brenda Destro, Professional Staff Member,
Health; Paul Edattel, Professional Staff Member, Health; Julie
Goon, Health Policy Advisor; Debbee Keller, Press Secretary;
Ryan Long, Chief Counsel, Health; Jeff Mortier, Professional
Staff Member; Katie Novaria, Legislative Clerk; Monica Popp,
Professional Staff Member, Health; Heidi Stirrup, Health Policy
Coordinator; Kristin Amerling, Democratic Chief Counsel and
Oversight Staff Director; Phil Barnett, Democratic Staff
Director; Alli Corr, Democratic Policy Analyst; Ruth Katz,
Democratic Chief Public Health Counsel; Purvee Kempf,
Democratic Senior Counsel; Karen Lightfoot, Democratic
Communications Director, and Senior Policy Advisor; Karen
Nelson, Democratic Deputy Committee Staff Director for Health;
and Mitch Smiley, Democratic Assistant Clerk.
Mr.Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The chair
will recognize himself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

The Community Living Assistance Services and Supports
program, the CLASS program, a government-run long-term care
insurance entitlement, was included in last year's health
reform law, seemingly as part of a budget process to make the
law look less expensive than it really is. Since participants
will have to pay into the program for 5 years before becoming
eligible for any benefits, CBO estimates including the CLASS
Act in Obamacare reduced the 10-year cost of the legislation by
$70 billion. With CBO estimating that the CLASS program will
begin running a deficit by 2030, and CMS' own actuaries
estimating that the program will go into deficit in 2025, a
taxpayer bailout may look very attractive to future Congresses,
when premium increases and benefit cuts can no longer make up
the shortfall.
While Obamacare specifically prohibits using taxpayer funds
to finance CLASS, Congress can always pass a new law to allow
the practice. Additionally, Congress can redirect funds from
general revenue into the CLASS Independence Fund, if it needs
to.
The concerns about this program are not limited to
Republicans. In October of 2009, Senators Kent Conrad, Joe
Lieberman, Blanche Lincoln, Mary Landrieu, Evan Bayh, Mark
Warner and Ben Nelson sent a letter to Senate Majority Leader
Harry Reid asking him to strip the CLASS Act out of the pending
health care reform legislation. They argued ``We have grave
concerns that the real effect of the provisions would be to
create a new Federal entitlement with large, long-term spending
increases that far exceed revenues.'' And Kent Conrad, the
Democratic Chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, famously
called the CLASS Act ``a Ponzi scheme of the first order, the
kind of thing that Bernie Madoff would have been proud of.''
More recently, on February 16, Secretary of Health and
Human Services Kathleen Sebelius testified before the Senate
Finance Committee and admitted in an exchange with Senator John
Thune that the CLASS Act is ``totally unsustainable.'' Those
are her words.
It seems the concerns with the CLASS program are
widespread, and I believe we can all agree that we do have a
serious long-term care problem in this country as the costs are
driving people into bankruptcy and weighing down the Medicaid
program. We do need to address the issue, and the private
sector, which already offers long-term care products, must be
at the center.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

The Community Living Assistance Services and Supports
(CLASS) program, a government-run long-term care (LTC)
insurance entitlement, was included in last year's health
reform law, seemingly as part of a budget gimmick to make
Obamacare look less expensive than it really is.
Since participants will have to pay into the program for 5
years before becoming eligible for any benefits, CBO estimates
including the CLASS Act in Obamacare reduced the 10-year cost
of the legislation by $70 billion.
With CBO estimating that the CLASS program will begin
running a deficit by 2030; and CMS' own actuaries estimating
that the program will go into deficit in 2025, a taxpayer
bailout may look very attractive to future Congresses, when
premium increases and benefits cuts can no longer make up the
shortfall.
While Obamacare specifically prohibits using taxpayer funds
to finance CLASS, Congress can always pass a new law to allow
the practice. Additionally, Congress can redirect funds from
general revenue into the CLASS Independence Fund, if it needs
to.
The concerns about this program are not limited to
Republicans. In October 2009, Senators Kent Conrad, Joe
Lieberman, Blanche Lincoln, Mary Landrieu, Evan Bayh, Mark
Warner, and Ben Nelson sent a letter to Senate Majority Leader
Harry Reid, asking him to strip the CLASS Act out of the
pending health reform legislation.
They argued ``We have grave concerns that the real effect
of the provisions would be to create a new Federal entitlement
with large, long-term spending increases that far exceed
revenues.''
And Kent Conrad, the Democratic Chairman of the Senate
Budget Committee, famously called the CLASS Act ``a Ponzi
scheme of the first order, the kind of thing that Bernie Madoff
would have been proud of.''
More recently, on February 16, Secretary of Health and
Human Services Kathleen Sebelius testified before the Senate
Finance Committee and admitted in an exchange with Sen. John
Thune that the CLASS Act is ``totally unsustainable.''
It seems the concerns with the CLASS program are widespread
and I believe we can all agree that we do have a serious long-
term care problem in this country as LTC costs are driving
people into bankruptcy and weighing down the Medicaid program.
We do need to address the issue, and the private sector,
which already offers LTC products, must be at the center.

Mr.Pitts. I now yield to my distinguished vice chairman,
Dr. Burgess, for the remainder of the time.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr.Burgess. I thank the chairman for yielding.
I too have concerns with the CLASS Act. I feel it is not
sustainable as presently drawn, and perhaps my biggest concern
is that it gives people the wrong impression of what they now
have under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. We
heard multiple people testify back in 2005 when we last looked
into this that there was a concern that people were
anesthetized as to their requirements for having some type of
long-term care insurance, and I fear that this CLASS Act does
again give people the false impression that now the government
is going to pick up this expense, and in fact, nothing could be
further from the truth. And then of course from the standpoint
of employers, yet again another Congressional mandate placed
upon them.
The CLASS Act is not an answer in search of a problem. We
all know the problem exists. Unfortunately, this committee last
really debated long-term care and long-term care issues in
2005. We never really got a chance to cover it during the
debates on the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. It
is just a fact of life: Some of us are going to get older. As
we get older, the likelihood that we will need some type of
long-term care assistance grows, and I have to tell you, I have
got a long-term care insurance policy. I bought it just after I
turned 50, long before I ever ran for Congress, and I didn't
buy it because I read an article in Health Affairs, I didn't
buy it because I saw something on C-SPAN that impressed me that
I ought to have it, I bought it because my mother told me if I
didn't want to be a burden on my children, I would attend to
that while I could.
So for some people, unexpectedly early in life, an injury
happens and well over 4 million people under age 65 are in need
of such care. Nine million Americans over 65 need some type of
long-term care. The care can be costly and the segment that the
government picks up through Medicaid is an impressive number. A
figure that was produced back in 2005 when we had hearings on
this that if we could move a third of projected seniors off of
Medicaid into long-term care insurance in the latter 5 years of
the 10-year budget window, which would be now, the Federal
Government would save in excess of $150 billion, something that
in fact could be quite useful today.
The problem is hard. The answer is elusive. Market
knowledge is important but it can be confusing for the
consumer, but I believe with the CLASS Act, we have taken a
step in the wrong direction because we have given people the
impression that they now have something which in fact they may
not have.
I thank the chairman for the consideration. I will yield
back the balance of my time.
Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and yields 5
minutes to the ranking member, Mr. Pallone, for an opening
statement.
Mr.Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

OPENING STATEMENT OF FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

You know, Mr. Chairman, I have a great deal of respect for
you and also for Dr. Burgess, but I have to start out by
dispelling some of the things that both of you said. I mean,
first of all, I have to say, I am getting very frustrated
because it seems like almost every hearing is an effort to
repeal or debunk or defund something that is in the Affordable
Care Act and suggest that somehow it is not real, and this is
just another example of it. I mean, the CLASS Act is very real.
It is providing community-based services, cash so that people
can actually get community-based services. It is real. It is
not something that is fiction that we are kidding people about.
They will be paying into a trust fund. They will get the money
back when they become disabled and need to go out and use that
cash to buy community-based services so they can stay in the
community.
The other thing that really bothers me is that I don't hear
any alternatives coming from the other side. I mean, Dr.
Burgess correctly said that there is a real need for long-term
care and support services, and this he says is no good. Well,
what is the alternative? I don't hear it.
We made a concerted effort, myself, Mr. Dingell and the
late Senator Kennedy, who was the Senate sponsor of this bill,
to come up with a program that offers an alternative to provide
services for disabled Americans so they can remain in their
homes and in their communities. It was not put in as an effort
to try save money for the health care reform. We have been
advocates for this for many years. You talk about three people,
I am the youngest of the three. I have only been here 23 years.
Mr. Dingell and the late Senator Kennedy were here for a lot
more years advocating for this legislation. It just happened to
be that there was an opportunity to move this in the context of
the Affordable Care Act, and we did it because we know that
there are 10 million Americans in need of long-term services
and that number is expected to increase to 26 million by 2050.
Meanwhile, more than 200 million adult Americans lack any
insurance protection against the cost of long-term services. As
a result, nearly half of all funding for these services is now
provided through Medicaid, which is a growing burden on States
and requires individuals to become and remain poor to receive
the help they need, which is a terrible way to operate.
So as Americans continue to age, we are faced with an
impending crisis in long-term care. The implementation of CLASS
offers a new approach that builds upon our existing safety-net
system and helps our elderly and disabled finance the long-term
care they need to remain active and productive members of their
communities for as long as possible. Now, I know this doesn't
address nursing home care. I am fully aware of that. But the
need for community-based care is just as important as a method
of financing long-term care in the nursing home. The nursing
homes are paid for by Medicaid but a lot of these services that
people would be able to access through the CLASS Act are not
even provided by Medicaid. That is why it is necessary. It is a
voluntary self-financed program designed to assist Americans
who choose to participate to proactively prepare for their
future. People are taking on responsibility, basically saying I
want to prepare myself, I am willing to take the
responsibility. It focuses on personal responsibility, ensures
as many choices as possible are available to those needing
future services.
I know my Republican colleagues have concerns about the
program's sustainability and its impact on the budget deficit,
but to them I would say that the Secretary has the tools she
needs in the bill to make sure this program does not grow into
a new entitlement. The chairman said it is an entitlement. It
is not. In fact, the law requires that she certify the program
to be actuarially sound and deficit-neutral. If anything, this
program helps alleviate deficit problems. As the CBO noted in
its analysis, CLASS could save Medicaid $2.5 billion in the
first 10 years, possibly additional savings after that, and
conversely, the CBO estimates that repeal of CLASS would add
$86 billion to the Federal deficit. I continue to remind my
Republican colleagues, if you start repealing the provisions of
the Affordable Care Act, CLASS or some of the others, you are
going to increase the deficit, and I strongly believe CLASS is
an important step in the evolution of public policy because it
is a framework based on the principles of independence, choice
and empowerment. CLASS is about ensuring you have the services
and support you need to remain independent members of society,
which is what all of us want.
Now, I was going to yield to Mr. Dingell but I think he is
going to come later, so let me ask unanimous consent, Mr.
Chairman, to enter into the record a narrative essay by Michael
Ogg from New Jersey titled ``Running Out of Time, Money and
Independence?,'' which I think powerfully illustrates the
realities of the current long-term care environment.
Mr.Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr.Pallone. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

Mr.Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The chair
recognizes the chairman emeritus of the committee, Mr. Barton,
for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr.Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to yield
some of that time to Dr. Gingrey.
Last April, a month after PPACA was signed into law, the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services' chief actuary,
Richard Foster, released a report entitled ``Estimated
Financial Effects of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act.'' He estimated that by 2025, 15 years after PPACA was
signed into law, projected benefits of this program would
exceed revenues. CBO has estimated that benefits paid out will
exceed premium payments by 2030, and Health and Human Services
Secretary Kathleen Sebelius deemed the program as being totally
unsustainable. Let me repeat that, totally unsustainable.
Regardless of when this program is expected to become
insolvent, we need to examine the CLASS Act to ensure that we
are not creating another Federal entitlement program which will
simply be a burden on our Federal budget. Last Congress, as the
ranking member of this committee, I asked then-Chairman Waxman
to bring Mr. Foster in to testify regarding this report and the
sustainability of the program. Chairman Waxman was not able to
do that, so I am very glad that Chairman Upton and Chairman
Pitts have agreed to do it in this Congress.
With the state of our economy being what it is right now
and the massive debt that we are incurring, I think it is
imperative that we rein in spending in order to protect our
country's financial stability. Long-term care is a serious
issue, and I believe that myself and all Republicans are very
willing to support some sort of a program for long-term care
but it must be one which is sustainable and which is fiscally
responsible. The program that we have in current law is not
sustainable and it is not fiscally responsible. Therefore, we
need to review it and hopefully reform it.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Barton follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Joe Barton

Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this important hearing.
Last April, a month after PPACA was signed into law, the
Centers for Medicare & Medicare Services' chief actuary,
Richard Foster, released a report entitled ``Estimated
Financial Effects of the ,Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act.'' He estimated that by 2025, 15 years after PPACA was
signed into law, projected benefits of this program would
exceed revenues. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) has
estimated that benefits paid out will exceed premium payments
by 2030. And the Health and Human Services Secretary, Kathleen
Sebelius, has deemed the program as being ``totally
unsustainable.''
Regardless of when this program is expected to become
insolvent, we need to examine the CLASS program now to ensure
that we are not creating another Federal entitlement program
that will overwhelm our Federal budget. Last Congress, I asked
then-Chairman Waxman to bring Mr. Foster in to testify
regarding this report and the sustainability of this program.
I'm glad Subcommittee Chairman Pitts has decided to examine
this program.
With the state of our economy right now, and the massive
debt we are incurring, it is imperative that we rein in
spending in order to protect our country's financial stability.
Long-term care is a serious issue and should be addressed. But
it must be addressed in a fiscally responsible manner, one
which creates a solvent program which benefits those who need
care, and does not just create another massive entitlement
program.

Mr.Barton. With that, I would like to yield 3 minutes to
Dr. Gingrey of Georgia.
Mr.Gingrey. Mr. Chairman and the gentleman from Texas, I
thank you for yielding.
Mr. Chairman, if we could stop the clock just for a second
to let me ask you a question? Are we each going to get 2
minutes for an opening statement or not?
Mr.Pitts. No, we were just----
Mr.Gingrey. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
gentleman from Texas.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PHIL GINGREY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF GEORGIA

The CLASS Act attempts to address an important public
policy concern, the need for non-institutional long-term care,
but that is not why we are here today. We are here today
because the CLASS Act, according to CBO, the President's own
debt commission and even the Administration is financially
unsustainable and a potential time bomb for the Federal budget
and our economy. To quote the President's debt commission,
``Sustaining the program over time will require increasing
premiums and reducing benefits to the point that the program is
not able to accomplish its stated function of caring for the
sick and disabled.'' Absent reform, the debt commission
concluded, ``The program is likely to require large general
revenue transfers or collapse under its own weight.''
To sum it up, the CLASS Act is a new entitlement nightmare
created by or included in, as the gentleman from New Jersey
said, Obamacare that when it fails it could harm disabled
patients that would depend on it as well as Medicare seniors
who are currently facing an unsustainable Medicare program of
their own. So Senator Conrad, current chairman of the Senate
Budget Committee, called the CLASS Act, and I quote him ``a
Ponzi scheme for the workers who are encouraged to sign up. The
perpetration of a Ponzi scheme requires an ever increasing flow
of money from investors, American workers in this case, to keep
this thing going and it is ultimately destined to collapse.''
So my question is, is Senator Conrad right? This country does
not need another Bernie Madoff fraudulent investment scheme,
especially one run by the Secretary of the Health and Human
Services.
And I want to close with the debt commission recommendation
for CLASS. The commission advised the CLASS Act be reformed in
a way that makes it credibly sustainable, and if that is not
possible, we advise it to be repealed.
Mr. Chairman, I am not seeing anything that would lead me
to think this program can be made credibly sustainable, and if
I am not convinced otherwise after today's hearing, and
certainly we will listen carefully to the witnesses, I will be
dropping a bipartisan bill today with my good friend, Dr.
Charles Boustany, the gentleman from Louisiana, to repeal this
program once and for all, and I yield back.
Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
Mr.Barton. With that, I would like to yield to Mr. Shimkus
the remaining time.
Mr.Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member.
The national government is headed off a cliff. Our budget
consists of Medicare, Medicaid, Social Security, interest on
the debt and the discretionary budget. All are following the
actions of the Congress today just trying to get to the end of
a budget fiscal year. How in the world do we add another
entitlement to the mix? How do we take 5 years of revenue
making promises that we can't fulfill?
This is a crazy process and I am glad we are having the
hearing, and I yield back.
Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman's
time is expired. The chair recognizes the ranking member, Mr.
Waxman, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr.Waxman. Mr. Chairman, today's hearing is about much more
than the nuts and bolts of the CLASS Program. At its core, this
meeting is about an issue that has touched virtually every
person in this room, public and private alike: the indignity,
the burden and the expense of long-term-care services and
supports and our lack of a decent, reasonable and accessible
program for those in need of this kind of assistance.
The problem has been with us for a long time, and it is
growing. With the aging of the Baby Boomers, the numbers are,
indeed, quite staggering, and I am sure we will hear much more
about that point from today's witnesses. But rather than facing
the challenge, we have pushed the problem aside year after
year, pledging to those in need that with just a bit more time,
we could get a good program in place. And if the Republicans
decide they want to repeal this program, I would like to know
what they are going to put in its place. We still haven't heard
what they want to put in place for the health care reform that
they want to repeal and replace. We know they want to repeal.
What do they have to offer?
Almost a year ago, we tried to keep the promise. In
creating the CLASS Act, a voluntary, self-sustaining, privately
financed and beneficiary-driven effort, we set in motion a
process that will allow the elderly and the disabled to be able
to stay in their homes and in their communities when they are
no longer able to do so independently. Shame on those who would
take this promise away and put nothing in its place.
Having said that, all of us who support the CLASS program--
members of Congress, HHS, advocacy organizations--all readily
agree that much work needs to be done before the program is
ready to go live in 2012. That is what the 2 years of
preparation time and the Secretarial discretion and flexibility
provided for in the enacting legislation is all about.
So let us get on with that task. Let us learn today about
where the program is and where the program is going and how it
plans to get there, and let us be assured that the requirements
of the law will, in fact, be met. But along the way, let us not
forget who and what brought us to this point: the Tony Youngs
of America--Tony, we are going to hear from later, is one of
our witnesses--their families, and the discouraging and often
devastating experience of simply wanting to stay put and remain
engaged and productive, and being told that is not possible.
The CLASS program is designed to change all that. Let us
give the CLASS Act a chance and keep our promise to those who
have waited so long for meaningful reform.
I want to yield the balance of my time to Mr. Dingell.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN D. DINGELL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr.Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank my good friend, Mr.
Waxman, for giving me this time, and I commend you for having
this hearing. Oversight is an extremely important undertaking,
and this will enable us to come to conclusions as to what is
the best thing for us to do with regard to the CLASS Act and
how it can best be made to enable us to serve a terrifying
unmet need for all of our people.
This is a proposal that was put into law, as you will
remember, by the ranking member of the Health Subcommittee, Mr.
Pallone, and by my dear friend, Senator Kennedy, and I, and it
is vital program and part of the health reform law. It will
fill an enormous unmet need in our society: affordable long-
term care services and support for 10 million Americans in need
of long-term care now and some projected 15 million Americans
that are going to need that by 2020. Currently, Americans in
need of long-term care, whether they are functionally disabled
or elderly, find themselves with few options, if any. Private
long-term care insurance is available but options are limited
and costs are too burdensome for many families. This
legislation, the CLASS Act, is not an entitlement program, it
is a voluntary program, and in our review today, if we will
work together, we can come up with an intelligent way of making
it work and be acceptable in terms of the budget constraints
and concerns that we have, and I call on my friends to approach
it that way rather than to seek to repeal a program which has
so much opportunity to help and benefit our people who have
desperate needs and their families who suffer.
Medicaid cannot continue to be the only affordable long-
term care service available to Americans, and I would call on
my colleagues to know that the CLASS Act enables people to pay
a part of their costs through premiums which they pay prior to
the time that they have need of the program. That is an
extremely important difference between it and Medicaid, and my
urging to my colleagues on both sides of the aisle,
particularly the Majority, is let us work together to make this
a good thing, to make it work for all the people and to stop
some of this nonsense about fighting about legislation of this
kind when in fact we could work together to make things better
for Americans in a fiscally responsible and proper way.
I thank you for holding these hearings and I thank my
colleague for yielding me this time.
Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman's
time is expired.
Mr.Waxman. Mr. Chairman, may I ask unanimous consent that
the statement from the Jewish Federations of North America be
inserted in the record?
Mr.Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

Mr.Dingell. Mr. Chairman, may I make a similar unanimous
consent request? The AARP has an excellent statement which they
have presented to me to ask me to have it submitted to the
committee by unanimous consent, and I ask unanimous consent
that that excellent statement be inserted in the record.
Mr.Pitts. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

Mr.Burgess. Mr. Chairman, may I ask unanimous consent that
our side could be allowed to see those letters?
Mr.Pitts. If you can pass those down, we will take a look
at them.
All right. We have two panels today, and I would like to
introduce the first panel at this time. Assistant Secretary
Kathy Greenlee was appointed by President Obama and later
confirmed by the Senate in June 2009 to serve as the Assistant
Secretary for the Administration on Aging, an agency within the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. In January of
this year, Assistant Secretary Greenlee was designated as the
Administrator of the Community Living Assistance Supports and
Services, more commonly referred to as the CLASS, program.
Prior to joining the Administration, she served as the
Secretary on Aging in Kansas and as the General Counsel of the
Kansas Insurance Department. In addition, Ms. Greenlee served
as Chief of Staff and Chief of Operations for then-Governor
Kathleen Sebelius.
Your written testimony will be entered into the record and
we ask that you summarize your statement in 5 minutes and then
be available for questioning. We look forward to your
testimony. The witness is now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KATHY GREENLEE, ASSISTANT SECRETARY,
ADMINISTRATION ON AGING

Ms.Greenlee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
implementation of the Community Living Assistance Services and
Supports Act, or what we all commonly call the CLASS Act.
Today, approximately 10 million Americans need long-term
services and supports ranging from having an aide visit for a
few hours a week to living in a nursing home around the clock.
As America ages, that number is rising steadily. By 2020, it is
expected that 15 million Americans will need some kind of long-
term care. We know that one out of six Americans who surpass
the age of 65 will spend more than $100,000 on long-term care
and far more will need less extensive but substantial care.
More than one of five persons who enter a nursing home will
spend down their own resources and qualify for Medicaid after
virtually exhausting their savings.
Unfortunately, only 8 to 10 percent of Americans have
private long-term care insurance, and new enrollment is
declining while major long-term care competitors have exited
the market. Taken together, this means that many Americans are
not well prepared to finance long-term care services and
supports that they will need.
There are a number of reasons for this reluctance to
prepare. First, four out of five Americans mistakenly believe
that Medicare will provide them with extensive coverage for
long-term care, and it does not. In addition, while Medicaid is
the primary payer for long-term care, paying approximately 50
percent of all nursing home expenditures in this country,
Medicaid requires that individual impoverish themselves in
order to qualify for long-term services and supports with only
modest protections for the needs of a spouse who remains in the
community.
Americans also frequently misjudge the likelihood that they
or a spouse will someday need long-term services and supports,
and many people are unaware of the cost of these kinds of
supports. A year of nursing home care costs around $75,000. But
it isn't just individual budgets that are stretched. Recent
data from the CMS Office of the Actuary showed that in 2009,
Medicaid spent $111.2 billion on long-term care, and spending
on those services is projected to increase as the population
ages, stressing both Federal and State budgets.
Prior to coming to Washington, as the chairman
acknowledged, I had the honor of serving as the Secretary of
Aging in Kansas. The Secretary of Aging in Kansas has a unique
portfolio. I oversaw community aging programs as well as the
Medicaid-funded programs for both nursing home services and
home and community-based services for frail elders. I also had
the opportunity during my service in Kansas to spend 8 years as
an insurance regulator, serving half of that time as the
General Counsel for the Kansas Insurance Department. I have
visited dozens of nursing homes and spoken to thousands of
seniors. I have managed a Medicaid budget. And what I know with
certainty is that all people regardless of age hope to maintain
their independence for as long as possible. I know and respect
many nursing home providers. Their particular task is
difficult. But for all of us, we hope to postpone nursing home
admission for as long as possible, and some people swear that
they will never go to a nursing home.
Fortunately, for policymakers, people prefer to live in the
setting that is the least, not the most, expensive. In most
cases, that setting is home. How then do we help people prepare
for the costs associated with aging and disability and increase
their access to home and community-based services and community
supports that they so desperately need? The CLASS program
offers one new tool to support Americans' long-term care needs
and help them remain independent. Its goals are to provide an
opportunity for individuals to take responsibility and to
prepare financially for their own long-term care needs, support
consumer choice related to their own care and their living
arrangements and facilitate independence and community living.
President Obama and Secretary Sebelius have pledged to use
the discretion provided in the law to protect the solvency of
this program. There are changes that we intend to make through
the Secretary's regulatory authority to guarantee the solvency.
We are committed, as the Secretary said in a recent speech,
that we will do everything we can to make these changes to
ensure the solvency. And as the Secretary has outlined, and I
can spend more time discussing with you, there are a number of
things that we have in mind that we will change by regulation.
We need to change the employment and earning requirements
for the program. We need to close loopholes that allow people
to skip payments and then enroll at a later time. We need to
explore options for indexing the premiums along with the
benefits. We need to tailor the benefits to more closely meet
the individual needs and preferences. We need to educate the
public about long-term care and we need to partner with
employers, and also protect against fraud and abuse. We will do
all of this in full view of the public with a transparent
process. We will do everything we can as we move forward to
implement this law responsibly and protect its solvency. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Greenlee follows:]

Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady. We will now
begin our questioning, and the chair recognizes himself for 5
minutes for questions.
Madam Secretary, some have suggested that in order to have
a sustainable program, the monthly premium may have to be at
least $240 a month or higher. When will your agency announce
what the monthly premium will be, and is it possible the
premium could be as high as $240 a month?
Ms.Greenlee. Mr. Chairman, there are two pieces of that I
would like to address. In terms of the plans for announcing the
monthly premium, the proposal going forward is that we will
submit three plans as recommended in the law to the
Independence Advisory Council for their submission to the
Secretary. We will then publish in a reg, most likely this
fall, our initial assessment of those three plans. I do not
know at this point whether or not that initial publication will
include specific pricing information but it will provide
information about the specific plans that we are looking at. We
know that the best way to protect the solvency of the program
is to ensure high participation, and participation will be a
function of several things, including the price of the product.
Mr.Pitts. Thank you. On the Administration on Aging's
authority to increase premiums, do you believe the Secretary
has the authority to increase CLASS program premiums, and if
so, on what basis, and are there limitations?
Ms.Greenlee. Mr. Chairman, it is clear in looking at the
law that the Secretary was given many protections once the
program is enacted in order to adjust or make changes to the
premiums. The list of recommendations that I have suggested are
things that we need to do early through a regulatory process,
not just to adjust premiums but to deal with the indexing of
the premiums to help protect the financial solvency. So she has
the authority both after the program is adopted and now.
Mr.Pitts. The President's fiscal year 2012 budget request
includes $120 million to begin the implementation of the CLASS
program. However, just last month Secretary Sebelius admitted
the CLASS program to be ``totally unsustainable.'' Madam
Secretary, do you agree with Secretary Sebelius that the
program in its current form is unsustainable? Yes or no.
Ms.Greenlee. Mr. Chairman, if I could elaborate beyond a
yes or no I could be more responsive. The Secretary is
referring to the conclusion we have come to by a plain reading
of the specific statute without adjustment. We are committing
to making reforms to the program so that we can hit the
financial targets that she is required to hit to make sure that
the program is solvent.
Mr.Pitts. Can you please explain why the Administration
requested $120 million for FY 2012 of which nearly $94 million
was for outreach and enrollment efforts when the
Administration's chief health official clearly does not believe
the program is sustainable in its current form?
Ms.Greenlee. Mr. Chairman, the Secretary's comment with
regard to not sustainable in its current form is her
explanation as to why we will reform the program. We don't
intend to implement the program without those changes. The
request for the $120 million is start-up funds so that we can
begin the program. This is a new program. It is a type of
product that has never been offered to the American public. As
I said earlier, participation is key and we will need to do an
education and outreach effort to America to describe not just
the program but the need that they have that is currently
unaddressed.
Mr.Pitts. And can you please provide more information on
the changes you believe you will need to make to the program in
order to make it more sustainable, including premium increases
and your intended timeline for doing so?
Ms.Greenlee. Certainly.
Mr.Pitts. The chair yields to the vice chairman, Dr.
Burgess.
Mr.Burgess. Yes. Secretary, thank you for being here. Do we
have an idea--Secretary Sebelius testified to the fact that the
program as drawn may be unsustainable. Do you have an idea as
to when that realization occurred, when that information became
available to the Secretary?
Ms.Greenlee. During the past year, after the law was
passed, we have worked to develop two actuarial models that
include the best of actuarial science as well as economics.
Each of those models has led us to the conclusion that to
protect the solvency, there are some changes that we need to
make to the program.
Mr.Burgess. And will those changes likely be on raising the
premium, reducing the benefit, a combination of both, or draw
on the Federal Treasury?
Ms.Greenlee. Congressman, the changes I mentioned briefly,
they are more fully described in my written testimony, but they
are changes that can be made with regard to earnings, anti-
gaming, fraud protections and indexing the premiums, which will
help strengthen the program.
Mr.Burgess. I will get to that in just a moment, but we do
need to pursue that a little bit. Thank you.
Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. Time is expired.
The chair recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Pallone, for 5
minutes for questioning.
Mr.Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to ask
questions, but I have to say, and again, not meant with any
disrespect to you or the Republicans on the other side, but it
just seems that we know we have a huge problem out here with
people not having these community-based services and the
Democrats come up with a plan to try to address it, and it just
seems like everybody on the other side is so scared like there
is this fear of a new program and, you know, we are going to
get the word out about it. I mean, the bottom line is, when you
have a problem, you try to address it and yes, it is going to
new and there are going to be some problems in implementation
and outreach, but that is what happens when you try to do
something new, address something that hasn't been addressed
before, and I appreciate the Assistant Secretary for pointing
that out, that we are trying to do something that has never
been done before and so naturally there are going to be some
kinks in it, but that is what happens when you try to address
something that hasn't been addressed.
Now, I just wanted to ask some brief questions, if I could.
First, I wanted to start with this decision that we made to put
the program in your agency, the Administration on Aging. Some
suggest that that is not the proper place for it. Why is the
program being housed there and how prepared do you feel you
are, and did we make the right choice? Quickly, because I want
to get to another one.
Ms.Greenlee. Congressman, the Secretary has the authority
to reorganize Department of Health and Human Services, which
gives her the authority to place it in the Administration on
Aging. This is a different kind of program than AoA has run in
the past but the connection is that we have long expertise in
providing services in the community that help support
independence, and I believe that I also have the credentials to
help make this possible.
Mr.Pallone. Thank you. Now, we heard statements here, the
Republicans referenced the Secretary's statements about
loopholes and sustainability and the need to strengthen the
program, but I see the basis for the Secretary exercising
flexibility and discretion given to her in the law to implement
it and make program improvements that address these loopholes
and sustainability. Would you tell us where the Administration
is in reviewing some of these criticisms, you know, statements
that were made by the chairman about loopholes, sustainability?
How are these being addressed?
Ms.Greenlee. As I had mentioned earlier, we have spent the
last year analyzing the law as written so that we have a
fundamental science to the analysis. We have hired an actuary
for the CLASS staff, who will now build on that to develop
solvent programs that we can take moving forward, but we know
there are changes that we need to make to protect the solvency.
The Secretary not only has the authority, she has the
responsibility to roll out a solvent program, and we take that
very seriously.
Mr.Pallone. OK. And then the last thing I wanted to ask is,
the process by which the requirements, the guidelines, the nuts
and bolts of the programs, if you will, will be disclosed and
subject to review by the relevant stakeholders. In other words,
how will the department go about publicizing the framework of
the program and at the same time seeking advice of those with
an interest in its operations?
Ms.Greenlee. There are two primary ways. We will work with
the CLASS Independence Advisory Council, which is clearly set
forth in the law to be a place where we go for additional
public input, stakeholder input, and we will go through the
Federal rulemaking process so that we will publish regs and
have full opportunity for the general public to comment. We
will review those comments and address them as we move forward.
Mr.Pallone. Well, I appreciate that. I just wanted to point
out a couple other things, and again, I am trying to sort of
address some of the criticisms that were made by my colleagues
on the other side. Statements were made about how this is a
mandate to employers. That is not true. Employers decide
whether they want to have their employees participate in this.
It is voluntary. Now, obviously, as you have said, Madam
Secretary, we want as many employers as possible to participate
because the price, if you will, will be lower if more people
participate and it is very important. But is it not mandated.
The law specifically says that employers can decide whether to
sign up, and obviously you are going to try to get as many of
them as you possibly can, but if you would comment on that?
Ms.Greenlee. That is correct. Both employers and employees
will have a choice about whether or not to participate. We will
work actively with the employer community to make it as easy as
possible for them to participate or to help individuals
participate because we need a large number and a broad risk
pool of people to apply.
Mr.Pallone. And I appreciate that. And I have about 10
minutes left here. Again, I just want to stress--oh, I don't?
Oh, 10 seconds? I am sorry. Now I have nothing left. No, I just
want to say again, you know, we are trying to address something
that hasn't been addressed. You said that. We are going to have
some kinks, but let us move forward. Let us not repeal it. I
really feel strongly that way. Thank you.
Mr.Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The chair
recognizes the vice chairman, Dr. Burgess, for 5 minutes for
questioning.
Mr.Burgess. Again, thank you, Secretary Greenlee, for being
here, and your testimony is important and certainly underscores
some of the testimony we had when we last had hearings on this
in 2005, and that is the general lack of knowledge of the
general public about the importance of having long-term care
insurance, your reasons why people don't pursue it, not wanting
to think about unpleasant things in the future, thinking that
some other Federal agency is going to pick this up at some
point. So all of this is extremely important. I guess the
question just comes up, you have mentioned the $120 million
budget that is spent this first year on developing the program.
What do you think we could have done with $120 million just
sort of increasing awareness, increasing the general public's
awareness of this as a problem and what options are out there
for them? Could we have done a better job?
Ms.Greenlee. I want to make sure I understand, without a
program attached to it, just a general----
Mr.Burgess. There are programs available. I bought one in
the year 2000. Again, it wasn't because I read an article in
Health Affairs. It wasn't because I saw somebody on C-SPAN who
looked smart. My mother told me that, hey, if you don't want to
be a burden on your children like I am on you, then perhaps you
will consider long-term care insurance, and indeed, I
investigated it and made a decision to purchase it. Now, it
wasn't particularly--you know, it was one of those bets I hope
that will never get covered, but at the same time, if more
people are aware of the importance of having this, what the
implications are of not having this, do you think we could have
perhaps done some good with $120 million as a public outreach
program, even employing old Andy Griffith to tell us about it?
Ms.Greenlee. You know, the private long-term care insurance
market has been selling for 30 years and they have only reached
penetration of probably 10 percent in the market. Clearly,
there is a need for more people----
Mr.Burgess. But, if I could, we make it extremely hard.
There is no tax deductibility for long-term care insurance like
there is for some of the employer-sponsored insurance. You
can't pay the premium out of a medical savings account or
health savings account. These are all after-tax dollars that
have to be invested. There are things we could do on the policy
side absent the CLASS Act that would have made a difference in
the number of participants. I am not saying it would have
solved the entire problem. Surely there are still going to be
people who are going to need a medical safety net. Medicaid is
obviously not going to go away. But it always seems like the
default position is, we are going to expand those Federal
programs. You talk about fraud and abuse and wanting to be able
to clamp down on that. I salute you for that. I want you to do
that. But at the same time, when you look at those third-party
payment programs that are subject to fraud and abuse, it is
never United Health Care that you read about in the front of
the page of the newspaper that has a problem with too many
wheelchairs going out, it is Medicaid, it is Medicare. It is
those public programs that seem to be so vulnerable. Why not
try to partner with those people who are already out there
offering private long-term care insurance and try to build on
that, perhaps remove some of the obstacles, work with
policymakers to remove some of those obstacles to purchase of
long-term care insurance?
Ms.Greenlee. Congressman, the product that the CLASS Act
represents is a different market than what the long-term care
insurance market has ever addressed. This is for a different
group of individuals with a limited benefit. The private market
has always offered comprehensive long-term care insurance,
which many people need, and I agree that there are new
opportunities, new ways to reach that market. That is not the
same market that the CLASS product is designed for.
Mr.Burgess. Well, let me ask you this: Do you think when
people look at--and granted, people's understanding of things
sometimes is more superficial than I think it should be, but as
people look at the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act,
say aha, they have got the CLASS Act in there, are they going
to be more or less inclined to more seriously look into private
long-term care insurance should they be able to afford it or is
there going to be an acknowledgement in people's minds now
that, yes, the government is taking care of that for me, I
don't have to worry about it?
Ms.Greenlee. This is a supplemental program, not
comprehensive needs, so the answer for an individual would
depend on what they could afford to purchase for themselves,
but whether or not there----
Mr.Burgess. But do you think there is a general awareness
that this is a supplemental program? It is not the way I hear
it talked about in the media.
Ms.Greenlee. That is part of the reason for the budget
request so that we can very clear with the public so they know
that this is for a supplemental supportive program and not a
comprehensive product.
Mr.Burgess. Look, I grant you that H.R. 3200 never saw the
light of day after it left the House floor, but when we marked
up the health care bill in this committee, the CLASS Act was
brought in at the last minute as kind of a shell bill. It was
to be filled out by other committees. And in fact, it was put
together as a hodgepodge on the Senate floor on Christmas Eve.
That is why we have got the problems that we have, and we ought
to be honest about addressing that, fix what we can but
understand that this was not an ideal program, was never
properly vetted by the United States Congress.
I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The chair
recognizes the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Waxman, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr.Waxman. The gentleman was correct about private long-
term care insurance. It is what we hope people would buy to
take care of themselves, otherwise we end up with people on
Medicaid and in nursing homes right now, which is the most
expensive place for long-term care, 70 percent is paid for by
Medicaid, and I don't think that means 30 percent is paid for
by long-term care insurance, it means a much smaller percentage
of the 30 because a lot of people are there still under
Medicare or they are paying it out of their own pockets. So
long-term care insurance has not been a great success so far.
The Federal Government allows employees to buy long-term care
insurance and it is negotiated by the OPM, office of something
management, whatever it is, program management?
Ms.Greenlee. Personnel Management.
Mr.Waxman. Personnel Management. OK. Do you have an
estimate of how many Federal employees have taken up long-term
care insurance?
Ms.Greenlee. Mr. Waxman, I can get that. I don't have that
with me here.
Mr.Waxman. OK. I would like to have that for the record.
Ms.Greenlee. But it is a small percentage, around 5
percent, but I would need to verify.
Mr.Waxman. I think when we look at the fact that very few
people put away money for their retirement, which is pretty
astounding, to get them to buy long-term care insurance that
they may never use and are in a state of denial, if they are in
a state of denial about retirement, they are even in a greater
state of denial about long-term care needs. So I don't see that
long-term care insurance is the way we are going to solve the
problems.
You answered a question I had. This is not a replacement
for private insurance. It dovetails quite nicely with that
market because it is a supplement to long-term care insurance.
Isn't that accurate?
Ms.Greenlee. Actually I would say it is the reverse, that
it is the first step for an individual to protect themselves
from a cost, and if they want to protect themselves further,
the private market would be there to help.
Mr.Waxman. Medicaid has been the primary safety-net
provider for the poor and elderly and disabled people, and
elderly and disabled become poor once they start paying for the
high costs of long-term care. It pays 40 percent of the costs
of long-term care services. It is the largest payer therefore
of these services in the Nation. There are a million nursing
home residents under Medicaid. That is 70 percent of all
nursing home residents. In addition, there are 2.8 million
individuals receiving community-based care services from
Medicaid. So Medicaid is the biggest payer for long-term care
services, and it comes at a high price. Each year we expect to
add $44 billion to the price tag of Medicaid due entirely to an
increasing demand for long-term services among an aging
population. These are vital services but they take an enormous
toll on State and Federal budgets, especially during the times
of economic downturns as we are now experiencing.
In the 2009 CBO analysis of the CLASS Act, there are some
Medicaid savings because at least in the last 2 years of the
10-year window that come to $2.5 billion in those 2 years. Do
you believe this program has the potential to save even more
Medicaid dollars?
Ms.Greenlee. Yes, sir. There are two primary ways that we
will see Medicaid savings. People who receive both CLASS and
Medicaid, depending on whether they are in the community or in
the nursing home, will pay a portion of that back to the State
for Medicaid. But even more importantly for savings, the CLASS
program can help people prevent spend-down to Medicaid, use
their own resources with the CLASS program resources to stay in
the community without asking for Medicaid.
Mr.Waxman. Well, I would say to my Republican and
Democratic colleagues, if we look down the road of how to deal
with this problem without humiliating people to have to go
through the indignity of becoming a Medicaid recipient after
they have exhausted all their money, we can go one of two ways.
We can require people to buy private insurance for long-term
care, we can require them to pay the money and buy it and then
they will be covered. But I hear a lot from my Republican
colleagues that they don't like a mandate, and that would
certainly not be a real popular idea, I would expect. The other
is to say everybody should pay into a fund. This is a real
clear, insurable event. If everybody paid into a fund, it would
be a small amount to pay for a relatively limited use of these
funds for those who are going to need long-term care, unlike
Medicare, which serves everybody who becomes eligible for it
because they need health care services. Long-term care is like
a catastrophic kind of coverage for people who need these
services, and that might be a real good social insurance
system. I just hope my Republican colleagues don't look down
their nose at all ideas of social insurance because I don't
know what other choices we have because Medicaid is not
sustainable with this burden.
So I thank you for what you are doing and let us hope that
this little program--it is a little program and it is no
answer, as far as I am concerned, to the big issue--can help. I
yield back.
Mr.Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The chair
recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5
minutes.
Mr.Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate
Chairman Waxman's calm approach. I mean, we all know this is a
major issue, and I am an original ``mi casa'' guy. When we had
Federal dollars following the individual and helping people
remain independent as long as they can and have them make the
decisions based upon dollars versus government making that
decision. So don't take these questions as being harsh or
accusative.
We have got a couple issues here. You are going to hire an
actuary. You are promising it is going to maintain solvency. An
actuary, if it goes out of solvency, the actuary is going to
have to decide one or two things: raise revenue or cut
benefits. Is the Secretary willing to do that?
Ms.Greenlee. Mr. Shimkus, we have already hired an actuary.
Mr.Shimkus. I know. I made that statement. That was my
statement.
Ms.Greenlee. Right. And before we move forward, as the law
requires, we will work with the CMS actuary as put forward. The
Secretary is only willing to move forward to implement the law
if we can demonstrate that it is solvent to the standards of
the law from the very beginning.
Mr.Shimkus. So we are having 5 years of revenue, no
payouts. Initially, that is going to be an easy decision. Our
concern is year 10, year 15, and then I follow up with a
question again. If then there is a solvency issue, will she be
willing to raise premiums or cut benefits?
Ms.Greenlee. The law requires the CMS actuary by way of
this other work that we have done to certify for both 25 and 75
years that the program is solvent, and we are committed to that
before we start the program. Thereafter, both the Secretary and
the board of trustees have the ongoing fiscal oversight of the
program and the authority to make the changes that they might
need, but we won't start the program unless we think it is
solvent from those modelings before we begin.
Mr.Shimkus. Well, I hope, Mr. Chairman, we are able to have
the Administration back numerous times to help you all review
your actuary and your numbers to make sure it is solvent
because in my opening statement, I mean, we are concerned about
making promises that we can't deliver. We have done it in our
entitlement programs and they are bankrupting us. And so that
is the concern.
So the actuary is going to calculate payments out based
upon payments in and people in the pool. What about the annual
expense that your budget requests or the budget request is $120
million for this program, is that part of the actuary numbers?
Ms.Greenlee. The program is designed to be self-sustaining,
to pay benefits only from premium dollars. So once the program
is up and running, then that is how it will operate.
Mr.Shimkus. What about the overhead?
Ms.Greenlee. And that is contained within the premium
revenue structure that I just described.
Mr.Shimkus. So we won't see another additional annual
request for money to administer this program?
Ms.Greenlee. No, the current request is for start-up funds.
Mr.Shimkus. Do you ever feel that the Secretary can go into
the $17.5 billion health care slush fund which is under section
4002, Prevention and Public Health Fund, which is $17.5
billion? Might she tap into that? It is at her discretion.
Ms.Greenlee. I have never had a conversation where that
even came up in discussion of the CLASS Act.
Mr.Shimkus. Would you ask her for us?
Ms.Greenlee. I can follow up with you.
Mr.Shimkus. Good. That would be great, because that is our
concern. In the fiscal environment, we already got the
Secretary to admit 2 weeks ago that she double counted $500
billion, which really addresses the fact that the statements
that the health care law pays down the deficit and the debt is
untrue. It could be true if you double count $500 billion. It
is untrue when you adequately put the $500 billion in its
proper concerns. If we want to help our citizens, we have to
have sustainable funds. Government doesn't have a good record.
We are hoping that you can prove us wrong in this, and we will
be following closely.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
We are voting on the floor. We have two votes. Let us take
one more 5-minute questioning from the ranking member emeritus
and then we will recess until immediately after the second
vote. The chair recognizes the gentleman Mr. Dingell for 5
minutes.
Mr.Dingell. Mr. Chairman, thank you for your courtesy. We
commend you for this hearing, which is a very useful thing.
I begin by welcoming the Secretary and I ask, do you have
all of the authority you need in the department to ensure that
this program gets off to a start in an actuarially sound
manner?
Ms.Greenlee. Yes, we do.
Mr.Dingell. And you lack nothing?
Ms.Greenlee. No. We can make it solvent. We have the
authority.
Mr.Dingell. Very good. Now, I am going to make a statement
and you tell me yes or no. Ten million Americans are in need of
long-term services now, and in 2020, 15 million Americans will
be needing long-term health care services. Is that correct?
Ms.Greenlee. That is correct.
Mr.Dingell. Now, Madam Secretary, it is my understanding
there are a number of long-term insurers in the United States
are leaving or planning to leave the market. Is that true?
Ms.Greenlee. Yes.
Mr.Dingell. In my opinion, this seems to offer individuals
in need of long-term insurance much more limited options. Do
you agree?
Ms.Greenlee. Yes.
Mr.Dingell. Isn't it true that the goal of the CLASS
program is to help Americans prepare for the unexpected and
allow them to participate in a choice that offers them services
and allows them to remain in the community rather than to go
into the nursing home?
Ms.Greenlee. Yes.
Mr.Dingell. So if I understand the program correctly, and I
was one of the authors of it, it is going to allow an
individual to buy into this program at an early time. Is that
correct?
Ms.Greenlee. Yes.
Mr.Dingell. And so that individual will pay money into the
program before that individual begins to draw benefits?
Ms.Greenlee. That is correct.
Mr.Dingell. That is conventional insurance practice, is it
not?
Ms.Greenlee. Absolutely.
Mr.Dingell. And you will see to it that it is done
actuarially soundly?
Ms.Greenlee. Yes, we will.
Mr.Dingell. Now, that will absolve Medicaid of providing
the same benefits in a nursing home, will it not?
Ms.Greenlee. Congressman, it will help buffer the costs of
Medicaid but it won't cover the full amount----
Mr.Dingell. It will help the individual stay home. Am I
right?
Ms.Greenlee. It will help the individual stay home.
Mr.Dingell. OK. And instead of the taxpayer paying 100
percent on Medicaid, the individual who derives benefits under
the plan will be paying into the plan so he will be actually
paying a significant part of the cost instead of that coming
out of the pocket of the taxpayers by way of Medicaid. Is that
correct?
Ms.Greenlee. He or she will be paying, yes, a portion of
the CLASS benefits back to the Medicaid program.
Mr.Dingell. Now, as you said, AARP says in their rather
excellent statement it is going to save about $2 billion to
Medicaid due to the CLASS Act. Is that correct?
Ms.Greenlee. Yes, that is consistent with the CBO score as
well.
Mr.Dingell. Is that an actuarially sound statement by AARP?
Ms.Greenlee. I haven't looked at their methodology but I do
know it was the CBO score as well.
Mr.Dingell. Now, Madam Secretary, as you said in your
testimony, Medicaid now pays for about 50 percent of the
Nation's nursing home expenditures, and in 2009 spent $112
billion on long-term care services. Isn't it probable that by
offering the ability to individuals to remain in the community
and not the nursing home that it will help Medicaid to reduce
its costs and also it will help reduce nursing home costs?
Ms.Greenlee. Congressman, it will help individuals use
their own resources and the CLASS resources to postpone the
need for Medicaid.
Mr.Dingell. So wouldn't I be fair in assuming that the
CLASS Act will fill an unmet need in terms of providing long-
term affordable health care services and to support people in
need?
Ms.Greenlee. Yes.
Mr.Dingell. Now, do you believe that the CLASS Act will
help today's workers to prepare for and provide for their
personal long-term needs in the future?
Ms.Greenlee. Yes.
Mr.Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I note that I am returning to the
committee 33 seconds. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. And on the
unanimous consent request of the gentlemen, Mr. Waxman and Mr.
Dingell, without objection, the documents are entered into the
record. So ordered.
Without objection, so ordered.
We will now recess until immediately after the second vote.
I trust the witnesses will bear with us. We will get back as
soon as possible. Thank you. The committee is in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr.Pitts. The recess time having expired, we will go back
to questioning, and the chair recognizes the gentleman from
Louisiana, Dr. Cassidy, for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr.Cassidy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I can't help but notice that Mr. Waxman pointed out the
indignities of people being on Medicaid and yet the PPACA put
16 million people on Medicaid by design and more by effect, and
so I found that an interesting comment. And I also will remark
that the people on the other side of the aisle who are
frightened of weather forecasts 100 years from now are so
sanguine about realistic predictions of bankruptcy within 11
years. Now, I am a physician who works in a public hospital so
I am very familiar with people, politicians overpromising and
underfunding. Do I call you Secretary or Assistant Secretary?
Ms.Greenlee. Either one is appropriate.
Mr.Cassidy. Madam Secretary, I just want to take the logic
from the other side of the aisle and go through this. Their
argument about an individual mandate is that if you don't force
people to be in the insurance program, only those who are
sickest will take the policies and it enters the so-called
death spiral where only the sickest are in it but those who
would have to support them by not being sick and paying
premiums get out because of expense. Now, you by law are
mandated to keep this actuarially sound for 75 years. Let us
assume the logic is correct that we are going to enter into a
situation where only those who are going to benefit wish to be
in and those who frankly don't see it in their financial
interest to do so choose not to join. Now, you have to
obviously by law make the premiums effective. So it seems to
me, and tell me if you disagree, if there is this adverse
selection that progressively you will have to raise the
premiums so much so that you will enter into the death spiral
we heard so much about regarding the private health insurance
market.
Ms.Greenlee. Congressman, as you have heard me testify, we
are absolutely committed to the solvency of the program, and
the key to the solvency will be broad participation----
Mr.Cassidy. But keep in mind my presumption. My presumption
is that they are right, that without a mandate only those who
benefit financially choose to participate, and if you will,
drop out those who don't see it in their financial interest to
pay a lot in and get a little out.
Ms.Greenlee. The underlying question is, what is the method
by which you gain broad participation so that you can avoid----
Mr.Cassidy. No, my underlying question is, is this at risk
of entering the death spiral?
Ms.Greenlee. We must have broad participation and not only
people who could access the benefit early in order for it to be
financially----
Mr.Cassidy. And is it possible--Mr. Waxman spoke about
potentials, so is it potentially true that again we would have
a lot of non-working spouses who would participate, which I
gather would be thought to be at a higher risk for claiming
benefits without paying in over the long hauls, someone
actively working, etc., that people over 65 cannot have their
premiums adjusted upward, all those things that obviously limit
your ability to raise premiums on anybody but the younger
working class, that as those younger people see wow, this
premium is $240 a month for a benefit that I am supposed to get
when I am 70 years old. I have to buy a car. Is there the
potential for this adverse selection process to occur?
Ms.Greenlee. Congressman, you are describing an adverse
selection death spiral that would occur if the program only
attracted those individuals. We are familiar----
Mr.Cassidy. Is there the potential--because I tell you, the
second panel, when I read the testimony of the second panel,
four out of whatever, six, agreed that there is a strong
potential for that death spiral to occur.
Ms.Greenlee. It comes back to the question of broad
participation, and all of the actuaries, the actuaries we work
with, all of the actuaries that will testify after me also
understand that a basic insurance sort of fundamental principle
is broad participation in the method by which----
Mr.Cassidy. So let me ask you, have you put into your
models, if you have premiums of $240 a month how broad your
participation will be?
Ms.Greenlee. We have looked at different pricing
mechanisms, of different pricing options and looked at what a
similar product looks like in the marketplace and understand to
get broad participation we must be competitive both in product
design and in price. I might return to something you said just
to tell you that non-working spouses are not eligible in this
program. I believe that was considered in an earlier bill that
came through Congress but that actually wasn't a feature that
was----
Mr.Cassidy. So let me finish up by saying again, I will see
patients on Monday at a public hospital in which politicians
overpromise and underfund and I see that it is ultimately the
patient who pays the penalty. So it is very easy for us to
promise when future generations have to pay, but I will tell
you, it won't just be future generations that pay, it will be
future so-called beneficiaries. Unless you can convince me
there is not a death spiral, I have to admit I have to be more
skeptical of this than a 100-year forecast. Thank you.
Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman's
time is expired. The chair recognizes the gentlelady from
California, Ms. Capps, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs.Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One general comment, if
I may, to begin. While I appreciate hearing from this
Administration on the topic of aging and certainly on your
testimony, Madam Secretary, about the importance of strong
long-term care and program accessible to all Americans, I can't
ignore the fact that this hearing is yet another in a long line
organized by those on the other side of the aisle obsessed with
repealing the Affordable Care Act. When repeal doesn't work,
they try to defund. When defunding doesn't work, they try to
find targets like school-based health centers or the CLASS
program to cut off. As the ranking member said, it is like deja
vu all over again, so I will continue myself to ask for a
hearing on the number one issue to our constituents, which is
jobs, and I will continue to ask for this subcommittee to come
together and support our health care workforce.
I also find it concerning that while the Republican members
of this committee are declaring the program we are discussing
today unsustainable, actually they should be taking credit for
the flexibility that will be the key to ensuring its success.
In fact, there is a political article today which describes how
the CLASS program flexibility came to be. It was an amendment
by then-Senator Judd Gregg and it was accepted unanimously by
the Senate Health Committee. In fact, after it was agreed to,
Senator Gregg went on to say that his amendment ensures that
the program will be fiscally solvent and that we won't be
passing the buck to future generations.
So Hon. Secretary Ms. Greenlee, considering the amount of
flexibility in the program design that you have already
discussed, do you agree with Senator Gregg in his assessment?
Ms.Greenlee. Congresswoman, as I understand, in response to
Senator Gregg's concern, the 75-year requirement was placed
into the law so that we look long term, and we are required to
look long term from the very beginning to know that we can hit
that marker before we ever start the program.
Mrs.Capps. Thank you. Now, I acknowledge in this committee
a strong difference of opinion among some of us on the
substance of this program but the overall issue should be one
we can easily agree on: The current system for affordable long-
term care is not just broken, it is all but nonexistent. Long-
term care insurance is far too expensive for most individuals
and Medicare does not cover the range of care needed. Instead,
we ask Americans to spend down their savings, sell their assets
and purposely become impoverished so that they can access the
Medicaid program, the primary long-term care provider in most
of our country.
Two weeks ago, this committee heard how expensive Medicaid
is both to the Federal Government and to the States. This is
particularly true in regards to long-term care but right now
what other option is there for most Americans? My colleague,
Mr. Waxman, accurately described how Medicaid costs could be
lessened by this program. Before many families get to this
point, they often struggle to find needed care for their loved
ones themselves. I think it is fairly clear and straightforward
how the CLASS program would benefit people who might need
assistance with such activities of daily living as dressing,
toileting, eating, and sometime in the future this could be the
case for all of us but the program also promises to help those
individuals who provide this kind of assistance to those in
need, family caregivers whose own lives are often disrupted or
put on hold while they care for a loved one. So would you
describe how the CLASS program would affect and benefit
individuals such as family members?
Ms.Greenlee. Family caregivers in specific--as you probably
know from talking to your constituents, family care-giving is a
tremendous burden both physically and financially. One of the
ways that the CLASS program would help provide the family
member themselves with cash benefits so that they can purchase
assistance--respite care, the kinds of things right now that
are often borne by family caregivers both in terms of physical
work and expense to provide care to their loved one.
Mrs.Capps. One more question, or comment and question.
There is a notion that the CLASS program won't work because
there is no room for it and that is because of the existence of
a private market, as limited as it is, provides the potential
market for long-term care is limited. The fact that there isn't
more of a market for it must mean that people don't want this,
yet this fails to take into consideration that government
programs often spur private markets. For example, the
implementation of Medicare led to the creation of what is now a
successful Medi-gap market. As the former General Counsel for
the Kansas Insurance Department, how do you see the CLASS
program impacting the private market? Do you see any room for
collaboration? Do you think this will be a growth industry in
the future?
Ms.Greenlee. Thank you. As I mentioned earlier, the private
market has been around for about 30 years. They started with
comprehensive nursing home insurance and then added and changed
really to include community-based services but it has always
been designed to be a comprehensive product. Nothing like the
CLASS program has ever existed in the private market so these
are complementary but different markets and I think there is
plenty of both need and room for both to exist as we move
forward.
Mrs.Capps. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr.Pitts. The gentlelady's time is expired. The chair
recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Dr. Murphy, for 5
minutes for questioning.
Mr.Murphy. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
I appreciate the comments from my colleagues about good
intentions, and all of us want to make sure that those who are
disabled have the care that they need, but good intentions do
not necessarily cause good law, and I may intend to pay all of
my bills, but if I don't, the bank isn't going to accept my
intentions as a reason to not foreclose on my home or my car.
So it is important that we have these numbers, and I appreciate
your patience in helping us understand this.
With regard to the health care bill, the latest CBO and
Joint Commission on Taxation estimates are that for the first
decade on the health care bill, it would cause a net increase
in Federal deficits of $210 billion over the period of 2012 to
2021. Now, last March the CBO and JCT estimated it would
actually be $124 billion, it would reduce deficits, so we are
off here by almost $300 billion in those estimates. They also
note that the repeal of the CLASS Act provisions would increase
Federal deficits by $86 billion, meaning that that money was
counted as part to pay the bills for the health care bill. For
the first 5 years, I believe the revenue would be collected
from people on a voluntary basis as long as they didn't opt
out. Am I correct on that?
Ms.Greenlee. You are correct on that, yes.
Mr.Murphy. And that would be a defined contribution, you
would set the rates of what someone would pay. Am I correct?
Ms.Greenlee. Yes.
Mr.Murphy. And it is a defined benefit of $50 a day. Am I
correct on that?
Ms.Greenlee. There will be a defined benefit. That is what
we are still developing.
Mr.Murphy. We still don't know how much that will be. Will
there be lifetime caps on that?
Ms.Greenlee. We are working with the law, which says an
average of $50 a day with a lifetime benefit in the product
design but I don't have specifics other than that to give you.
Mr.Murphy. Well, given this information we have that in
order to pay for the health care bill overall, the other day
Secretary Sebelius was speaking to us and under questioning
from Mr. Shimkus she acknowledged that the health care bill
actually by borrowing the $500 billion from Medicare really was
double counting that money to pay for the health care bill but
we still had to pay back Medicare. So I ask a similar question
here. This money which is going towards helping to offset the
cost of the health care bill, is it also double counted?
Ms.Greenlee. Congressman, truthfully, I am aware of the CBO
budgeting process. My responsibility really is to help advise
how we make this particular program solvent and not--I don't do
as much with what the CBO counting of the score and certainly
not for the overall bill.
Mr.Murphy. I appreciate that, but isn't that money also
being counted to offset the health care costs of the rest of
the bill?
Ms.Greenlee. As I understand the CBO scoring, for the first
5 years as you described, there would be money coming in and
that has been considered in the CBO scoring as you have
described.
Mr.Murphy. So that is double counted. That money is also to
help pay for the health care bill as well as to cover the CLASS
Act?
Ms.Greenlee. I would have to go back to the CBO description
but that sounds accurate, but I would just refer back to what
CBO did themselves----
Mr.Murphy. Yes, it is double counting. I am taking that as
an answer. In that case, don't we have to pay back that money
to cover the CLASS Act, that $80 billion plus, and not just
take it out? You also need that as you are going through to
define the benefits and contributions and the caps. I am
assuming that you are hoping that money comes back and isn't
just taken out and it never returns.
Ms.Greenlee. Certainly, we will only move a program forward
if there are premiums, and we have modeling to indicate that
the premiums will cover the benefits as designed, so by
inference we are assuming that will have premiums to collect
and that they are accounted for in the Federal Government that
we can draw upon to pay the benefits.
Mr.Murphy. I am trying to help you, because you have a very
difficult job here. If $80 billion plus is taken out to pay for
health care but you still need to have $80 billion in there to
pay for your benefits, the question is, where is that money
going to come from? And I liken it this way: If I went to the
State of Pennsylvania and I said I want to start up a long-term
care insurance company and so what I am going to do is, I am
going to collect benefits from people but I am going to spend
that money on other things but I promise you the day it starts
I am going to have money to pay for that. I am sure they would
say you are not going to do this, and if you try to, we are
going to put you in jail because you don't have the money to do
that. I think you have been given an impossible situation here
where you are going to have to come up with this plan that
someone is already taken $80 billion plus for something else,
and I hope there is a mechanism, I don't know what it is, where
the money is going to come from to help you. Do you have any
idea how that is going to work out?
Ms.Greenlee. Congressman, I am understanding your question.
To me, this is the difference between the budget methodology
and the financial accounting that we need to do in order to run
a solvent program. I have much more authority and
responsibility with regard to the basic accounting and
fundamental science of the plan----
Mr.Murphy. I appreciate it, and my concern is also for the
people. I hate to promise people a benefit and then say, ``By
the way, there is no money to pay for it so we are going to
have to raise your premiums, raise your co-pays, reduce your
benefits and set caps.'' That is concerning to me because that
is a promise unkept.
I am out of time. Thank you.
Mr.Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The chair
recognizes the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, for 5
minutes for questioning.
Ms.Schakowsky. The gentleman just described exactly what we
have with private insurance right now, that kind of uncertainty
that is in the private market, and I have confidence that the
CLASS Act will actually address this problem.
I am happy to meet you and to see you here. I have been
working on the issue of long-term care since I was in the State
legislature starting in 1991 in Illinois and helped to pass the
prevention from spousal impoverishment that people didn't have
to lose their homes, spend down every single asset in order to
have their spouse go to a nursing home. The issue of the cost
of long-term care not just for persons with disabilities, who I
see are here today and I welcome them, but certainly for most
families or many families, anyway, you know, face this really
frightening prospect right now of not being able to have the
care that they need, having to move from one place to another,
find some place that will accept Medicare, and so I wanted to,
Mr. Chairman, put into the record and then refer to the
National Council on Aging has ``Top 10 Reasons Why
Conservatives Should Love the CLASS Program,'' and I would like
unanimous consent to place this in the record.
Mr.Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

Ms.Schakowsky. I wanted to go over a couple of them and
welcome your comments. It says, one, CLASS provides flexibility
to ensure fiscal solvency, and thanks to an amendment from
former Senator Judd Gregg, the plan includes strong provisions
to guarantee fiscal solvency for 75 years. Statutory language
was purposefully written to provide flexibility in benefit
design, eligibility triggers and work requirements which help
reduce adverse selection and ensure solvency. I wondered if you
wanted to comment or expand or just assure its accuracy.
Ms.Greenlee. Congresswoman, the Secretary has the
responsibility to guarantee solvency and the authority to make
adjustments that we need to in order to get us to that point.
The amendment by Senator Gregg certainly gives us the
guideposts that we must make sure that this is solvent in the
long run for 75 years.
Ms.Schakowsky. Let me go to the second one. No Federal tax
funds will be used to pay benefits. Section 3208 states, ``No
taxpayer funds shall be used for payment of benefits under
CLASS independent benefit plan.''
Ms.Greenlee. That is correct. The premiums have to cover
the benefits.
Ms.Schakowsky. Three, CLASS has no mandates. It is optional
for both employers and consumers.
Ms.Greenlee. That is correct.
Ms.Schakowsky. CLASS will increase business productivity by
reducing caregiver absenteeism and permitting people with
disabilities to work. A recent survey found that 74 percent of
caregivers have had to change their job or stop working because
of their care-giving responsibilities.
Ms.Greenlee. Well, as you know, the main purpose of the law
is to provide cash to an individual who needs assistance. There
is a parallel there for additional support for the caregivers
who are providing that assistance. Care-giving is a huge
burden, and as we know, many people struggle to both maintain
their own work and care for a loved one, so helping the person
needing care will help both people.
Ms.Schakowsky. Americans across party lines strongly
support CLASS. Let me just give you some figures. The Kaiser
Family Foundation poll in February, 74 percent of Americans
support the program. Only 20 percent oppose it. Among
independent voters, 75 percent support, 19 percent oppose.
Among Republicans, 57 percent support, 36 percent oppose it, 21
percent margin. I will go on, six, CLASS will jump-start a flat
private long-term care insurance market. I think you talked a
bit about that. I know that Congresswoman Capps suggested that
this actually could do this. I want to just give you one fact.
When France implemented a proposal similar to CLASS, sales of
private plans increased annually by 15 percent, largely because
the public debate increased awareness of long-term care risk.
So you stated earlier that you hoped that and thought that
would be the result?
Ms.Greenlee. Certainly. One of the major issues that we
need to address and that is part of the plan for the budget is
to market to the American public the problem, that there is a
need for support for long-term services. CLASS is one option.
Private insurance would be another.
Ms.Schakowsky. I am going to skip to, CLASS will reduce the
Federal budget deficit by $86 billion over the next 10 years.
Ms.Greenlee. Yes, that was the CBO score.
Ms.Schakowsky. My time is expired. Thank you.
Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and recognizes
the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes for
questioning.
Mr.Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Assistant Secretary,
thanks very much for being here today. I really appreciate it.
Just kind of the line of questions that some of the other
members asked a little bit earlier but maybe I could just
follow up on. One is, I just want to make sure I understand it,
did the Secretary say at a Senate hearing that the program will
not start unless we can be absolutely certain that it will be
solvent and self-sustaining into the future? Did she make
that--I just want to make sure I have got that correct.
Ms.Greenlee. Yes.
Mr.Latta. OK. And also in your testimony, you stated on
page 4, you said that ``President Obama and Secretary Sebelius
have acknowledged that the CLASS program needs improvement.
Many of the changes proposed to the Senate health reform bill
that would have improved the CLASS program's financial
stability were not included in the final legislation were
reflected in the Congressional Budget Office assumptions that
scored the CLASS program. Therefore, it was not unexpected that
the President's fiscal commission identified that these same
unresolved issues in December and recommended reform or repeal
of CLASS. Given the critical unmet needs of long-term care that
I noted earlier, we should not repeal CLASS until we have made
every effort to reform the program,'' and that was in your
testimony.
And the next question is, is it my understanding that the
President is requesting in fiscal year 2012 $120 million?
Ms.Greenlee. That is correct.
Mr.Latta. OK. And may I ask, what exactly does he want to
spend the $120 million on?
Ms.Greenlee. Ninety-three point five million would be for
education and outreach efforts to both inform the public about
the new program as well as the larger issue of the need for
long-term care. The other two expenses are for administrative
costs and----
Mr.Latta. OK. Let me ask this question. If we have a
program that everybody acknowledges is broken, why do we want
to spend money educating people on something that might not
work in the present form? Let me give you this example. If
someone in the private market makes a defect product and puts
it on the market, should that person have done that?
Ms.Greenlee. I am trying to draw a connection to CLASS
here.
Mr.Latta. If someone goes out and makes a defective
product, knowingly knows that they put something out on the
market that is defective, should they have done that?
Ms.Greenlee. We don't intend to market a defective product.
Mr.Latta. OK. Well, let me ask this, though. We are going
to educate people on $120 million on something that is broken,
you know, in the private market what would happen is, we would
have every State attorney general, we would have the ABCs of
the Federal Government, we would have private individuals
filing class lawsuits against someone that would have done
that. And so I guess, you know, I am not saying good or bad
about this program. What I am saying is, why do we in the
Federal Government want to spend money on something that we
already know right now isn't working and we are going to go out
and market it to tell people--are we going to tell people this
is defective? Should we use the statement from the Secretary
and her testimony before the Senate Finance hearing saying the
program will not start unless we can be absolutely certain that
it will be solvent and self-sustaining into the future?
Ms.Greenlee. We spent a year since the law was adopted
analyzing through two actuarial models what the law would look
like, and that led us to the conclusion that there are changes
and improvements that we need to make so that we can go to
market with a product----
Mr.Latta. Pardon me. Should that be the first statement we
should put out in any notice to anybody, we should put a
disclaimer, a caveat to the American people saying that this
program will not start unless we can be absolutely certain that
it will be solvent and self-sustaining into the future?
Ms.Greenlee. I think we should tell the American public
that this program will be solvent because we won't start if it
won't, and provide them information so they know what they are
participating in if they choose to.
Mr.Latta. You know, and again, though, maybe my logic is
off, but we are going to spend money on something out there
that is defective. Shouldn't we first improve the product, then
market it?
Ms.Greenlee. To me, that is the description of what we are
telling you that we are in the process of doing, that we did
the initial modeling. There are improvements that we need to
make. Both the President and Secretary have discussed that in
terms of reform in response to the debt commission, and we will
not, again, using your language, go to market until those
improvements are made and we know it is solvent.
Mr.Latta. OK. Do you all have the authority to make all the
reforms in it beforehand?
Ms.Greenlee. There are between 35 and 40 different places
in the law where the Secretary is given both authority and
responsibility to make the program work.
Mr.Latta. Do you have to come back to Congress to have any
forms implemented?
Ms.Greenlee. No, we don't have any proposals at this point.
Mr.Latta. But at the same time, we are going to spend $120
million. How long do you think it is going to be before you
could go out to market and actually have a product that people
can say on our side that it is something that is totally done,
that we don't have to worry about telling people that it is not
incorrect?
Ms.Greenlee. The statute requires the Secretary to publish
a final plan in October 2012, and we will hit that marker and
have a product at that point that we could support and go to
market shortly after that. That is the scheduled described in
the law.
Mr.Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The chair
recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. Weiner, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr.Weiner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This morning I woke up to a phone call from my brother,
Jason, who told me that my mom, who is 75 years old, who skis
every weekend and who takes long walks, tries not to drive
anywhere, walks up and down her stairs, and she lives in a
four-story walkup, had to be taken to the doctor because she
fell. Jason is going to eventually have to go to work. I have
to figure out whether I am going to be able to cast votes
tonight because I am going to have to run home to see if I can
take care of her when she gets done with the doctor. Nothing
remarkable about this story.
Ms.Greenlee. No.
Mr.Weiner. Every single day people are trying to figure out
how you deal with an increasingly healthy, longer-living, aging
society, something we should be very proud of, something that
was largely the result of the Medicare Act, which many people
objected to. They said it is socialized medicine, what are we
doing, we should stay out of people's business. But we created
that program and now we have healthier people, and a lot of
them women because husbands die, you know, actuarially die
earlier so a lot of women like my mother. She didn't choose to
fall and hurt her hip. No one chooses to have Alzheimer's
because they are Democrat or Republican. No one gets up one
morning and says the free market leads me to decide that today
I am going to go shopping for a broken hip. It doesn't happen.
You know, there is an expression that it takes a great man
to build a barn but any jackass can kick one down, in this
case, a great woman to build a barn. In this case, my friends
on the other side of the aisle are kicking down their own barn.
They are the ones that have continually said throughout the
health care debate, well, if you just give people money back
and let them decide the smart way to spend it, then that is the
way to structure a program. That is what the CLASS Act did. It
imbued the idea that my friends had and yet here they are
saying, you know what, we can't do that. Now, it is funny how
they all stipulate so comfortingly, oh, of course, it is a big
problem, oh, yes, it is a very big problem because they know
every one of their constituents literally sits in anxiety like
I do and like my brother, how are we going to balance this. We
don't want my mother to be in an institution. That would cost a
great deal, and she doesn't really need it. But how do we
provide this seam of care? I am very lucky. Jason is very
lucky. We are both gainfully employed. We have some
flexibility. But what about the families that don't? They know
that it is not a partisan thing about whether your loved one
gets sick. It is not a party thing. If we can step back for one
moment and say well, wait a minute, if we all concede and
stipulate that this is a problem that needs to be solved, let
us think of the foundation on how we try to solve it.
Now, I believe in a single-payer system like Medicare that
covers things like this, that covers people 65 and older, also
covers 55, also covers 35 and 45. I believe in that. Now, some
of my Republican friends say, no, we don't believe in that, we
don't like Medicare, we don't like programs like it, we believe
in the private model, let us double down on private insurance.
And so Secretary Greenlee, you are here to say well, we have
come up with a program that tries to address something you
stipulate is a need in a model that you stipulate you like
more, doesn't have a guaranteed anything except that we are
going to try to make sure everyone gets at least $50 a day and
now we are saying, oh, this is a very big problem but we don't
like this idea. We don't like this way. OK. Where is your idea?
Well, we heard earlier there is no Republican idea. This is an
entirely deconstructionist agenda. And I want to say to my
friends and to my colleagues, for 99 percent of the American
public, they see politics as kind of this white noise in their
background. They just want to tune in every once in a while and
say, you know what, they get it. They watch this debate today
on C-SPAN 6 or whatever it is on. They watch this debate today
and they listen to you say, well, I want to see a guarantee.
Well, if you are dealing with a loved one who has hurt
themselves and needs care and needs to be taken care of maybe
for the first time in your life, you are not thinking that way.
You are thinking, you know what, let us see if we can try to
help out a little bit, and we have to return to this place
where we try and solve problems, not constantly deconstruct the
solutions that other people are coming up with.
And I say to my colleagues on the other side of the aisle,
good and decent people, God willing you live that life where
none of your senior loved ones get sick. God willing. I wish
that to you. But on the off chance that one of your
constituents, even one of them, faces this problem, let us try
to come up with a solution, and we are bludgeoning this poor
person who is trying to say, you know what, I stipulate to the
idea, it might not be perfect. It is a tough challenge. We are
trying to fix it. We are using a model that you suggested,
using flexibility that you demanded and we are trying our best
and we are committed to trying to solve the problems.
And what is the answer? Oh, you can't say with metaphysical
certitude you will solve the problems today before you leave
the room? Well, in that case, let us hear from the four
panelists who we paid to come here to say this program stinks.
Let us listen to them. That ain't the way to run a country.
Mr.Pitts. The chair will ask the audience to please
restrain themselves.
The gentleman's time is expired. The chair recognizes the
gentleman from Georgia, Dr. Gingrey, for 5 minutes for
questioning.
Mr.Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I will take a lot
of my time to maybe give a speech as well, and even if the
audience were permitted their applause, I am not sure that I
would get any, but I will take the privilege anyway.
Let me just say this, that my friend from New York made a
comment in regard to this side of the aisle being in opposition
to Medicare and Medicaid and SCHIP, and he didn't say it but
probably Social Security as well, and that is absolutely not
true. That is absolutely not true. I have spent my whole adult
professional life practicing medicine, 31 years, and I was a
freshman in medical school when Medicare passed. So this side
of the aisle truly believes in the importance of the safety-net
programs that we have. But we also firmly believe, Madam
Secretary, that we need to pay for these programs, and if we
don't and if we use gimmicks and certainly we feel and can
point to the evidence in the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act that there was a funny accounting used, double
counting. We brought that out a number of times in this
particular hearing. And all of this is what leads to $14.3
trillion worth of debt and deficits of $1.63 trillion and the
need to raise taxes in the President's current budget that he
submitted to us last month by $1.6 trillion.
So, you know, you go off a cliff. As important as these
programs are--and I have talked to some of you between the
break, and I understand that this CLASS Act has great merit and
maybe some potential but clearly with this double counting, the
gentleman from Pennsylvania on our side brought that up and I
am going to bring it up again, Madam Secretary, because this is
the kind of thing that is wrecking this country and pushing us
toward the precipice of bankruptcy, and so that is why we say
if a program like this doesn't work, let us don't start it, and
I plead with you not to do that. I wish this bill was a stand-
alone provision that we could really vet and make sure before
we started anything like this that it was not just another
situation where you have the big Federal Government raiding the
trust funds, whether it is Social Security or Medicare.
So let me, Madam Secretary, address that once again. My
numbers say that the CBO found that something like $39
billion--Mr. Murphy had a higher figure--the total costs of
Obamacare, would be paid for by the total net savings from the
CLASS Act. So do you know why CBO--again, he asked you that
question and I will give you a second opportunity to answer
it--why the CBO counted the $39 billion toward paying for
Obamacare and yet you say the importance of raising that money
earlier before this program goes into effect in essentially 5
years, where is that money going to come from when it is needed
for these seniors that Mr. Weiner and others are
compassionately talking about?
Ms.Greenlee. Congressman, I hope to be able to describe
accurately to you how I believe the program will operate. I
don't have any involvement with the CBO scoring, and I know
that is something that you realize. The money will be collected
for a number of years, 5 years, before the money is paid back
out, and it is clear that there will be an obligation to the
American public that they pay premiums, we will pay their
benefits. I am simply not involved in the CBO scoring process
or how the budget impacts the actual accounting of the program.
We will make sure the accounting works and continue to be
involved, follow up with you if there is something that we need
to readdress with regard to the CBO----
Mr.Gingrey. Well, Madam Secretary, you have said that a
number of times, and I appreciate that, and I think you are
very honest in your testimony, and being an honest woman and
somebody with a lot of experience going back to your days in
Kansas, do you think it is fair for the Administration to spend
whatever dollar amount, whether it is $40 billion or $80
billion, put into the CLASS Act trust fund and then take it out
and use it as part of the CBO score to make the Obamacare
numbers work?
Ms.Greenlee. I just don't have a comment on that, sir.
Mr.Gingrey. Well, Madam Secretary, let me go a little bit
further on that and say this. The Secretary of Health and Human
Services has stated that she has the regulatory authority to
make changes to this program. Do you believe under that
authority that she has the ability to increase the program's
income eligibility standards? It is a fairly straightforward
yes or no question. And I think my time is about to expire. Yes
or no.
Ms.Greenlee. Yes, there are requirements in the law she
must follow. She has the authority to do that.
Mr.Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, if you will bear with me just for
a second then, I would like to ask unanimous consent to put
into the Congressional record this CRS report that questions
whether or not the Secretary has that authority, and that
questions the overall viability of the program, and I admit
this to the record.
Mr.Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

Mr.Gingrey. I yield back.
Mr.Pitts. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. Towns, for 5
minutes for questioning.
Mr.Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member, for holding this hearing. And we have long agreed that
our country simply does not have an established framework to
provide long-term care for those in need.
Nursing home care is extremely expensive. When paid for by
Medicaid, taxpayers are spending over $200 per person per day
on these expenditures. At a time when both the Federal and
State budgets are extremely tight, we need to be looking for
ways to alleviate these issues. Programs like CLASS can pose
one solution so long as we can work together to ensure that it
remains financially sound.
Let me ask you, Ms. Greenlee, what is HHS doing to ensure
the fiscal soundness of this program? Now, this question might
have been asked and I am sorry.
Ms.Greenlee. I am certainly willing to answer. Since the
law was passed a year ago, we have been involved in putting
together two different actuarial models so that we can check
them against each other to determine how the program works from
the actuarial point of view. It is from those models that we
have come to the conclusion that we need to make some changes
to the program. We will now move forward using the new
assumptions so that we can develop the plans that we need to
prepare for presentation to the advisory council and to the
Secretary. All of that will be a very public and transparent
process so we continue to move forward and build on what we
have learned so far.
Mr.Towns. Thank you very much. You mentioned in your
written testimony that many of the changes proposed to the
Senate health reform bill that would have improved the CLASS
program's financial stability were not included in the final
legislation. Can you give me at least two examples?
Ms.Greenlee. Indexing of the premiums would be one example.
Mr.Towns. Yes.
Ms.Greenlee. I was not a participant in those
conversations. As we have come to the conclusion that we need
to make some changes, revisiting that Senate list was the first
place we looked for ideas and some of those things on the list
are ones that we are proposing now.
Mr.Towns. You know, Mr. Chairman, we are getting a lot of
criticism on the other side, and it bothers me because I am not
getting any suggestions or ideas from the other side when it is
a known fact that people are now living longer and they need
this care at the end of their days, and if we are not going to
work together to come up with some ideas, how do we reject what
is already there? I mean, I just want to get a little answer
because I am really troubled, because this is a very serious
issue and I am not sure it has been treated in a serious
fashion, and I direct that to you, Mr. Chairman, not to the
witness on this one.
Mr.Gingrey. Mr. Towns, if you would yield to me?
Mr.Towns. I would be delighted. I will yield to anybody
that might be able to help me.
Mr.Gingrey. Well, I appreciate, and I think in my time and
the remarks that I made and the questions that I asked of the
Secretary is to further outline and shine a little light on the
fact that we are very much concerned, Mr. Towns, in regard to
this program, if it were stand-alone and we could get it
right----
Mr.Weiner. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr.Gingrey. Yes.
Mr.Weiner. I appreciate the gentleman yielding. I mean, the
fact of the matter is, we had 75 hours of hearings, hours and
hours of markups and basically every single time it was greeted
with ``No, we are against it.'' Mr. Towns, you are correct in
pointing out, they don't have--this repeal and replace is a
fiction. It is just repeal. Earlier you missed it, Dr. Burgess
said no, we don't have a bill. I would ask, Dr. Gingrey, is
there a bill? We will take a look at it right now. Let us hold
it up and take a look at it. They said read the bill. It won't
even take you much time to read their bill, Mr. Towns. They
don't have one. They are bankrupt of ideas but they do know
that for all the people that are going to get care under the
CLASS Act, they want them to be out of luck. That is clear, Mr.
Towns, and I yield back to you.
Mr.Towns. I thank the gentleman, and I must admit that I
agree with your statement, and I think it is unfortunate
because this is a very serious issue and I don't think it has
been handled in a very serious fashion, and that bothers me.
Mr.Burgess. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr.Towns. I would be delighted to yield. Do you have any
kind of solution?
Mr.Burgess. Well, I just----
Mr.Towns. If you do, I will yield to you.
Mr.Burgess. Well, the solution is the hearing that we are
having today, but I would just point out, this is a hearing
that we were promised when we marked the bill up in the middle
of the night without having a hearing on this subject, and
Chairman Pallone at that time promised a hearing after the bill
passed. That seemed odd to me, but I was willing to go along
with it. Well, now we are having the hearing, but
unfortunately, the bill was passed and signed into law, and as
we know, the Gregg amendment over in the Senate was slapped
together at the last minute. The Gregg amendment did protect
the draw on the Treasury but that can be overwritten by the
Secretary of Health and Human Services. Is that not correct?
Mr.Towns. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.Pitts. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
thanks the gentleman and yields 5 minutes to the gentleman Mr.
Guthrie from Kentucky for questions.
Mr.Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that. And
we are concerned. You know, people do have issues when they are
older and we need to prepare financially for that. And like all
the members here, I am willing to work with whoever we need to
help people. People can't use health savings accounts, they
can't use pre-tax dollars for long-term planning, and that is
where we need to go with it.
But on the premium side of it, if you look at the questions
we are asking, I mean, Kentucky today, the legislature is in
general assembly and special session to close $100 million gap
in Medicare and looking at cutting education to do so. So when
something passes and the Secretary of Health and Human Services
says in its current form is not solvent, I think it would be
absolutely irresponsible for us seeing what is happening in the
budget not to sit down and ask these questions, and you are
giving some answers that are comforting.
A couple of things, one, on the premium. It is going to be
self-sustaining so the premium that goes in pays the benefit?
Ms.Greenlee. That is correct.
Mr.Guthrie. And so there is no--well, the premium may be
high. That is the question once you start figuring out what it
is going to be, maybe, you know, if it is unaffordable. It
won't be any, well, we are going to save Medicaid here,
therefore we can--the law doesn't allow you to say this premium
will pay this but there is a gap but we are going to have
savings in Medicaid and therefore it is a self-funding program.
You know what I'm saying, just booking savings in other
categories to----
Ms.Greenlee. No, the analysis is self-contained within the
CLASS Act itself. I mean, the Medicaid savings are important to
watch but they don't in some way offset what is happening
within the CLASS program itself.
Mr.Guthrie. Now, if I understand this, the first 5 years
people will pay in but you can't receive a benefit for 5 years
because you have to pay in 5 years to receive a benefit.
Ms.Greenlee. That is correct.
Mr.Guthrie. So the money paid in has been scored to support
other parts of the health care bill?
Ms.Greenlee. Yes.
Mr.Guthrie. So when you say a premium is going to pay
benefits, you have to account for that? Because that money is
not going to be there in year five to pay so the premium will
have to be higher to cover the benefits in the CLASS Act alone
because you are taking money out to subsidize something else,
right?
Ms.Greenlee. This is----
Mr.Guthrie. You have to factor that into that.
Ms.Greenlee. As I described earlier, the difference between
budgeting and the budgeting process and the accounting that we
have to do in the receipts and expenditures in the CLASS
program itself. They are not the same thing. They are related
but they are not the same thing in terms of the solvency of the
program.
Mr.Guthrie. Well, I know you are not budgeting, I mean, I
know you are not CBO but you are going to have to account in
the value of the premium for the fact that you are not going to
have the first 5 years of dollars to spend for benefits.
Ms.Greenlee. No, the program must be credited with the
premiums that come in.
Mr.Guthrie. OK. So you are going to count the premiums that
are spent somewhere else as part of the benefit?
Ms.Greenlee. It will have to----
Mr.Guthrie. You are not going to have the money there.
Ms.Greenlee. But it has to be a part of the accounting that
we make for the program. I mean, it is very clear in the law
that the premiums that come in have to cover the benefits and
there will be a request for benefits. I mean, that is the
program design. If there is a budget methodology that accounts
for that in a different way, it does not change the
fundamental----
Mr.Guthrie. So now we are going to have to cover the first
5 years of money?
Ms.Greenlee. Five years it will be there, but again, these
are kind of different financial mechanisms that we are
interchanging.
Mr.Guthrie. I have worked in family business and provided
benefits to our workers and looked for ways for people to plan
for their long-term care. If a business doesn't auto-enroll, is
there an alternative process to enroll individuals? If a
business chooses not to offer it as an auto-enroll benefit,
then what is the alternative process?
Ms.Greenlee. The key here is that both the employers and
the individuals have a choice. The law describes an employer
opt-in methodology, which is up to the employer if they want to
participate, and we also have to come up with an alternative
mechanism for individuals. We are seriously interested in
engaging the business community about what would work for them.
If they choose not to opt in, are there other kinds of
information, other kinds of ways that they could help their
employees gain access to the program, and we will be engaged
with the employer community in a robust fashion because their
support is helpful to us as we gain the large numbers of----
Mr.Guthrie. Well, that is just a way to reach access.
Ms.Greenlee. That is how we get the numbers we need.
Mr.Guthrie. Like when you do immunizations, you get them at
school because you know you are going to get everybody coming
in.
Ms.Greenlee. And we need to be engaged with them and plan
to do that.
Mr.Guthrie. I have just about a minute, but I understand
you have the 3 months so you don't want to pay in early, drop
out and then get back in and try to get in at your earlier rate
so if you drop out for 3 months, then you come back, you are
reassessed at the age and the time and actuarially at the time
you come back in, so if you buy a policy at 20, it should be
cheaper than if you buy a policy when you are 60 because you
have got longer--hopefully, unless you are disabled, have a
longer time to pay. So currently we have had people on
unemployment for 2 years so we have these kinds of situations,
but if somebody dropped out, lost their job and couldn't get a
job for 3 months and a day, when they show back up they would
be reassessed at their new age. So if they started at 20, they
get 40, they lose their job, they come back at 40, 3 months and
a day later they get reassessed. Is that how----
Ms.Greenlee. There are two things we have to achieve
together in that----
Mr.Guthrie. I mean, that is just a real issue that----
Ms.Greenlee. Right, the fact that people may come in and
out of the program in a very legitimate way that we need to
price but we also need to protect from gaming the program at
the same time.
Mr.Guthrie. Thanks. I appreciate it.
Mr.Pitts. The gentleman's time has expired. Madam
Secretary, thank you for your testimony and your response to
the questions. Earlier this month, Secretary Sebelius promised
Dr. Gingrey during her testimony before this committee that HHS
would engage in a transparent process in the development of the
CLASS program. My hope is that you will share information with
this committee as you develop the program's structure.
Ms.Greenlee. Yes.
Mr.Pitts. Thank you, and that concludes the first panel,
and the chair thanks the Secretary for your very informative
testimony and responses.
Mr.Dingell. Mr. Chairman?
Mr.Pitts. Yes, Chairman.
Mr.Dingell. Very briefly. Thank you for having this
hearing. It has been very useful and it is moving us towards
seeing to it this program works well. This is the purpose for
which oversight was designed and it is our responsibility, and
I commend you for it. Thank you.
Mr.Pitts. Thank you, Mr. Dingell, for those comments.
So you are excused at this time and we will call the second
panel to sit at the table, and I will introduce them at this
time. Thank you. And let me introduce the witnesses and they
will testify in this order, and I ask that they will summarize
with 5-minute statements each. We will make your written
testimony part of the record. First of all, Mr. Allen Schmitz
is a Principal and Consulting Actuary with the Milwaukee office
of Milliman, focusing primarily on long-term care insurance.
Mr. Schmitz was part of a team of actuaries from the American
Academy of Actuaries that has provided actuarial analysis and
review of the CLASS program. Mr. Schmitz has also recently
served on the Society of Actuaries' long-term care insurance
section council and currently leads the International Actuarial
Association long-term care team.
Dr. Joe Antos is Wilson H. Taylor Scholar in Health Care
and Retirement Policy at the American Enterprise Institute. Dr.
Antos is also a Commissioner of the Maryland Health Services
Cost Review Commission, a help advisor to the Congressional
Budget Office and an Adjunct Professor at the Gillings School
of Global Public Health at the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill. Before joining AEI, he was Assistant Director for
Help and Human Resources at the Congressional Budget Office.
Dr. Antos received his PhD in economics from the University of
Rochester.
Mr. Warshawsky currently serves as the Director of
Retirement Research at Towers Watson, a global human capital
consulting firm. He conducts and oversees research on employer-
sponsored retirement programs and policies, Social Security
financial planning and health care financing. In addition, Mr.
Warshawsky was confirmed by the Senate to serve as a member of
the Social Security Advisory Board for a term through 2012. He
previously served as Assistant Secretary for economic policy at
the U.S. Treasury Department.
Mr. William Minnix, Jr., has served as the President and
CEO of LeadingAge since 2001. LeadingAge is an association of
5,400 not-for-profit organizations focused on advancing
policies that support the empowerment of people to live fully
as they age. For more than 35 years, Mr. Minnix has been an
advocate for innovation in not-for-profit aging services, and
during his tenure with LeadingAge established the LeadingAge
Center for Aging Services Technologies.
Mr. Tony Young is the NISH Senior Public Policy Strategist
addressing employment issues as they affect individuals with
significant disabilities. Mr. Young is particularly involved
with the AbilityOne program, whose mission is to provide
employment opportunities for people who are blind or have
severe disabilities in the manufacture and delivery of products
and services to the Federal Government. In 1998, Mr. Young
received the Disability Achievement Award by the American
Public Health Association's Disability Forum. This award is
given to a person who has a long history of making substantial
achievements in the field of disability science or policy
benefiting persons with disabilities.
So welcome. We look forward to your testimony, and Mr.
Schmitz, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF ALLEN J. SCHMITZ, FSA, MAAA, PRINCIPAL,
CONSULTING ACTUARY, MILLIMAN, AMERICAN ACADEMY OF ACTUARIES;
JOSEPH ANTOS, PH.D., WILLIAM H. TAYLOR SCHOLAR IN HEALTH CARE
AND RETIREMENT POLICY, THE AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE; HON.
MARK J. WARSHAWSKY, CURRENT MEMBER OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY
ADVISORY BOARD, DIRECTOR OF RETIREMENT RESEARCH, TOWERS WATSON;
WILLIAM LAWRENCE MINNIX, JR., LEADINGAGE, CEO, ADVANCE CLASS,
INC., CHAIR; AND ANTHONY J. YOUNG, SENIOR PUBLIC POLICY
STRATEGIST, NISH, THE ABILITYONE PROGRAM

STATEMENT OF ALLEN J. SCHMITZ

Mr.Schmitz. Thank you, Chairman Pitts and Ranking Member
Pallone, for the opportunity to testify today.
My name is Al Schmitz, and I am here on behalf of the
American Academy of Actuaries. We published an analysis of the
CLASS Act legislation in 2009, which modeled an earlier version
of the program. Based on that analysis, we concluded that the
program would not be sustainable in the long term and that it
would be unlikely to cover more than a small percentage of the
intended population. Those same concerns persist with the CLASS
program as enacted.
The CLASS program is a voluntary, guaranteed-issue,
employment-based program. It is important to note that the
CLASS program is required to be actuarially sound over a 75-
year period with no support from taxpayers. Nevertheless, the
actuarially sound requirement will be very difficult to achieve
under the current program design.
A primary concern is the considerable potential for adverse
selection in this program. Without addressing many of the
program's issues, the program will be unsustainable in the long
term. An effective, actuarially sound public long-term care
program will limit the effect of adverse selection, and this is
critical in a voluntary program in which participants may opt
in and opt out. Those with greater need for long-term care
coverage are more likely to opt in and those individuals
without that need are more likely to opt out. This adverse
selection increases the average insured risk and results in
higher average premiums which in turn may lead to less
participation from healthy individuals and even more adverse
selection. This can result in a premium spiral.
Important provisions in the CLASS Act that affect adverse
selection include guaranteed issue with a weak actively-at-work
requirement, opt-out and opt-in provisions that allow
participants to delay coverage until it is needed, premium
subsidies requiring a premium of only $5 per month for students
and those below the poverty line, a waiting period that is not
long enough to control adverse selection, rate increase
limitations for certain individuals older than age 65, and
benefit design features such as cash benefits and unlimited
lifetime maximums that have been and continue to be problematic
in the private long-term care insurance market because they are
susceptible to induced demand and may drive higher premiums and
lower participation.
There has been significant focus on participation levels as
a critical yardstick in measuring the viability and success of
this program, and while higher participation generally makes it
easier to obtain a reasonable spread of risk, it should be made
clear that it is the mix of individuals with different risk
characteristics enrolled in the program at any one time and not
participation alone that is key to long-term sustainability.
High participation from only higher-risk individuals will
threaten the program.
Key factors influencing participation are affordability and
marketing. The premium levels must be affordable, competitive
with what is available in the private long-term care insurance
market and of good value to consumers. But the CLASS program
design includes features that increase adverse selection and
result in relatively unaffordable premiums. A strong marketing
program would significantly increase participation and aid in
obtaining a reasonable spread of risk. In addition, it would
encourage individuals to plan for their future long-term care
needs, and getting people to plan for their future long-term
care needs could help reduce pressure on government which
currently pays a majority of long-term care. A sustainable
voluntary program will have provisions to address many of the
adverse-selection concerns I have outlined.
On behalf of the academy, I offer the following
recommendations for modifying the CLASS program: an actively-
at-work definition with the minimum requirement of 20 to 30
hours of scheduled work or comparable requirement, restrictions
on the ability to opt out and subsequently opt in with the use
of either a long second waiting period or alternative
underwriting mechanism, the use of benefit elimination period
and duration limits, benefits that are paid on a reimbursement
rather than cash basis, and an initial premium structure that
provides for schedule premium increases at either Consumer
Price Index or alternative rate.
These modifications along with an effective marketing
effort will improve the sustainability of this voluntary long-
term care program. Without these modifications, the program is
likely to be unsustainable. We are encouraged that Congress and
the Administration are considering changes to the program
design that could help address adverse selection. Significant
additional changes, however, are necessary to address the
concerns I have raised here today or the CLASS program may not
be sustainable.
Again, I thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today and would welcome any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schmitz follows:]

Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes Dr.
Antos for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH ANTOS

Mr.Antos. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Ranking
Member Pallone.
CLASS is a new Federal long-term care program that is
financed solely through enrollee premiums. Because the program
collects premiums in advance of benefit payments, CLASS reduces
the budget deficit in the near term. Over the longer term,
CLASS increases the deficit and worsens the fiscal crisis we
are already facing due to the mounting costs of Medicare,
Medicaid and Social Security.
The goals of CLASS are laudable. The program aims to
provide persons with functional limitations cash assistance to
help them remain living in their communities, but few people
will benefit unless the program is attractive to a broad
population who can share the cost and keep premiums affordable.
CLASS will primarily enroll an older, sicker population, which
will drive premiums up sharply. This adverse selection will
create a death spiral of rising premiums and declining
participation that will doom the program as it is now
structured.
The technical defects in CLASS arise from the intention to
make long-term care benefits readily available including to
persons who already have disabilities but are still able to
work. Underwriting is prohibited and enrollees of the same age
are charged the same premium regardless of their health or
disability status. Moreover, low-income people would pay a $5
monthly premium. Consequently, premiums for other enrollees
will be high to begin with and grow rapidly as healthier people
refuse coverage or drop out of the program. Automatic
enrollment and the minimal work requirement will have very
little impact on this situation.
Premiums are hard to predict. CBO estimates that premiums
would be $123 a month for a $75-a-day benefit. The CMS Chief
Actuary estimates $240. That tells you that there is
fundamental uncertainty about what is going on with this
program. By comparison, however, private premiums average about
$184 for a daily benefit, somewhat larger than $150. There are
differences, but nonetheless that tells you something about the
state of the market. With high CLASS premiums and better deals
elsewhere, it is not surprising that participation is estimated
at 2 to 3-1/2 percent of the market.
It will soon become obvious to many workers that prompt
enrollment in CLASS is not in their best interest, even for
those few who are actively interested in purchasing long-term
care insurance. A 40-year-old who waits 10 years would save
about $15,000 in premiums with only a small risk of becoming
unable to qualify for CLASS by the time she reaches 50.
Consequently, there will be few younger, healthier people in
the program to subsidize those who will soon draw benefits.
The law requires premiums to be set to keep the CLASS trust
fund solvent over 75 years. That guarantees steep price hikes
as the mix of enrollees shifts towards those with greater risk.
Even if solvency is achieved, the program will generate budget
deficits in coming years. CBO says the deficit will appear
sometime after 2030. The CMS Actuary says 2025. The question is
not whether there will be deficits but rather when and how
much.
As with Medicare, the trust fund does nothing to protect
the CLASS program. Surpluses that accumulate in the fund are
invested in non-marketable Treasury securities, essentially
IOUs that obligate Treasury to find funds to cover the
operation of CLASS when premiums are no longer sufficient to
cover expenses. That money is of course used, the surpluses are
used immediately by the Treasury to fund the ongoing operations
of the Federal Government. It is standard operating procedure.
Although premiums would be set to maintain a positive fund
balance for 75 years, that balance includes the excess premiums
from the first few years that were in fact spent and it
includes imputed interest on Treasury Secretaries that is not
in fact new money.
If adverse selection is not addressed, CLASS will face a
funding crisis. Unless Congress reneges on a public promise, it
fails to pay benefits after having collected billions in
premiums, it would have no choice but to provide a financial
bailout rivaling anything we have seen to date. Congress could
take action to mitigate adverse selection by, for example,
toughening the work requirement or permitting some form of
underwriting. I know that Secretary Sebelius has said that she
has the authority to take the necessary actions and the CRS
analysis that was introduced strongly indicates that that is
not the case. Congress could also ignore the structural defects
of CLASS and force workers to buy it, despite the fact that
very few people now buy long-term care insurance today, which
says something about how people view the situation regardless
of what we analysts think is right.
There is no guarantee that even legislative changes, even
dramatic legislative changes, can cure the CLASS program's
serious defects. Repeal is a logical alternative. It is far
better as a public policy matter to repeal a defective program
than to let it repeal itself through fiscal failure.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Antos follows:]

Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes the
gentleman, Mr. Warshawsky, for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK J. WARSHAWSKY

Mr.Warshawsky. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone,
other members of the subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity
to share information and thoughts with you on the new voluntary
long-term care insurance program to be offered by the Federal
Government in 2012 called CLASS. I am Director of Retirement
Research at Towers Watson, a firm consulting on employee
benefits, and a member of the Social Security Advisory Board.
In this testimony, however, I am not representing either
organization. Rather, I am speaking as somebody who has done
research and written on long-term care insurance and disability
risk for more than 15 years and most recently about the CLASS
legislation.
In this statement, I hope to set forward a framework that
could be used by employers in deciding whether or not to
participate in the CLASS program. First, however, I thought it
would be helpful to provide some statistics about current
offerings of private long-term care insurance by employers to
workers. According to our benefits data source at Towers
Watson, as of 2010 about 50 percent of large employers offer
but do not subsidize long-term care insurance to their workers.
Another 4 percent provide such insurance with either a partial
or full subsidy. The fact that the vast majority of employers
either do not subsidize or even offer long-term care insurance
to their workers despite a tax advantage to the worker for many
employer subsidies reflects that this insurance is considered a
convenience benefit to employees. That is, long-term care
insurance is not a core benefit for employers because it is not
thought to provide a significant business advantage to the
employer offering it beyond goodwill and convenience to the
employee.
Moreover, experience to date with take-up by employees and
employer-offered long-term care insurance plans has been quite
modest. Even in large organizations with well-paid and well-
informed employees for whom Medicaid is unlikely to be thought
a source of long-term care coverage, take-up rates have not
exceeded 5 or 6 percent, and that is at the upper end of the
spectrum. This is despite the fact that employer-offered
policies have the advantage over commercial individual policies
that little or no underwriting is done in the workplace.
We have had extensive discussion about the intended
structure of the CLASS program so I won't go into that, but I
will note that one aspect is that it provides that workers can
be enrolled in the program via one of two methods. The
employers who can decide to participate in the program would
automatically enroll their workers through payroll deduction
with the workers having the right to opt out. Such automatic
enrollment is now common in many 401(k) plans. Self-employed
workers and those whose employers do not participate could join
through an individual enrollment mechanism. According to my
understanding of the language of the law, employers could only
participate in the program if they agreed to automatically
enroll their employees. Also, according to my understanding of
the legislative expectations of the program and the score given
to the program by the CBO, as part of the broader health reform
legislation, it is thought that most of the enrollment in the
program projected by the CBO to be 6 percent of the Nation's
working population in 2010 will be through employers.
Now, the framework, and I will have to be quick. The
overall important consideration to employers is whether the
government aggressively promotes the need and the benefits of
long-term care insurance per se directly with workers. In other
words, they have to make a sale to the American public that
this is the right thing to do as a long-term care insurance
benefit. For example, is it possible for the government to add
informative and candid inserts into regular communications that
workers get from the Federal Government? Absent such
promotions, many employers, even those currently offering long-
term care insurance, are unlikely to want to participate in an
automatic enrollment program when the vast majority of workers
are likely to opt out.
I have in my testimony discussion of the adverse selection
problem, which would concern employers as well, but I think
that has been very accurately and ably discussed.
So let me discuss in terms of some benefits and drawbacks
of the Federal program per se. Obviously, the employers will be
comparing the benefits and premiums of the administration of
the Federal program with those available in the private sector.
This will be an intensely facts-and-circumstances evaluation
and I can't speculate on how it will come out, but there are
sort of two opposing factors. One would favor the government
program and others would favor the private long-term care
insurance. The fact that the government program pays cash
benefits that can be used for any purpose I think is an
attractive feature of the program because it provides
flexibility but the level of benefits that are contemplated in
the government program, $50 to $75 a day, is unlikely to cover
the actual costs of care for many disabilities, nursing home,
home health care. But in private insurance, that is a parameter
in the policy and can be selected to be appropriate to the
region of the country and a level of care desired by the
insureds. Also, an advantage to the private insurance is that
there is no 5-year waiting period.
Let me conclude by saying that CLASS program employers will
need to evaluate at the time whether to offer it to their
workers on an automatic enrollment basis, and it is worth
noting that employers have a lot on their plate at this time
with health care reform and so this is just another issue.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Warshawsky follows:]

Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes Mr.
Minnix for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM LAWRENCE MINNIX, JR.

Mr.Minnix. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
especially Congressman Dingell and Congressman Pallone for
their leadership on this issue.
My organization represents not-for-profit aging services
sector. They have been in your communities on average for 75
years. They are the Jewish and Catholic and Lutheran and
Masonic and labor-sponsored organizations. We joined with a
large coalition. I want to remind everyone that we are 270
consumer service organizations that supported CLASS. Senator
Dodd said as far as he knew, that was unprecedented. So we come
to the table today with a lot of people that want this program.
Why? Because they see the need for it inside out.
Long-term care is something most families will face and
nobody wants to talk about. We have been discussing risk. Here
is where the big risk is: It is the single biggest risk that
most American families face today. Just ask those that have
been through it and they are not insured for it. So it is hard
to talk about but who will benefit from CLASS is potentially
every American family. Disabling conditions are not respecter
of political party, age, socioeconomic status, living venue,
background, genetics, what have you. It is the 20-year-old that
took the dive at beach week and is now a paraplegic. It is the
veteran who comes back from the war as a double amputee. It is
the Alzheimer's person who moves in with the family.
Families spend 35 hours a week care-giving, and that mostly
involves women who also work full time. They spend on average
out of their own pockets $5,500 a year in that job, $9,000 if
they are a long-distance caregiver. So Mr. Weiner's situation
is becoming more and more commonplace. Those who are poor or
have to spend down, we do have Medicaid and we need to do all
we can do to make sure Medicaid is there for people who need
it.
For private long-term care insurance, I own it just like
Dr. Burgess. I bought it 10 years ago. My wife couldn't get it,
through no fault of her own. My premiums just went up 60
percent. I can't wait for CLASS to roll out for me and my wife.
Every poll or focus group I have seen about CLASS, when you ask
real people, Democrat, Republican, especially women, say the
time has come for a program like this. We need a choice not
available in the marketplace. What is wrong with giving people
a chance to choose something that may help them because the
options they have today are simply not there for the masses? So
when we talk about risk, we better be talking about the risk of
real people trying to live out their lives every single day.
Now, who will benefit from CLASS? Consumers, we have talked
about, the taxpayer. It is a self-contained program. Business
will benefit from it. We have had discussions with the business
community. A MetLife study says that it is costing business,
care-giving is costing business $17 billion a year, and when I
talk to business leaders, many of them say, you know, we know
this is happening but we are really not sure about what to do
about it. Part of Advance CLASS, which is a group that formed
out of these 270 groups, is committed over the next several
years to educating the public. These 270 groups, touches the
lives, has communication with tens of millions of people every
year, and one of the things that is paramount for all of us to
do over the next several years is educate the public because
the more people enroll, the better the effect on Medicaid. It
puts money back in families' pockets that are willing to assume
responsibility for care-giving, and it will help the taxpayer.
It also will help business, because whether we like it or not,
the need for care-giving is not going away. It will increase.
You know the history of CLASS and we have had on both sides
of the aisle conversations about this ad nauseam. The biggest
unknowns about CLASS, the biggest one is that no one can be
sure how many people will sign up. I heard Secretary Greenlee
say they are going to roll out a plan and that is the actuarial
study we ought to all be looking at, because the day the plan
rolls out and you can say here is what it looks like, here are
the options, here are the premiums, then we have all got a big
education role. The biggest risk is status quo, doing nothing.
The risk of moving forward with CLASS is minimal compared to
what we face otherwise.
Thank you for your interest in this issue.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Minnix follows:]

Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes Mr.
Young for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANTHONY YOUNG

Mr.Young. Good morning, Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member
Pallone and members of the Health Subcommittee. I am Tony
Young, as you know, a Senior Public Policy Strategist with
NISH. I work in a program called the AbilityOne program. We
assist people with very significant disabilities and blindness
to obtain jobs through Federal contracts. In FY 2009, the
AbilityOne program helped over 47,000 people who are blind or
have severe disabilities obtain employment.
The national voluntary CLASS program could help individuals
and their families manage the impact when a sudden, unexpected
event results in a lifelong need for assistance with basic
human functions. Such an event can happen to anyone at any time
and most who learn they need long-term services and supports
have few options for financing that care. Many try to rely on
their own resources or on help from family members for their
care. However, unless they are extremely wealthy or they have
very good, dedicated family support, they will not be prepared
for the financial and emotional costs. That is why I am here
today. My experience demonstrates the need of a national
voluntary CLASS program.
I was 18 when I acquired my disability while body surfing.
In high school, I was very active in sports, lettering in
football and track, even selected Second Team All-Met Right
Guard for the Washington Post. There were social clubs, school
activities, summer jobs, dating, dancing, pool parties and
preparing for college. It all ended abruptly and without
warning on a hot summer day in August 1970. I went from near-
total independence to near-total dependence in the crunch of a
C4 vertebra.
After 10 months of medical and physical rehabilitation, I
was sent home to live with my parents. There was no information
available on how or where to get help. There were long months
when my parents managed all of my personal assistance while
working full time. We were fortunate enough to have good health
insurance at that time so the medical bills did not bankrupt
the family. This continued for nearly 3 years.
Slowly we discovered that some services were available.
They came from a local visiting nurse service. I received home
visits for personal care, physical and occupational therapy and
medical monitoring. These services helped to relieve some of
the personal care burdens on my family but it soon became
apparent that I would need more flexibility and more responsive
supports as they aged.
There are three things I would like you to keep in mind
during my testimony today. First, I am one of the fortunate
few. I was not forced to go into a nursing home. I was not
forced to become impoverished in order to be eligible for
Medicaid. I was able to obtain the long-term supports and
services I needed. [Inaudible.] prior to the accident. Had
someone like me had CLASS prior to such an unexpected life-
changing accident, my family and I would have some security,
that the personal assistance and long-term supports I needed
would be available to us. I want the opportunity for my wife
and eventually my son to plan for a future disability.
Three: Keep in mind that a person born with a disability,
one who acquires a disability in adult life or develops
disabilities in latter life are not automatically triggered
into the CLASS benefits. In order to trigger benefits, an
individual must meet a threshold of functional limitations.
There are different thresholds and different benefit levels
depending on the level of limitations. Some individuals will
choose not to trigger the benefits at all.
I know that some of you have concerns over the solvency of
the program. Believe me, I want and need CLASS to be solvent
too. I want it for my family and for millions of other
Americans to have a sustainable program for the future. As we
have already heard today, the HHS Secretary has authority,
indeed, the responsibility, to ensure that the program is
solvent for 75 years. The Secretary has announced important
steps to ensure the sustainability of the CLASS program by
addressing earnings minimum levels, adjusting premium levels to
account for inflation and strengthen the fraud, waste and abuse
loopholes that might threaten the program. These reforms are
important to the program and I believe that the Secretary must
be given the time to make these and other changes to strengthen
the CLASS program. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Young follows:]

Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman, and we will start
questioning. I yield myself 5 minutes for questioning.
Dr. Antos, during Congressional debate on health care
reform, we heard bipartisan concerns with the structure of the
CLASS program. We have repeatedly heard Senator Conrad's
quotes, regularly calling the program a Ponzi scheme. Could you
please explain the budget gimmick that was used to claim
program savings, even though by most accounts this program will
significantly add to the Nation's deficit?
Mr.Antos. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, I think it is a
time-honored tradition in Congress to use this particular
technique, so I wouldn't want to call it a gimmick. But the
fact is that premiums will be collected for the first 5 years
before any benefits are paid, and there is a 5-year vesting
period so that that means even--and I wasn't clear when the
program will begin but suppose it starts next year--even after
2017 or 2018, there will still be premiums coming in from an
individual before there is any possibility that they could draw
down benefits. This idea of collecting the money in advance and
putting it in a trust fund is a well-known political concept
but it has nothing to do with budget rules. Trust funds are a
separate kind of accounting mechanism. The budget follows
essentially cash in and cash out. And so in the normal course
of events with the government, while this trust fund will
accumulate balances, that money is immediately disbursed to
finance the other operations of the government, and eventually
when money needs to be drawn on that trust fund, the way it
works is that the Treasury has to go to its usual sources to
find the money, which is generally deficit financing, generally
borrowing money from Americans and others who buy government
securities.
Mr.Pitts. Thank you.
Mr. Schmitz, one of the challenges of long-term care
insurance and health insurance is adverse selection, which
occurs when insurance benefits attract a larger number of high-
risk participants. The American Academy of Actuaries' analysis
noted that the CLASS program in its current form has the
potential for adverse selection. Could you please speak to the
potential magnitude of that selection and how such an effect
could put the viability of the entire CLASS program at risk?
Mr.Schmitz. Sure. The adverse selection that is potential
in the CLASS program as it is designed is driven by a number of
things. It is going to be a voluntary program on a guaranteed-
issue basis, and to make a voluntary program work, there needs
to be risk classification. You need to adhere to actuarial risk
classification principles, and the way it is currently
designed, the risk classification principles will not be
followed because you will have unhealthy individuals who will
be more likely to join the program. So you end up with a
situation not just because of initial selection but also
throughout the program as healthy individuals, they may be the
ones who decide to leave and you end up with a group that--the
premiums end up rising and you end up with a rate spiral. The
other things that are important to look at with respect to
this, in order to try to make this program work, there is going
to have to be significant marketing of the program. That is
going to be a critical piece in order to get the participation
from healthy individuals that it is looking for.
There also needs to be--there is a concern in terms of
adverse selection as to what is available in the private long-
term care insurance market, because right now, the way CLASS is
designed, there is really not a good way to supplement the way
it is structured. And so what is going to happen is, the
private market is going to end up competing with CLASS and so
if there is an individual who is healthy, who is able to get
underwritten in the private market, is perhaps married, the
private market offers significant marital discounts, that
individual is going to find a better deal in the private
market. And so what you will end up with is the more unhealthy
individuals will end up in CLASS and so there will be a problem
with adverse selection from that perspective.
Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and yields 5
minutes to Ranking Member Pallone for questions.
Mr.Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to start with Mr. Minnix. Basically you pointed
out that there are a lot of things that people pay out of
pocket are not covered right now. I could give you just from
being a caretaker to my parents that that is certainly true. So
explain to us why we need CLASS. In other words, what is wrong
with Medicare? What are the limitations with Medicaid? What are
the problems with private long-term insurance that even if none
of these alone can fully address the long-term needs of the
elderly and disabled, and we know that in terms of allowing
them to stay at home or in the community--what is wrong with
the sort of mix-and-match approach to the problem, which is I
think essentially what we are doing with CLASS?
Mr.Minnix. Sure. Well, Medicare covers acute and some post-
acute needs on a limited basis until somebody is to the point,
say, of they have rehabilitated to their maximum, and Medicare
is a very good program in that regard. Then there are--but
Medicare does not cover someone to come in inexpensively to
help you get bathed and dressed or someone to monitor your
medications if you are living in your daughter's home. Nobody
pays for that.
Mr.Pallone. Exactly.
Mr.Minnix. If you are fortunate enough to survive
underwriting of private long-term care insurance and can afford
it, oK, you have got some coverage there. And then there is
Medicaid. We have a colleague at our work whose mother moved in
with him. She would have been an ideal CLASS kind of person but
obviously CLASS wasn't in existence. The woman died. A week
later she was notified that she was number 176 on the waiting
list for a Medicaid-eligible home and community-based services
in her community. Well, that is just crazy. So what do regular
people do? They patch it together. They sweat it out. They pool
their money if they can. And CLASS comes in beautifully to help
look at that need.
One of the issues we found in our studies is that young
people have seen this in their own families, and one of the
things we think is going to help in the marketplace is younger
people because what they have seen in their families may well
be willing to say, you know what, I have seen it in my own
family, I am willing to pay premiums. So we are excited about
the opportunity of educating people to say I want to get in
this early.
Mr.Pallone. I want to ask another question. Basically in
terms of who it targets, the funding mechanism, the benefit
package, the things that you think we need to do, do you think
the program is designed to achieve the goals and deal with some
of these problems that you have spoken about?
Mr.Minnix. I think the law provides a very good framework,
and now what we have to do is see a final plan, and I think we
have heard Assistant Secretary Greenlee and Secretary Sebelius
say, and we support that. It ought to be a sound plan that it
looks like a lot of people will buy into. I am confident that
both of those things will happen.
Mr.Pallone. Now, let me ask Mr. Young, because you are
talking from personal experience, would you describe how the
program could benefit your family, your wife, who works full
time, I believe? In other words, you talked about some of the
problems that you have had and difficulties others had. Tell us
how CLASS once it goes into effect is going to help,
particularly with caregivers, both the patient, I guess, as
well as the caregivers.
Mr.Young. The burden, the cost, I should say, of long-term
services and supports goes well beyond what we pay out of
pocket. I pay $17,000 a year now for about 18 hours of services
in the morning and a couple of hours in the evening. All the
rest of the support that I need, whether it is grocery shopping
or laundry or preparing meals or, you know, hanging out with my
son, any of those activities that makes a family go really fall
on my wife, and for our purposes, a little extra would give us
an opportunity to bring in that much more assistance that would
ease her burden, give her some rest every once in a while. With
a six-year-old child and a C4 quadriplegic husband and a full-
time job, she doesn't get much downtime, and even a little bit
more would be very helpful.
Mr.Pallone. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and yields 5
minutes to Vice Chairman Dr. Burgess.
Mr.Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Antos, you described, I think you called it a death
spiral of increasing premiums and decreasing benefits. What
happens if you move too far out along that timeline? Will the
Secretary have any ability to modify the program as you
understand it if that scenario develops?
Mr.Antos. Well, Dr. Burgess, I think the prudent thing
would be for the Secretary if she has authority to make the
changes now. I think there is considerable doubt about how much
authority she does have to make the changes, and many of those
changes would move in a direction that I believe folks who are
looking forward to benefits from this program would find very
negative, very unfavorable to them. But the fact is that you
have to follow through, they have to follow through on what
they said which is they won't start the program unless it is
fiscally sound, and that is not just a question of solvency in
a trust fund. It is also a question of the impact on our
deficit. There is no requirement in the law that says the
Secretary has to worry about the deficit, just the trust fund.
Mr.Burgess. Correct, but when we say if the program is
started. My understanding was, the program has started and the
passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was
predicated on the money coming in from the premiums paid into
the CLASS Act.
Mr.Antos. That is right, but since the regulation isn't
coming out until sometime later, I am not sure when, we don't
really know all the details of how things will get started.
With that said, I believe that the basic structure of the
program is so fundamentally flawed that the Secretary I believe
does not have the authority to make such dramatic changes and
it will have to come back here.
Mr.Burgess. When we had the initial exposure to the CLASS
Act concept when Mr. Pallone brought it late that night when we
were marking up H.R. 3200, I seem to recall at that time the
discussion was the premium was set at $50 a month and the
benefit was $50 a day. I get the impression it has morphed a
little bit since then. Can you give us further insight as to
what the likely premium is going to be?
Mr.Antos. Well, there is nothing in the law that says what
the premium must be. What is specified is what the minimum
benefit must be, $50 a day. Beyond that, it is a matter of
actuarial science and guesswork, I would say, and the----
Mr.Burgess. Well, then I guess we better ask our actuary.
Mr.Antos. I would, but I think the key point is that there
is a huge difference of opinion between CBO and the Chief
Actuary at CMS, which tells you how fundamentally uncertain
this whole thing is.
Mr.Burgess. And I think that is the point I was actually
trying to make, but let us do hear from our actuary. You look
like you wanted to say something.
Mr.Schmitz. Sure. I think that the current design is
structured such that I think the premiums are going to be
difficult to price with the current design because of the lack
of risk classification and the actually rich type of benefits.
This plan is a cash plan, and everybody likes cash. Cash is
easy, cash is flexible, but cash is a very expensive way to pay
long-term care insurance benefits. People claim earlier, they
claim more often. You end up with what the private industry
calls ADL creep in that, in order to qualify for benefits, you
need assistance with your activities of daily living. Well,
people will start to move towards claiming that earlier under a
cash plan. You also have lifetime benefits in this plan, and
lifetime benefits, there is significant adverse selection that
the industry is well aware of that they experience on lifetime
benefit plans. So you have these very expensive features in a
voluntary guaranteed-issue program that put all together, you
know, with what is available in the competitive market, needs
to all be taken into account when pricing this program, and it
is a very difficult task the way the structure is currently
designed.
Mr.Burgess. Is it possible that the premium could increase
under the CLASS as written?
Mr.Schmitz. I think it could. I think there is a risk of
not pricing this right away. It is so important to take in all
these considerations right away because if you don't, we are
going to start in the hole, and if we start in the hole, the
thing is not going to--you are not going to be able to--to dig
out is going to be almost impossible. It is going to be very
difficult to actually right the ship and either increase
premiums or lower benefits.
Mr.Burgess. Could you see premium increases by as much as
60 percent?
Mr.Schmitz. Well, because of all the issues going on in
this program, it is unknown what the premium increases might
be.
Mr.Burgess. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes the
ranking member emeritus, Mr. Dingell, for 5 minutes for
questioning.
Mr.Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy.
Mr. Minnix, I want to thank you first for your kind words
about me and my colleagues who have worked on this matter. I
want you to know I intend to continue working with the
Administration and with other stakeholders to ensure that the
program is successful. Mr. Minnix, you note in your testimony
that the CLASS Act will be of assistance to employers,
particularly small businesses. Your testimony points out that
MetLife estimated the cost of lost productivity for employees
to be $17 billion annually. I gather this is in good part due
to employees having to take time off for care of older
relatives. Am I correct in that?
Mr.Minnix. Right.
Mr.Dingell. Now, on the other hand, Mr. Warshawsky, in your
testimony you note that the vast majority of employers do not
subsidize or even offer long-term care insurance partly due to
the fact that they do not see offering such insurance as
providing a significant business advantage. Is that correct?
Mr.Warshawsky. That is correct.
Mr.Dingell. Thank you. Now, you both discussed the impacts
of CLASS Act for employers, and I would like you both, if you
please, to respond to the following questions, and if you
please again to answer yes or no. If you answer no, would you
please for the record submit a detailed explanation to give us
a more full picture of your concerns.
Now, Mr. Minnix and Mr. Warshawsky, I have too often heard
from adult constituents about financial difficulties of trying
to care for their older relatives, mostly their parents, while
trying to raise children of their own. Is it true that the
CLASS Act allows payments to adult caregivers that would help
offset the cost of the care that they are providing? Yes or no.
Mr.Warshawsky. Yes.
Mr.Minnix. Yes.
Mr.Dingell. Thank you, gentlemen. Mr. Minnix and Mr.
Warshawsky again, is it true that the availability of CLASS Act
would allow adult caregivers to hire home care assistants to
help in the daily care of their elder relatives? Yes or no.
Mr.Minnix. Correct. Yes.
Mr.Dingell. Mr. Warshawsky?
Mr.Warshawsky. Yes.
Mr.Dingell. Now, Mr. Minnix and Mr. Warshawsky, by hiring
these home care assistants to help with the daily care of elder
relatives, wouldn't this help to reduce caregiver absenteeism
in the workplace? Yes or no.
Mr.Minnix. Yes.
Mr.Warshawsky. Not to a significant amount.
Mr.Dingell. Now, Mr. Minnix and Mr. Warshawsky again, in
your opinion then, if the CLASS Act will help to relieve the
financial burden for adult caregivers and also reduce caregiver
absenteeism from the workplace, do you believe that it would
help the employers to see in their workforce greater
productivity? Yes or no.
Mr.Minnix. Yes.
Mr.Warshawsky. No.
Mr.Dingell. No?
Mr.Warshawsky. No.
Mr.Dingell. OK. Now, Mr. Minnix and Mr. Warshawsky, is it
not true that a more productive workforce would be a business
advantage for employers? Yes or no.
Mr.Minnix. Yes.
Mr.Warshawsky. Yes.
Mr.Dingell. Now, I would like to look at this. We have
looked at the costs of this to government and the possibility
of failures but we pay for health care for our people out of a
lot of different pockets. On Medicaid, we pay for health care
particularly in the area of long-term care, and this is an
enormous cost for the taxpayers. In that particular program,
there is virtually no contribution made by the person who
receives the help from the Federal-State combined program. But
with the program we are talking about here, we would find that
the CLASS Act would allow persons and in fact encourage them to
pay into the program. Would this not then ease somewhat the
burden on Medicaid, which pays a huge amount of cost and which
largely pays costs for institutional care as opposed to home
care? Isn't this going to help somewhat with regard to the cost
of Medicaid, which is breaking State budgets, causing huge
budget difficulties to the Federal Government?
Mr.Warshawsky. Congressman, as I indicated in my written
testimony, it is very unlikely that lower or even moderate-
income workers will purchase long-term care insurance, because
of the availability of Medicaid. There have been many very
rigorous, fine studies that have been done on this subject, and
they indicate uniformly that that----
Mr.Dingell. So you don't think that would be a help?
Mr.Warshawsky. Extremely minimal, yes.
Mr.Dingell. Mr. Minnix, yes or no?
Mr.Minnix. I have the opposite view.
Mr.Dingell. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, you have been courteous. Thank you.
Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes Dr.
Cassidy for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr.Cassidy. To all of you whom I question, I apologize. I
had to step out of the room, so if it is a repeat question, I
am sorry.
Mr. Schmitz, folks on the other side of the aisle kept on
saying how this a solution but I think what I am hearing is
that if by statute they have to make it work, meaning they have
to increase the premiums so that it is actuarially sound, that
the way you write how--I think I have a quote here--``based
upon this analysis, it was concluded that the program would not
be sustainable in the long term and it is unlikely to cover
more than a small proportion of the intended population,'' not
much of a solution. That said, it also seems as if it would
cover even a smaller portion if there is adverse selection, and
I think the Assistant Secretary, her absence of comment upon my
question kind of affirmed my answer that there would be a great
potential for that adverse selection. Can we imagine what would
be the uptake of a product, an insurance product that the
monthly premiums were $240 for a benefit that would be accrued
when you are 30 years older?
Mr.Schmitz. I think the uptake, it is going to really
depend--the way it is currently structured right now and those
higher premium levels will likely have very low participation.
There needs to be--the structure of the program as it is right
now on a guaranteed-issue voluntary basis is going to be very
expensive.
Mr.Cassidy. Now, when you say ``very expensive,'' it could
be $3,000, $4,000 a year, correct?
Mr.Schmitz. I mean, you end up with a situation trying to
deal with the premium spiral in that, well, the more you raise
premiums, the healthy individuals will keep leaving and so then
you have to keep raising premiums and so you get to a point
where eventually you are just going to have prepaid care. And
so without having risk classification in the program that is
going to be adequate to get the participation from healthy
individuals that you need, the premium rate spiral potentially
will make it unsustainable in the long term.
Mr.Cassidy. Mr. Warshawsky and Mr. Minnix, Mr. Dingell
asked you all a question just now and you said no, you didn't
think it would have much an impact. I think it was about the
ability of this payment to offset Medicaid cost. Was that the
question that you all differed on?
Mr.Warshawsky. Yes.
Mr.Cassidy. Now, you quoted data. You said there are
multiple studies showing it will not have an impact. Now, Mr.
Minnix, you disagree with Mr. Warshawsky. Do you similarly have
data or is that just a feeling that you have?
Mr.Minnix. No, we are going on what the CBO said in their
scoring. We also did a----
Mr.Cassidy. Now, what specifically did the CBO say that you
would base that on? Because what I was reading is that it is
going to be actuarially unsound in a decade or so.
Mr.Minnix. What the CBO data said--and I can get the
specific figure but I think it is a matter of public record--is
beginning the sixth or seventh year out it begins to show
Medicaid savings.
Mr.Cassidy. Now, the $2 billion Medicaid savings that Mr.
Waxman quoted earlier, I tried to look up the number for our
national debt for long-term care and Medicaid program. It is
huge. And Deloitte, they did an analysis and they were saying
that it is going to be, like, 35 percent--I don't have the
article in front of me--of New York's budget. So $2 billion
over the entire Nation, well, that is a lot of money in
absolute terms. As a percent, it doesn't sound like very much
to me.
Mr.Minnix. Well, you can take it from a conservative
standpoint and say----
Mr.Cassidy. I like that.
Mr.Minnix [continuing]. That if there is minimal
participation, that is all it saves. A study we commissioned
independently that I would glad to share with you says that if
everyone eligible participated in a similar kind of program--
you have to remember, there are different assumptions.
Mr.Cassidy. Now, it would have to be mandated, right? When
you say ``everyone''----
Mr.Minnix. I am talking about the political mandate. I am
talking about--everybody is talking theory here.
Mr.Cassidy. Well, no, no, because actually the thing I am
after is, Mr. Warshawsky is quoting data and I think Dr.
Antos----
Mr.Minnix. I am trying to respond. I have got data.
Mr.Cassidy. But they say 2 to 4 percent. Are you saying
there would be 100 percent?
Mr.Minnix. I am saying that we commissioned a study that
shows that if there were 100 percent of the participation that
the Medicaid savings if a plan like this were in place today,
Medicaid for long-term care would be----
Mr.Cassidy. Sorry. I am almost out of time.
Dr. Antos----
Mr.Minnix. A $50 billion savings.
Mr.Cassidy. Dr. Antos, do you think it is reasonable based
upon any empiric experience that we would have 100 percent
uptake in a voluntary program like this?
Mr.Antos. None whatsoever.
Mr.Minnix. I don't think that either.
Mr.Cassidy. But that is what your study shows. And what do
you think would be more likely, Dr. Antos?
Mr.Antos. Well, it is hard to argue with the people who
have done the estimates so far, and they think that the take-up
rate for the total population, not the employed population,
will run 2 to 3-1/2 population.
Mr.Cassidy. Thank you all very much.
Mr.Minnix. We think it would be significantly more than
that over time.
Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes the
gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms.Schakowsky. Well, first of all, after sitting here not
through all the testimony but through this hearing and others
like it, I have to question the intention of this hearing.
Everyone on the other side of the aisle, on the Republican side
of the aisle, has voted it seems like dozens of times to simply
repeal the Affordable Care Act and the CLASS Act with it, so I
think this is just another effort to try and set up a panel
that aside from our two witnesses, Mr. Minnix and Mr. Young, to
discredit this program.
I was on the President's Commission on Fiscal
Responsibility and Reform, and I started that by saying, you
know, it would be pretty easy to balance the budget. You put on
your green eyeshade, you bring in the actuaries and a red
pencil and you just cut, cut, cut. But that is not who we are
as Americans, and today we are talking about a program that is
designed to not cost one single dollar of taxpayer funding and
we are finding out that, oh, hidden in there is going to be
some sort of addition to the deficit reduction. Now, I would be
happy to sit down with actuaries and experts on all the
research and design a real program if you don't like what is
going on, but that is not what we are talking about. This is an
effort to discredit a program that we think by and large,
perhaps with some important improvements, could help people.
Now, I want to talk a little bit about money, Mr. Young.
You used to be getting Federal support, right, SSDI?
Mr.Young. Yes.
Ms.Schakowsky. But you aren't anymore?
Mr.Young. Right.
Ms.Schakowsky. You are now working, paying taxes and
contributing. I don't know how much you are reducing the
deficit by with your income taxes but it is something. So
creating a program--I guess my question is, how will this help
people work as opposed to even have to get long-term care
insurance or, according to the naysayers, be on the public
dole?
Mr.Young. Well, if you can't get out of bed in the morning
and you can't get dressed and you can't have supports that work
where, you know, if you need to go to the bathroom or have a
drink of water, you can't work. That is the bottom line. If
there are no supports available for basic bodily needs, nobody
is going to be thinking about how to go to work or even being
in the workforce because you are worried about basic survival.
Ms.Schakowsky. So you think that this kind of program
available to persons with disabilities could actually make more
people as taxpayers as opposed to tax eaters?
Mr.Young. Right. Exactly. And the fact that it is lifelong,
it doesn't disappear once you go to work and start earning some
money like Medicaid supports do, is invaluable.
Ms.Schakowsky. Mr. Minnix, this notion of this tiny number
of people that is projected to get this insurance I think first
assumes that people would rather spend down into total poverty
in order to get on Medicaid as opposed to take care of
themselves, personal responsibility. But as you said, it will
take an education program. Why do you think that there will be
more than this miniscule number that they are projecting that
would actually enroll in this program?
Mr.Minnix. I have been serving people in this field for 38
years. I have seen a little bit of everything. And one of the
things you see over and over again is, number one, families'
willingness to bear responsibility for their loved ones, and
secondly, they begin to run out of money doing it, and the
sandwich generation in the middle begins to say do I help my
children or grandchildren or do I pay for elderly relatives,
and there is no program there to do it. And the work we have
done with focus groups and polls and other things say the
American public is ready to look at this issue. We have talked
to younger people, older people and middle-aged people and they
say, yes, that is beginning to make sense and I would be
willing to pay. So I am looking forward to the day Assistant
Secretary Greenlee rolls out this plan and we see who salutes,
and I am betting it is going to be more than 2 or 3 percent of
the people.
Ms.Schakowsky. But you are not just waiting, I would hope.
Mr.Minnix. No.
Ms.Schakowsky. Can you talk to us about what kind of
efforts you see to educate people and to make sure that they
know about it, etc.?
Mr.Minnix. Well, the Advance CLASS Board, which is made up
of some leaders of the 270 coalition, we have set up shop. We
have got a Web site. We are beginning to get the word out, and
just things like this will be a huge education effort so people
can talk about it and begin to plan for it. We are determined
to get people to plan for it.
Ms.Schakowsky. Is the disability community going to do that
as well, get the word out?
Mr.Young. We are together in this.
Mr.Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady. The gentlelady's
time is expired. The chair recognizes the gentleman from
Georgia, Dr. Gingrey, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr.Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I am going to
read, sort of in response to my colleague from Illinois, from
the debt and deficit commission, the National Commission on
Fiscal Responsibility and Reform, the official title of their
report in December of 2010 of which Ms. Schakowsky was a
member, so I am sure she knows exactly what it is in here, but
here is what they say in regard to the CLASS Act.
Ms.Schakowsky. And you know it wasn't adopted.
Mr.Gingrey. Reclaiming my time. ``The Community Living
Assistance Services and Support, the CLASS Act, established a
voluntary long-term care insurance program enacted as part of
the Affordable Care Act,'' Obamacare. ``The program attempts to
address an important public policy concern, the need for non-
institutional long-term care. But it is viewed by many experts
as financially unsound. The program's earliest beneficiaries
will pay modest premiums for only a few years and receive
benefits many times larger so that sustaining the system over
time will require increasing premiums and reducing benefits to
the point the program is neither appealing to potential
customers nor able to accomplish its stated function. Absent
reform, the program is therefore likely to require large
general revenue transfers or else collapse under its own
weight. The commission advises the CLASS Act be reformed in a
way that makes it credibly sustainable over the long term. To
the extent this is not possible, we advise it to be repealed.
Technically repealing the CLASS Act will increase the deficit
over the next decade because the program's premiums are
collected up front and its benefits are not paid out for 5
years. To address this, we would replace the deficit reduction
on paper from the CLASS Act with real options that truly save
the Federal Government money and put it on a more sustainable
path.''
Let me ask Mr. Antos, have you seen the CRS memo that I
submitted earlier for the record when I was with the Secretary?
Have you seen that? It states that the Secretary does not have
the authority to change income eligibility.
Mr.Antos. Yes, I have looked at that. I am merely an
economist, not a lawyer, so I am not qualified to really opine
on this, but I believe that CRS has experts in the law who can
make this judgment. If this is in fact the case, then it seems
unlikely to me that this program can be put on an actuarially
sound basis.
Mr.Gingrey. Well, then it is your opinion, Mr. Antos, I
think I understand you correctly, that if the Secretary does
not have the authority and the language in the law to make
those necessary changes that the first witness said were
absolutely essential to put it on a sustainable glide path, if
we can't fix it, do you think that we should repeal it as the
President's commission, of which Ms. Schakowsky was a member,
recommended?
Mr.Antos. Well, I think we should deal with the problem. I
think that is the problem with this law. It doesn't deal with
the actual problem. Mr. Young is a great person who has somehow
managed to survive our system. This CLASS Act really doesn't
address it, and to have a program that is going to fail with
certainty and going to make false promises that can't be kept
is a disservice to disabled people.
Mr.Gingrey. And I thank you for that, and of course, that
is my concern and that is why I bring up these points. In the
minute that I have remaining, I would like, Mr. Schmitz, to ask
you, under the law, any individual whose income does not exceed
the poverty line and any individual who has not attained age
22, is actively employed and is a full-time student will pay a
nominal premium beginning at $5. What do you believe will
happen to the program's sustainability if more low-income
individuals enroll at the $5 premium subsidy than it is
actually projected in the bill?
Mr.Schmitz. If we end up having more people in the program
at the $5 subsidy, it is the other individuals who are going to
have to subsidize them and their premium rates are necessarily
going to be higher. It is going to be important to try to
understand and estimate those numbers of how many people we
will be subsidizing, and that is one of the challenges in
pricing this plan is being able to predict that level of
adverse selection. There is a lot of unknowns and a lot of
assumptions that need to be nailed down in this plan that are
pretty volatile to predict.
Mr.Gingrey. I wanted to pursue it further, Mr. Chairman. I
see my time has expired, and of course, I yield back.
Mr.Pitts. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
thanks the gentleman.
This has been excellent testimony, an excellent panel. In
conclusion, I would like to thank the witnesses, thank the
members for participating in today's hearing. I remind members
they have 10 business days to submit questions for the record.
I would like to ask the witnesses to respond promptly to any
questions that are given to you in writing. Members should
submit their questions by the close of business on March 31st.
The subcommittee is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:05 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]


