- RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE BLUE RIBBON COMMISSION ON AMERICA'S NUCLEAR FUTURE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE BLUE RIBBON COMMISSION ON AMERICA'S NUCLEAR
FUTURE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND THE ECONOMY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 1, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-109

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

75-441 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2012

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy

JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
Chairman
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARY BONO MACK, California           JOHN BARROW, Georgia
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   LOIS CAPPS, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
CORY GARDNER, Colorado                   officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     6
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     7
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     8

Witnesses

Lee Hamilton, Co-Chair, Blue Ribbon Commission on America's
Nuclear Future.................................................    10
Brent Scowcroft, Co-Chair, Blue Ribbon Commission on America's
Nuclear Future.................................................    12
Prepared statement of Mr. Hamilton and Mr. Scowcroft.........    16
Lake H. Barrett, President, L. Barrett Consulting................    65
Prepared statement...........................................    68
D. Warner North, President and Principal Scientist, NorthWorks,
Inc............................................................    73
Prepared statement...........................................    75
Martin G. Malsch, Partner, Egan, Fitzpatrick, Malsch & Lawrence,
PLLC...........................................................    99
Prepared statement...........................................   101
Edwin Lyman, Senior Scientist, Global Security Program, Union of
Concerned Scientists...........................................   113
Prepared statement...........................................   115
Thomas A. Schatz, President, Citizens Against Government Waste...   126
Prepared statement...........................................   128
David A. Wright, President, National Association of Regulatory
Utility Commissioners..........................................   136
Prepared statement...........................................   138

RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE BLUE RIBBON COMMISSION ON AMERICA'S NUCLEAR
FUTURE

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 1, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:37 a.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Shimkus
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Shimkus, Whitfield, Bass,
Latta, McMorris Rodgers, Harper, Cassidy, Gardner, Barton,
Green, Butterfield, Barrow, Matsui, Capps, and Waxman (ex
officio).
Also present: Representatives Kinzinger and Inslee.
Staff present: Charlotte Baker, Press Secretary; Dave
McCarthy, Chief Counsel, Environment and the Economy; Andrew
Powaleny, Assistant Press Secretary; Tina Richards, Counsel,
Environment and the Economy; Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator,
Environment and the Economy; Brett Scott, Staff Assistant;
Peter Spencer, Professional Staff Member, Oversight; Lyn
Walker, Coordinator, Administrator/Human Resources; Alex
Yergin, Legislative Clerk; Jeff Baran, Minority Senior Counsel;
Alison Cassady, Minority Senior Professional Staff Member; and
Caitlin Haberman, Minority Policy Analyst.
Mr. Shimkus. We are going to call the hearing to order and
welcome our first panel. And I will begin with my 5-minute
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Good morning, and welcome to our first Environment and the
Economy Subcommittee hearing of 2012. Today I am pleased to
kick off the subcommittee's agenda on a topic many of you know
I am very engaged with and passionate about: the disposal of
high-level nuclear waste. As a result of our successful defense
programs, and as contractual obligations to taxpayers and
consumers who have invested billions of dollars and counting,
we, as a Federal Government, have responsibilities to
permanently dispose of nuclear waste. This debate has lead us
here today to discuss a report from the Blue Ribbon Commission
on America's Nuclear Future and how its recommendations might
aid in moving the existing law forward while staying ahead of
the curve into the future.
As I read the report over the last few days and--I actually
did read the report--I agree with many of the Commission's
recommendations. I too think a new organization tasked with
nuclear waste management is needed. I agree access to the funds
nuclear utility ratepayers and taxpayers have invested should
not be squandered by political brinksmanship. And as I have
been talking about each week on the House floor, I agree that
Yucca Mountain as designated by law remains fixed on the table
as a solution to the nuclear waste debate.
In the wake of the administration's interference with the
independent technical evaluation of the repository of Yucca
Mountain, the resulting Blue Ribbon Commission found what many
of us have long have been saying about the failed management of
nuclear waste. The Commission's report correctly advises
control of the nuclear waste fund be removed from the purse
string of political ideologues and entrusted to a new
organization dedicated solely to implementing the waste
management program set forth under law.
It is clear the dysfunction within and between the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission and the Department of Energy has rendered
the current waste management structure ineffective. We simply
cannot burden our children with 65,000 and growing metric tons
of nuclear waste simply because of a bureaucratic failure to
carry out the law of the land.
Yucca Mountain remains the most shovel-ready, thoroughly-
studied geological repository for spent nuclear fuel, there are
possibly no other 230 square miles in the world that have been
examined and reexamined more by America's greatest scientific
minds than Yucca Mountain.
Three decades of study, $15 billion and quite frankly,
common sense support the current requirement to secure high-
level nuclear waste on Federal property, under a mountain in a
desert. While the extensive research and millions of man-hours
by expert scientists and engineers have proven we can safely
and securely store nuclear waste at Yucca Mountain, this debate
is also about jobs.
The Department of Energy estimates continuing construction
at Yucca Mountain would employ 2,600 workers, with about 1,100
of them being additional jobs and new jobs. Additionally, DOE
estimates an almost equal number indirect jobs bringing the
total to 7,000 jobs in Nevada, a State currently suffering from
13 percent unemployment. In addition to job creation, this
would help stimulate the struggling Nevada economy.
In 2000, research done by the University of Nevada, Las
Vegas, concluded the Yucca Mountain project contributed nearly
200 million to the Nevada economy that year and similar amounts
in 2001. The reality is Yucca Mountain not only fulfills our
commitment to the American taxpayers to secure high-level
nuclear waste as required by law, but makes a commitment to the
people in Nevada to turn around a struggling economy and
expanding infrastructure and creating jobs.
I would like to welcome the co-chairs of the Blue Ribbon
Commission, a former colleague of ours, Congressman Lee
Hamilton, it is great to see you and welcome back. And
Lieutenant General Scowcroft. I would say beat Navy, and also
Air Force, but you might have twisted loyalties there. I look
forward to their thoughts on implementing some of the
recommendations and how they fit into current law.
I also want to thank our second panel of witnesses for
being here today to give us their outside perspective on the
report, as those who have been a part of the process for many
years, their input will be invaluable as we consider how to
utilize the Commission's recommendations. With that, I finish
my opening statement and I would like to recognize the ranking
member, Congressman Green from Texas, for 5 minutes.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing entitled ``Recommendations of the Blue Ribbon
Commission on America's Nuclear Future.'' Many of us on this
subcommittee have been anxiously awaiting the completion of the
Blue Ribbon Commission's report since they were tasked with the
responsibility a couple of years ago. As a long-term supporter
of nuclear energy, because this is a cleaner energy
alternative, I had the opportunity to visit countries like
France and Sweden to learn about their nuclear energy programs.
I accompanied our committee colleague, Representative Murphy on
a CODEL to France and Sweden last year and were able to see how
French and Swedish reprocess and store their nuclear waste.
The issue of long-term and interim nuclear waste storage
and disposal is a very important topic in this country and
there is no doubt we are well behind our foreign counterparts
when it comes to disposing of nuclear waste.
This subcommittee's examining the issue of nuclear waste
storage in past hearings. These hearings have primarily been
focused on Yucca Mountain and the actions of the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission, and we have yet to examine other issues
or alternatives for permanent nuclear storage and disposal.
I had the opportunity to visit Yucca Mountain last year
also with Chairman Shimkus, and I have supported the use of
Yucca Mountain in the past and still believe it is a terrible
waste of taxpayer dollars to have this $12 billion facility
sitting unused in the desert.
While I am supportive of using Yucca Mountain as a
permanent nuclear waste disposal facility, it is clear that
certain political realities must be accepted in the here and
now, and we have been fighting a battle to use Yucca since it
was first proposed in 1987 and have not been able to come to a
resolution. The issue of Yucca Mountain may not be resolved in
the near future, but perhaps there will come a time we can move
past the political logjam, and if we do, we can revisit
utilizing Yucca Mountain in the future. Regardless one fact is
certain, the U.S. Has a very real and serious impending issue
at hand with regard to the storage and disposal of nuclear
waste, and it must be dealt with sooner rather than later.
Currently spent fuel and reprocessed waste is stored at
nuclear plants in 30 sites scattered across the U.S., local
communities are spending millions of dollars to ensure the
safety and protection of our nuclear waste. Even with these
current sites, we are still producing nuclear waste and that
waste will need to be stored for at least 1,000 years. If we
begin reprocessing our nuclear waste, it still will not solve
or eliminate our problem. I strongly support research and
developing of reprocessing because it could, in the future,
reduce the amount of the waste and it is not the ultimate
solution, but it is not the ultimate solution of our nuclear
storage problem.
I would like to note that reprocessing spent fuel could be
a job creator in this country. Research and development jobs
are needed in the U.S. and we should be doing more in the
reprocessing arena to foster job development as well as
reducing our nuclear footprint. That is why I look forward to
the testimony of Blue Ribbon Commission. I think it is
important we learn how we can begin the process of finding one
or more interim and alternative storage and disposal sites to
Yucca Mountain. I am also interested in hearing the opinions of
the Commission on creating a new organization dedicated to
nuclear waste management, reprocessing investments in U.S.
research and development for the workforce development, and
legislative proposal to help access funds from the nuclear
ratepayers for nuclear waste management.
I want to commend the Blue Ribbon Commission for completing
a report on time and producing a consensus document. In this
Congress, it is impressive that all 15 members of the
Commission signed the report. Additionally, I know they
reviewed more than 1,000 comments and submitted the draft
report and included several changes that are reflected in the
final report. I also want to thank the witnesses for appearing
today, and I look forward to your testimony. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The
chairman now recognizes the chairman emeritus, Congressman
Barton, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't think I will
take that time. It is good to see--I still call him Congressman
Hamilton, but Dr. Hamilton and General Scowcroft, I have been
around here long enough to remember when both of you were--when
the Congressman was actually chairman of the Foreign Relations
Committee in the House, and General Scowcroft was National
Security Advisor to the first President Bush, so it is good to
have you two gentleman still serving the public.
On the Energy and Commerce Committee, I think we have 59
members, only three of them served when the Nuclear Waste
Policy Act in 1982 was passed, Mr. Waxman, Mr. Dingell, and I
believe Mr. Markey. Mr. Hall, who is on leave from the
committee on the Republican side, is the only Republican who
was here then. I didn't get here until 1985.
My first job as a White House fellow for President Reagan
at the Department of Energy in 1981 was to brief the then
Secretary of Energy, James B. Edwards, on the proposed Nuclear
Waste Policy Act. They asked me to brief him because they
thought if an Aggie could understand it and explain it, then
anybody could. And so the technical experts spent a day
explaining to me what they were trying to do, and then I had 15
minutes to explain that to the Secretary of Energy.
So I have been involved with this for a few years and it is
a shame that we are still where we were basically then, and
that is that we don't have a solution. And it is really not
fair to you two gentleman or the other commissioners to expect
you to pull nuclear waste depository rabbit out of a hat when
we haven't been able to do it in the Congress for the last 30
years. We are not here to name names, but if I had to name
somebody who really put the fly in the ointment, I would say
former Senator Bennett Johnson of Louisiana and Senator Trent
Lott of Mississippi. They made a deal in the Senate to put it
in Nevada over the objections of the Nevada delegation and the
Nevada delegation pledged eternal opposition, and they meant it
and that is kind of why we are here today.
Gentleman, in your final report the Secretary of Energy you
do speak of the importance of Federal relations and public
confidence. You discuss how a continued delay to store the
65,000 metric tons of inventory, which as Congressman Green
pointed out, is growing is damaging America's standing in the
world as a source of nuclear expertise, as a leader of global
issues on nuclear safety, non proliferation and security. We
have spent in the neighborhood of $15 billion building Yucca
Mountain and don't have a whole lot to show for it. I think
that is inexcusable.
Dr. Peter Swift, who is the chief scientist for Yucca's
lead laboratories, Sandia National Laboratory, has discussed
how the technical basis for the Yucca Mountain repository has
been developed by hundreds of scientists and multiple technical
experts. He said, ``One of the main conclusions of these
analysis is that the estimated releases of radiation doses to
hypothetical future humans are well below the EPA and NRC
standards.'' He goes on to say, there is sufficient technical
basis for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to issue a license
authorizing construction of the facility. To kind of put that
in layman's terms, he is basically saying we can continue to
have debates about how many nuclear angels are dancing on the
head of the pin, but there is basis to think that the current
design is sufficient and safe and we should move forward.
I do think that your report is going to help us in the
political arena make a decision on what to do. I also believe
that it is probably time to reform the Nuclear Waste Policy Act
of 1982 incorporating some of the recommendations that you
gentlemen and your other commissioners have made in the report.
We do need to develop secondary geological disposal facilities.
It is important to provide real access to the funds for the
sole purpose of waste management.
And last but not least, I think we do need to work to find
opportunities to address recycling and new technologies by
instituting legislation to make that possible.
Again, gentlemen, thank you for your time and effort. I
hope that your work will actually be used in a legislative
fashion in the near future to reform the Nuclear Waste Policy
Act and let's finally get going. With that, I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The Chair
now recognizes the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Waxman, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In 1982, Congress
passed the Nuclear Waste Policy Act, the Act sought to
establish a fair and science-based process for selecting two
nuclear fuel and high-level radioactive waste. Under this
approach, no one State or locality would bear the entire burden
of the Nation's nuclear waste. In the years that followed, the
Department of Energy began evaluating a number of potential
repository sites. Then in 1987, Congress made the decision to
designate Yucca Mountain in Nevada as the sole site to be
considered for a permanent geologic repository. There was no
plan B. As the Blue Ribbon Commission explained, this decision
was widely viewed as political and provoked strong opposition
in Nevada where the legislation was poorly received.
Ever since Congress decided to short-circuit the site
selection process it established 5 years earlier, the State of
Nevada, the majority of its citizens, have opposed the Yucca
Mountain project. In 2002, President Bush recommended the Yucca
Mountain site to Congress. Using the State veto procedures set
forth in the Nuclear Waste Policy Act, Nevada then filed an
official notice of disapproval of the site. Congress proceeded
to override Nevada's veto by enacting a resolution that was
marked up in this Energy and Commerce Committee.
Twenty-five years after the 1987 amendments to the Nuclear
Waste Policy Act, it is clear that this top-down, Federally-
mandated approach has not worked.
The Department of Energy has terminated its Yucca Mountain
activities. Last year, and again this year, Congress has
provided no funding for Yucca Mountain, even the biggest
advocates for Yucca Mountain in the Republican House have not
acted to provide any funding. In light of the poor track record
of the current top-down approach, President Obama directed
Secretary Chu to charter a Blue Ribbon Commission to perform a
comprehensive review of U.S. policies for managing nuclear
waste and to recommend a new strategy. The Blue Ribbon
Commission spent nearly 2 years conducting this review and its
recommendations are timely.
The Commission recommendations deserve our serious
consideration. They raise a number of important policy
questions, such as whether a new organization should be
established to address the nuclear waste problem, how the
nuclear waste funds should be used, and whether one or more
centralized storage facilities should be developed in addition
to one or more geologic repositories.
Answering these questions requires an open mind and a
willingness to move past the narrow obsession with Yucca
Mountain. It is time to move forward and today's hearing is a
good first step. I thank our witnesses for being here today to
share their views and I thank them for their contribution and
their work on this Commission, which I hope will be helpful to
us. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
Mr. Waxman. I yield back my time.
Mr. Shimkus. Then what I would like to do, asking unanimous
consent, is I will put 10 minutes on the clock and we will let
you all give your opening statements. This is a very important
period of time, and so I don't know how you plan to split,
maybe 5 minutes each. So we will put 10 minutes on and then go
from there, and just don't be worried about the clock too much.
I would now like to recognize our former colleague Mr. Hamilton
for as much time as he may consume.

STATEMENTS OF LEE HAMILTON AND BRENT SCOWCROFT, CO-CHAIRS, BLUE
RIBBON COMMISSION ON AMERICA'S NUCLEAR FUTURE

STATEMENT OF LEE HAMILTON

Mr. Hamilton. To allow us to come before.
Mr. Shimkus. Still having trouble.
Mr. Hamilton. Is that on now?
Mr. Shimkus. Yes.
Mr. Hamilton. Thank you. I ask unanimous consent of course
that the full testimony be submitted.
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Hamilton. We are very grateful to you and appreciate
the leadership this subcommittee and the full committee have
shown over a period of years on a lot of our biggest challenges
in the Nation. Certainly, the topic that we present to you
today, managing nuclear spent fuel and high-level nuclear
waste.
It is a rare privilege for me to have the opportunity to
work with General Scowcroft. By any measure, he is one of the
great Americans, and a distinct privilege for me to be with
him, but also with the other 13 members of the Commission
appointed by Secretary Chu. They really were an outstanding
group, talented and dedicated in every way, and their
professionalism contributed to the unanimity of the report.
What I will do is take the first part of our testimony, and
General Scowcroft will take the second part, and we will take
up the full 10 minutes, perhaps a little more.
As has been stated here several times this morning already,
the nuclear waste management program is at a real impasse, it
has been in deep trouble for decades. One or two of you in this
room are old enough to remember when Congressman Mo Udall
stepped on the floor of the House of Representatives 30 or 40
years ago, I am not sure when, and said to us shame on us
because we haven't solved the problem of what to do with
nuclear waste. That was decades ago, and here we are and the
process has about completely broken down. It has been decades
going along this current path and it has led to controversy,
litigation and protracted delay, and, most of all, not a
solution.
This is a serious failure of the American government, and
it has had real consequences which Chairman Emeritus Barton has
already referred to. Our failure to come to grips with this
problem has meant that we are slowing down for sure, damaging
the prospects of a very important potential energy supply,
nuclear energy. It has damaged our State-Federal relationships
very sharply, and it has caused the public to lose confidence
in the Federal Government's competence to solve the problem,
and it has damaged America's standing in the world and its
leadership. We cannot really claim to be a leader in nuclear
power if we can't solve one of the fundamental problems that
exist with nuclear power what do with the nuclear waste, and of
course, we haven't solved that.
Likewise, the whole inability to solve the problem has been
very costly. It has been costly to the ratepayers who have to
continue to pay for nuclear waste management, a solution that
has not yet been delivered. It has been costly to communities
who have been unwilling hosts of long-term nuclear waste
storage; it has certainly been costly to the American
taxpayers, who face billions of dollars now every year in
liabilities as a result of our failure to meet our
responsibilities here.
And underlying all of this is really an obligation, an
ethical obligation, if you will, to avoid burdening future
generations with finding a safe, permanent solution for
hazardous materials that they did not create, we created them.
And we are about ready to hand over to them the problem we
created without a solution unless we move forward promptly.
So there is a real urgency here, 65,000 metric ton
inventory of spent nuclear fuel spread across the country,
growing at the rate of about 2,000 metric tons per year, and I
think all of us can agree that the status quo is not
acceptable.
Now we have eight key elements of our recommendations, they
are integrated, in other words, they are packaged in our point
of view, all are necessary to establish a truly nuclear
national nuclear waste management system. I will talk about
three and General Scowcroft will talk about the others. I will
try to be quite brief.
The first one, of course, is a new consent-based approach
to siting future nuclear waste management facilities. You, in
some of your opening statements, referred to this. We have had,
over a period of years, a top-down forced solution to the
problem and it has not worked. In a sense, we are faced with a
choice in this Nation, and the choice is we can continue along
to fight the same battles we have been fighting for decades
now, 30 or more years, with no conclusion, or we can step back
and try to chart a new course, and that is what we are trying
to recommend to you with this consent-based approach.
The top-down forced solution, trying to force a solution
over the objections of State and local communities is not
efficient, it takes longer, costs more, has lower odds of
ultimate success. The approach we recommend is adaptive, it is
staged, it is consent-based. It is based on a review of
successful siting processes in the United States, the WIPP
project in New Mexico, and of course, in several other
countries around the world, Spain, Finland and Sweden among
them. We believe this type of consent-based approach has the
best chance of succeeding and building the confidence that is
needed to get these controversial facilities through to
completion.
The second recommendation we make is to say that a new
organization has to be created here to handle the waste
management program, and it has to be empowered with the
authority to act, and it has to have the resources to succeed.
The DOD has wrestled with this problem for a long time, for
more than 50 years. That record has not inspired confidence,
created a lot of criticism, we heard an awful lot of criticism
during the 2 years in the way in which that program has been
handled. The Commission has concluded, thus, that a new
institutional leadership is needed and we specifically
recommend a congressionally-chartered Federal corporation.
There are other organizational structures that the committee
may want to consider, we looked at some of those, but we think
this is best suited to provide the stability and the focus and
the credibility that you need in order to put a waste product--
waste management system in place.
The new organization to succeed would have to get the waste
program back on track, and it will need a substantial degree of
implementing authority and a sure access to funding.
Throughout, of course, there will have to be rigorous oversight
by the Congress of this new organization and the appropriate
government agencies.
The third point I want to make, the third of our
recommendations is that access to the funds that the nuclear
ratepayers are now paying, are now providing for the purpose of
waste management must be available to this new organization so
that it has the resources to move forward. The 1982 Nuclear
Waste Policy Act, which has already been referred to, had a
polluter-pay theme, or funding mechanism, to ensure that the
full cost of disposing of commercial spent fuel would be paid
by the utilities, or their ratepayers obviously, with no impact
on taxpayers or the Federal budget.
For a variety of reasons, and for many reasons really, this
fund has not worked as intended. A series of executive and
congressional actions has made the annual fee revenues, which
are approximately $750 million a year, and the unspent $25
billion balance in the fund effectively inaccessible to the
waste program. Instead, the waste program must compete today
for funding, and is, therefore, subject to exactly the budget
constraints and uncertainties that the fund was created to
avoid. We think that situation has to be remedied right away to
allow the program to succeed. And we make several
recommendations as to how that should be done. For the balance
of our testimony, I turn to General Scowcroft.
Mr. Shimkus. You are recognized, General Scowcroft.

STATEMENT OF BRENT SCOWCROFT

Mr. Scowcroft. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, may I
just say that it is an honor for me to participate on an issue
so deeply in the national interest, and it is a delight to work
with my co-chairman, former Congressman Lee Hamilton, whom I
have knowledge and worked with for decades.
The fourth element of our recommendations are prompt
efforts to develop one or more geological disposal facilities.
The conclusion that disposal is needed in deep geologic
disposal is the scientifically-preferred approach has been
reached by every expert panel that has looked at this issue,
and by every other country that is pursuing a nuclear waste
management program.
Moreover, all fuel processing or recycle options either are
already available or under active development at this time
still generate waste streams that require a permanent disposal
solution. We believe permanent disposal will very likely also
be needed to safely manage, at least some portions of the
commercial spent fuel inventory.
The Commission recognizes the current law establishes Yucca
Mountain in Nevada as the site for the first repository for
spent fuel and high-level waste. Provided the licensed
application submitted by DOE meets relevant requirements. Our
Blue Ribbon Commission was not chartered as a siting
commission; accordingly, we have not evaluated Yucca Mountain
or any other particular location as a potential site for the
storage or disposal of spent nuclear fuel and high-level waste.
Nor have we taken a position on the administration's request to
withdraw the license application. We simply note that
regardless of what happens with Yucca Mountain, the U.S.
inventory of spent nuclear fuel will soon exceed the amount
that can be legally in place at this site until a second
repository is in operation.
So under current law, the United States will need to find a
new disposal site, even if Yucca Mountain goes forward. We
believe the approach set forth here provides the best strategy
for assuring continuing progress regardless of the fate of
Yucca Mountain.
The fifth element of our recommendations are efforts to
develop one or more consolidated storage facilities. And here,
let me point out the difference between storage and disposal.
Storage is a temporary condition, disposal is a permanent
condition, although retrievability is a possible issue there.
Developing consolidated interim storage capacity would
allow the Federal Government to begin the orderly transfer of
spent fuel from reactor sites to safe and secure centralized
facilities, independent of the schedule for opening and
operating a permanent repository. The arguments in favor of
consolidated storage are strongest for the so-called stranded
spent fuel, that is, fuel from shutdown plant sites of which
there are nine presently across the country.
Stranded fuel should be first in line for transfer to a
consolidated facility so these plant sites can be completely
decommissioned and put to other beneficial uses.
Looking beyond the issue of today's stranded fuel, the
availability of consolidated storage would provide valuable
flexibility in the nuclear waste management system that could
achieve significant cost savings for both ratepayers and
taxpayers when a significant additional number of plants are
shut down in the future. It can provide emergency backup
storage in the event spent fuel needs to be moved quickly from
a reactor site and would provide an excellent platform for
ongoing R&D to better understand how storage systems currently
in use at commercial and DOE sites perform over time.
The sixth element of our recommendations are prompt efforts
to prepare for the eventual large scale transport of spent
nuclear fuel and high-level waste to consolidated storage and
disposal sites when such facilities become available.
The current system of standards and regulations governing
the transport of spent fuel and other nuclear materials has
functioned very well, and the safety record for past shipments
of these types of materials is excellent. That being said, past
experiences in the United States and abroad and extensive
comments to this Commission indicate many people fear the
transport of nuclear materials. Thus greater transport demands
for nuclear materials are likely to raise new public concerns.
In order to deal with these concerns, while ensuring the
highest level of transport safety, the Commission believes that
State, Tribal and local officials should be extensively
involved in transportation planning and should be given the
resources necessary to discharge their roles and obligations in
this area. Given that transportation represents a crucial link
in the overall storage and disposal system, it would be
important to allow substantial lead time to assess and resolve
transportation issues well in advance of when materials would
be expected to actually begin shipping to a new facility.
Historically some programs have treated transportation planning
as an afterthought. No successful programs have done so.
The seventh recommendation we have is support for advances
in nuclear energy technology and for workforce development.
Advances in nuclear energy technology have the potential to
deliver an array of benefits across a wide range of energy
policy goals. The Commission believes these benefits, in light
of the environmental and energy challenges the United States
and the world will confront this century, justify public and
private sector support for RD&D on advanced reactor and fuel
cycle technology.
In the near term, opportunities exist to improve the safety
and performance of existing water reactors and spent fuel and
high-level waste storage transportation and disposal system. In
the longer term, the possibility exists to advance game-
changing innovations that offer potentially large advantages
over current technologies and systems.
Additionally, the Commission recommends increased support
for ongoing work by the NRC to develop a regulatory framework
for advanced nuclear energy systems. Such a framework can guide
the design of new systems in lower barriers to commercial
investment by increasing confidence that new systems can be
successfully licensed.
The Commission also recommends expanded Federal joint labor
management and university-based support for advanced science
technology, engineering and mathematics training to develop the
skill workforce needed to support an effective waste management
program, as well as viable domestic nuclear energy. The
stalemate we have faced over the years has paid enormous cost
in the workforce and skills.
At the same time, the Department of Energy and the nuclear
energy industry should work to ensure that valuable existing
capabilities and assets, including the critical infrastructure
on human expertise are maintained.
On our last recommendation, is an observation really,
active U.S. leadership is essential in international efforts to
address issues of safety nonproliferation and security. As more
nations consider pursuing nuclear energy or expanding their
nuclear programs, U.S. leadership is urgently needed on issues
of safety, particularly in light of events at Fukushima,
nonproliferation, security and counterterrorism issues.
Many countries, especially those just embarking on
commercial nuclear power development, have relatively small
programs and they lack the regulatory and oversight resources
available to countries with more established programs.
International assistance may be required to ensure they do not
create disproportionate safety, physical security and
proliferation risks.
In many cases, mitigating these risks will depend less on
technological interventions than on the ability to strengthen
international institutions and safeguards while promoting
multilateral coordination and cooperation.
From the U.S. perspective, two further points are
particularly important, first, with so many players in the
international and nuclear energy and policy arena, the United
States will increasingly have to lead by engagement and by
example. Second, the United States cannot exercise effective
leadership on issues related to the back end of the fuel cycle
so long as its own program is in disarray. Effective domestic
policies are needed to support America's international agenda.
To conclude, the problem of nuclear waste may be unique in
the sense there is wide agreement about the outlines of the
solution, put very simply, we know what we have to do, we know
we have to do it, and we even know how to do it. Experience in
the United States and abroad has shown that suitable sites for
deep geologic repository for nuclear waste can be identified
and developed. The knowledge and experience we need are in
hand, and the necessary funds have been and are being
collected.
The core difficulty actually remains what it has always
been, finding a way to site these inherently controversial
activities--facilities and to conduct the waste management
program in a manner that allows all stakeholders, but most
especially, host communities, States and tribes to conclude
that their interests have been adequately protected and their
well-being enhanced, not merely sacrificed and overridden by
the larger interest of the country as a whole.
We believe the conditions for progress are arguably more
promising than they have been in some time, but we will only
know if we start, which is what we urge the administration and
the Congress to do without delay.
We thank you for allowing us to meet with you today. And we
intend to submit a full version of our testimony for the
record, and we look forward to your questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, I thank my colleagues for sitting
patiently.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hamilton and Mr. Scowcroft
follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. I think it was very important. You both have
earned the ability to speak for as long as you want, based upon
your service to this country. So thank you. Now I would like to
recognize myself for the first 5 minutes.
I did go through the report and the advisory committee
charter and all the--who actually told the Commission not to
consider Yucca Mountain? Was it a statement by any one
individual or--
Mr. Hamilton. We had a statement from Secretary Chu.
Mr. Shimkus. So it was Secretary Chu who said do not
consider Yucca Mountain in the Blue Ribbon Commission report?
Mr. Hamilton. I will quote him precisely. ``What I don't
want the committee to be doing is just spending time and saying
by looking at past history was Yucca Mountain a good decision
or a bad decision, and whether it can be used as a future
repository.'' He followed that up by saying to us, ``This is
not a citing commission.'' And then he reiterated that in a
letter to us.
Mr. Shimkus. Great, thank you. I have a lot of questions so
I am going to try to be pretty brief. The Commission did not
evaluate and take a position on the technical suitability of
Yucca Mountain; is that correct?
Mr. Hamilton. That is correct.
Mr. Shimkus. The Commission did not take a position
regarding the request to withdraw the license application for
Yucca Mountain; is that correct?
Mr. Hamilton. That is correct.
Mr. Shimkus. The Commission did not evaluate the
possibility of public acceptance of Yucca Mountain should the
NRC complete and provide a positive safety evaluation; is that
correct?
Mr. Hamilton. That is correct.
Mr. Shimkus. I want to underscore this, because you address
a lot on this consent-based approach, right. It is all through
the report.
Mr. Hamilton. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. It is hard to get to a final consent-based
approach when we are stopped from funding the final scientific
report. Don't you think a final scientific report might help
educate the locals and develop a consent-based approach?
I am not trying to be tricky, but having scientific--the
final report on a suitability of a site, wouldn't that be
helpful to develop a consent-based approach?
Mr. Hamilton. Well, our--we have to be very clear here as I
think we have been that we are not taking--have not taken a
position on Yucca, did not study it, were not asked to study
it.
Mr. Shimkus. But the question is----
Mr. Hamilton. Yes, having said that, obviously evaluating
that experience can teach us a lot.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, but just generally, if there is a
scientific report due on a site, should that be finished in
helping develop a consent-based approach of whether that site--
don't you think the local community would like to see the final
scientific study?
Mr. Hamilton. Well, I suspect the answer to that question
carries a lot of weight with regard to Yucca, and it is
impossible really to divorce the question from that context.
Mr. Shimkus. Always a politician, you can't get away from--
I will just move on, you understand--is it true that the
Commission's recommendations could be implemented with Yucca
Mountain's development?
Mr. Hamilton. Yes.
Mr. Scowcroft. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Nothing in this report forecloses Yucca
Mountain as a potential suitable site, correct?
Mr. Scowcroft. Correct.
Mr. Shimkus. Now, let me go--up on the chart there, I want
to talk about this debate that you had in this report on
locality. When I read the report, it was like kissing your
sister, you know, I mean, there is really not meat in some of
these specific issues of how to solve some of these problems.
So that is the State of Nevada. Hit the next slide. That is the
Federal land. Hit the next slide. And that square is
approximately the size in Finland of their disposal site. Now,
based upon that, which in the local community in that square
said, yes. Based upon that, who would be local?
Mr. Scowcroft. Well, that is a very good question.
Mr. Shimkus. One that I came up with myself. Very good.
Mr. Scowcroft. One of the problems is the definition of
consent, and it is especially true in our Federal system. And
while Secretary--Mr. Hamilton described the Spanish, the Finns
and the Swedes as having solved this problem, they don't have
exactly the same kind of jurisdictional issues that we have.
Mr. Shimkus. Let me go to finish this. My time is running
out. So I would argue that the Federal Government is a local
entity here, the Federal Government, we are the locals, we own
the land.
Mr. Scowcroft. We own the land.
Mr. Shimkus. Then go to the next. I think that is Nye
County. They support Yucca Mountain. We have a commissioner
back here, I saw him, you probably know him, Gary Hollis, from
Nye County. We have their report saying we support this.
Next slide, next slide, next. OK, and then the counties are
popping up, their names Esmerelda, Mineral, keep going, keep
going. OK, all these localities have endorsed the siting of
Yucca Mountain, and I am sure they testified in front of you.
There is a lot more, I will have time to go with the second
panel. But I think it is safe to say that because one U.S.
Senator doesn't want the site, that is not speaking for the
locals, and I yield back the balance of my time.
I would like to recognize Mr. Green for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and we can spend a lot
of time, and I think we will with the second panel on consent
on the State and local community. I was out there and I met
with all those County commissioners, a number of them and they
are very supportive. It is a beautiful area but not a lot of
people out there. I guess the people are in Las Vegas and Reno
and Nevada. I guess from my experience when I was in Sweden and
looked at Sweden had built a prototype of a deep facility, much
more advanced even their prototype. And we asked the folks
there, is this where ultimately--oh, no, this is our
experimental facilities because that region and whatever they
call them in Sweden stayed or local community would not have
agreed to it if they thought it was a permanent site.
Now, maybe 20 years from now or whatever they may change
that on the national government can make that, but consent is
always tough, because that is why in the 1980s, I assume
Congress just made the decision.
But let me get to some recommendations on your panel. And
first of all, I want thank you for appearing before the
committee and thank all the other commissioners for producing a
really good report, I think. A couple issues I want to talk
about. The report stated believes there is enough funding in
the nuclear waste fund to take care of all the activities
related to the siting, possibly two new waste disposal
facilities not including Yucca Mountain, as well as one more
interim facility.
Right now the nuclear waste fund contains about $27
billion, which seems like enough money, but once you include
funding for a new independent organization, which I think might
be what we need to move off dead center and all the other
logistical details surrounding the siting, could we face a
problem at that nuclear waste fund would not have enough
funding? And how did you come up with the conclusion that the
current stream or waste fund dollars recover all the costs
associated with your recommendations?
Mr. Hamilton. Well, we were very sensitive, of course, to
the whole question of the impact on the deficit and the Federal
spending issue. And by the very nature of these
recommendations, precise cost estimates really are not
possible. We think that the costs are something that can be
managed within current spending streams, if you would, within
the Department of Energy and perhaps other places.
In other words, the waste management recommendations can be
implemented with existing revenue streams that are already
dedicated for that purpose, as nearly as we can estimate. But
we do not have precise estimates. We call, for example, as you
know, and several of you have cited for a new organization,
that is going to cost some money. We didn't try to make
estimates of that. And there are other things here that would
require expenditures. So we don't have exact information of it.
It is impossible to estimate the cost of the nuclear waste
program without knowing the specific sites that are going to be
developed. And of course, we don't that at this point.
Mr. Green. Well, now, Lee, I only have a minute and a half
left, did the Commission discuss anything what would happen if
we didn't have it? My next question, I want to get to the
legislative changes, because that is something our committee
has jurisdiction on. You recommend some of the legislative
changes allowed to proceed to the independent organization, can
you explain any of those, or if you have a summary of those,
can you provide them to the committee? I know its in the
report.
Mr. Hamilton. Yes, we have a summary on the page, Roman
numeral VIII of the executive summary. We have a chart on
proposed legislative changes that I think can sum it up. What
we say, broadly speaking, is there are six areas that you have
to look at: A new facility siting process, consolidated interim
storage facilities, broadening support the jurisdictions
affected by transportation, establishing a new waste management
organization, establishing access to dedicated funding, and
promoting international engagements. So there is a lot for the
Congress to do here and the specifics are pretty well spelled
out within the report.
Mr. Green. My last question is and you heard my opening
statement about reprocessing. It doesn't really reduce the
footprint very much, but it also creates, and again, I was in
France in 1998, and then just last year again and saw their
reprocessing site there in Normandy expand substantially. That
is almost an interim storage facility for them. Did the
Commission talk at all about reprocessing as an option?
Mr. Scowcroft. Well, we did look at reprocessing and we are
in favor of research and development going forward, but no form
of reprocessing eliminates the issue of waste. And so, you
know, we use only about 1 percent of the energy value of the
nuclear fuel we use now. Certainly we can do better I think,
but we just recommend that R&D go forward to see if we cannot
improve the whole nuclear fuel cycle to make it more effective,
but whatever what happens, we don't see the possibility of
eliminating the need for waste facilities.
Mr. Green. Thank you for letting me run over time, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the chairman of the Energy and Power Subcommittee,
Mr. Whitfield, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much. I also want to thank
you all for appearing here today, and also thank you for the
hard work that you have put forward in coming up with some
suggestions for the U.S. Congress. I must say to you, and
certainly none of this is your fault, but I was reading the
testimony of Mr. Schatz, who is the President Citizens Against
Government Waste, and in his testimony, he says the Yucca
Mountain project owes its ultimate demise to years of delays,
manipulation and obstructionism by Senate majority leader Harry
Reid, and the exigencies of election-year politics.
I for one--I am not really going to have much of a
question, but I think the American people would be in an uproar
of rage if they knew all the facts surrounding what has
happened since 1983 when the Nuclear Waste Policy Act was
signed by President Reagan. In 1987, DOE conducted studies of
nine potential repository sites. Congress selected Yucca
Mountain soon after that.
In 2002, following extensive evaluation of the site by DOE
in its National Laboratories, the Secretary of Energy
determined Yucca Mountain was suitable for repository
development and recommended that the President approve the
site. The President did approve the site, the Congress approved
the site, and June 3rd, 2008, after additional scientific and
engineering studies on development and design, DOE submitted a
license application to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission
seeking construction authority for the repository. The NRC
docketed the license application in September 2008 and directed
the body to conduct a review within 4 years looking at all of
this in preparation to issue a license to construct.
And before that 4 years was up, Secretary Chu filed a
motion within NRC's construction authorization board to
withdraw the license application, and then the board denied the
DOE's motion to withdraw the application. And then Chairman
Jaczko delayed and delayed and so the whole thing has fallen
apart.
And Congressman Hamilton, you made the comment, this is a
serious failure. I think it is one of the most significant
failures of the American policy on an energy issue ever. You
also said that it damaged the American standing in the world
and I agree with that completely. And then when you look on top
of that, that we spent $15 billion on this site, the Department
of Justice spent $188 million in legal fees when some of the
104 nuclear power plants filed the lawsuits because the
government could not meet its contractual obligation to take
possession of the material, and now DOE is saying well, the
ultimate liability legally may be 20 billion, but some of the
people in the energy field, the nuclear energy field say the
ultimate liability may be 50 billion.
So I think the American people have every right to be
totally upset and irate about what has happened in this
instance which clearly shows pure politics by the President, by
the Secretary of Energy by Mr. Jaczko, and by Senator Harry
Reid.
And I hope, I agree with Chairman Shimkus, I hope, since
you all were not asked to look at Yucca Mountain or render any
opinion on Yucca Mountain, I hope that there is some way we can
continue at Yucca Mountain myself, because it would be a vast
waste of human resources, financial resources if we cannot do
it. Having said that, I just want to thank you all for this
report to the Secretary of Energy, it is quite comprehensive,
but I, for one, feel it is a travesty that we find ourselves in
this situation today and I yield back my 5 seconds.
Mr. Shimkus. The Chair appreciates the gentleman's
question. And now I would like to recognize my friend
Congressman Capps from California for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate very
much both of you being here today and your testimony, and also
the work of the Commission, the work you have done to
investigate these issues which are particularly relevant to my
State of California, given the logistical challenges we face in
the storage and transport of spent fuel, as well as more
pressing seismic concerns, which really have yet to be fully
addressed.
As you know, three of California's civilian power reactors
are located directly on the Pacific Rim: Humboldt Bay, San
Onofre, and in my Congressional district, Diablo Canyon. At
present, Diablo Canyon and San Onofre, both of which reside in
highly active seismic zones, are scheduled for decommissioning
between 2022 and 2025. And both are currently storing high-
level radioactive waste on the site, both in pools as well as
dry cask. New seismic unknowns are also emerging, such as the
discovery in 2008 of the Shoreline fault less than a mile from
the Diablo Canyon spent fuel storage casks. I would note that
the current seismic analysis is still incomplete on that fault
system.
Further, the NRC acknowledges the special seismic
circumstances of California's nuclear reactors in its draft
generic EIS for license renewal of nuclear plants. I know that
you agree that placing radioactive waste in the presence of
seismic forces is an issue we must treat with utmost care. So
before I get to some questions on reprocessing, which I would
like to do, I would want to ask you to share with us any
general comments on the topic of storing spent fuel in dry
casks as opposed to pools in seismically-active sites. For
example, over the past couple of years the Commission has been
active, what did you hear or learn about this issue if you
would share, please?
Mr. Scowcroft. We have looked at that issue, and we are
examining it further in the light of the Fukushima----
Mrs. Capps. Yes.
Mr. Scowcroft [continuing]. Which could be very valuable in
analyzing some--it is not clear for example on the Fukushima
how much of the problem came from the earthquake and how much
from the tsunami, and you don't have the tsunami problems that
Japan has in California.
Mrs. Capps. No.
Mr. Scowcroft. That is--there has been research under dry
cask and it is very positive, but for the first 5 years after
the fuel is removed, it needs to be in wet storage, after that
it can be put in dry storage, and one of the things we would
like to see is the temporary storage places to evaluate what
happens under longer conditions of storage and security and
earthquakes and so on, to that. But the reports that we got
were that dry storage is a very promising way to go.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you.
Mr. Hamilton. Congresswoman Capps, you probably saw the
article in The Wall Street Journal this morning about you
Nuclear Regulatory Commission's actions with regard to
earthquake damage in present nuclear reactors in this country,
they are obviously worried about it and they are thinking of
further requirements, apparently further studies. Fukushima
happened as we were in process, and obviously it turned our
thoughts as it did all persons interested in nuclear power to
the question of safety. What we ended up recommending, because
there is so many complications here was that the National
Academy of Sciences conduct a thorough review of the lessons
learned from Fukushima, I think they are going to do that, it
may already be underway. There are others that can speak to
that----
On the safety and security of these current storage
arrangements, we simply didn't have the technical expertise or
the time, frankly, to get into that in great detail.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I know this is going
to go over a little bit, but I would like to pose my question
on reprocessing options, and if there is no time to answer
verbally they can get back to me.
And just to the point of your saying there hasn't been time
currently and more studies need to be done, one concern that
many of my constituents have is over the relicensing process
while these needs for further study continue, which poses a
challenge because the licensing process is under way, at least
in Diablo Canyon. But I am also very concerned about the
reprocessing situation in light of all these with the
earthquake fault possibilities. And my understanding is that
reprocessing options produce radioactive streams, waste
streams, that would need to be disposed of, is that correct?
Mr. Scowcroft. Yes, that is correct.
Mrs. Capps. So----
Mr. Scowcroft. No kind of reprocessing at present that we
know can eliminate the need for waste disposal.
Mrs. Capps. And does that underscore your statement to a
previous question that this is not going to eliminate the need
for a permanent geologic repository?
Mr. Hamilton. That is correct. It is simply premature to
make a judgment now based on the technical information that is
available as to whether or not you proceed with recycling and
reprocessing, so-called closing the nuclear fuel cycle.
Mrs. Capps. Would you be willing to estimate how much time
and money it would take to redevelop and commercialize a
processing technology that could fundamentally alter the waste
management challenge we face? Do you see what posing those two
challenges sort of simultaneously to--this is all within a time
frame. What kind of resources and time would it take to do
this?
Mr. Hamilton. I just don't think we are competent to answer
that question. Listen, that is the reason we recommend going
forward with more research and development here. There are so
many open-ended questions that need to be resolved, and that is
one of them.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady's time is expired.
In part of the report you have spent nuclear fuel, but you
also have nuclear waste. And they do talk a lot about the
Department of Defense waste in Hanford and all that stuff that
was designed to go to Yucca Mountain, too. So there is other
waste than just spent nuclear fuel that is to go to these
depositories?
Mr. Hamilton. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Now I would like to recognize Congressman
Barton for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Chairman. We have two hearings going
on. We have the FDA Commissioner downstairs in the Health
Subcommittee, so that is why some of us are yo-yoing back and
forth. I want to pick your two gentlemen's brains on this
consent-based approach that you talk about in your
recommendations. Is there a technical evaluation of sites
before you go through the consent-based process, or could
anybody--just take an extreme case, if New York City wanted to
apply, could they apply without any technical evaluation of
their site at all?
Mr. Scowcroft. I think the notion is that there would,
first of all, be a technical evaluation of what general areas
are suitable so that we didn't go down this consent process
with something that technologically was not accurate.
Mr. Barton. So you would put out some sort of a technical
requirement list and if you felt like you met the technical
requirements and got approval based on technical merit,
whatever that was, then there would kick in this consent-based
process?
Mr. Scowcroft. Right. That is basically it. Although even
that could be iterative. A community could come up and say we
want to have a site, and then a quick evaluation could show
that the terrain is not suitable.
Mr. Hamilton. We recommend that the EPA develop generic
disposal standards and supporting regulatory requirements. Very
early in the siting process that has to be done.
Mr. Barton. You are recommending the EPA do it----
Mr. Hamilton. That is right.
Mr. Barton [continuing]. And not NRC? You just set your
program back 10 years.
Mr. Hamilton. I think under current law EPA would have that
responsibility. I stand to be corrected on that. That is my
understanding of that. But anyway, the Federal Government
should set the standards, whether it is EPA or DOE or somebody
else.
Look, this consent-based process, I don't want to give the
impression we think it is easy. It is a very complex process.
You can't sit down and spell out in detail exactly what has to
happen. This is going to be a matter of negotiations between
the parties. There has to be flexibility, transparency,
patience, consultation, all of these things in order to make it
work. In practical terms what I think you are talking about
here is encouraging communities to volunteer if they want some
of these sites, and clearly some of them do. There are a lot of
jobs created when you put these sites in place. And it would
also involve the entity that has the responsibility for
organizing this system of what you do with nuclear waste. They
may want to approach a community and provide incentives for
that community to put forward a proposal. You can't spell out
how all that is going to go. It is going to be a very elaborate
process, just as was followed in the New Mexico case where we
have successfully sited a waste facility.
Mr. Barton. Well, I have a question here that the staff has
provided that I want to ask. While your group has been
conducting your study, your committee, the Department of Energy
has been dismantling the waste disposal office in DOE. How do
you go forward given what the Department of Energy has done in
their nuclear waste office cutback and their abandonment, at
least at the secretarial level, of the Yucca project?
Mr. Scowcroft. Well, we recommend creating a new entity, a
Federal corporation, if you will, to take over those
responsibilities for siting construction.
Mr. Barton. Do you fund it with the funds that are being
collected now? Is that correct?
Mr. Scowcroft. Yes.
Mr. Hamilton. But there is an important point here. I don't
know how long it will take to create a new organization. You
would know.
Mr. Barton. Longer than you think.
Mr. Hamilton. I suspect you are right. You are at least
talking a year, maybe 2 years, maybe more. It is going to take
some time. Now, we don't want everything to come to a dead stop
while we are sitting around waiting for a new organization to
be built. And the DOE is going to have to move forward with a
number of the recommendations, I think, and begin a lot of the
process that we identify in the report with regard to siting
and with regard to transportation and all the rest of it so
that we can keep this process moving. We don't want a dead stop
here for 2 or 3 years while we wait to develop an organization.
Mr. Barton. My time is expired. Mr. Chairman, I have one
more question. Do you gentlemen and the other commissioners of
your Blue Ribbon Commission expect the Congress to act
legislatively on your recommendations in this Congress? In
other words, put a bill on the President's desk in the next 10
months?
Mr. Hamilton. We don't anticipate that. We would be
delighted if you did it, but we recognize the realities of it.
Look, we recommend----
Mr. Barton. You should say you do expect it.
Mr. Hamilton. We recommend a new organization, but we
recommend it only in very general terms. And the Congress would
have to fill in a lot of the details on that. So it is going to
take you time, and we would want you to take time to look at
that. Do I personally expect that you would have it done in
2012? The answer is no.
Mr. Scowcroft. But it is one of our priority
recommendations.
Mr. Barton. It is an honest answer. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time is expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentlewoman from California, Ms. Matsui, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
both of you for being here today. Thank you for your service.
Both of you have been called upon many times to deal with
challenging issues, and this is certainly the latest of them.
Commercial nuclear power's future I think depends a lot on what
we are talking about today, what we do at the back end,
particularly in light of Fukushima, which occurred almost a
year ago, and that really brought to fore some of the problems
inherent in nuclear power. And I am very concerned because I
believe unless we take care of this back end we are going to
have difficulties moving forward, and I don't want to wait for
another Fukushima again.
But at any rate, what I would like to kind of delve into, I
really looked at your consent-based siting and I think that is
a good way to go forward with. I think that is probably
something we would have to really look at in a positive manner.
I want to kind of drill down a little bit more because you
mentioned that there are nine commercial shutdown nuclear power
plant sites in the U.S. One of them is in my district, the
Rancho Seco power plant, which is owned by my local utility,
the Seco Municipal Utility District, which is a wonderful
utility, one of the top utilities in the country. Now, the
spent fuel is still stored at this site, so the question of how
we move forward to find a safe place to dispose of this spent
nuclear fuel is important to my district and to my
constituents.
Now, as you report, sites at all of these places the spent
fuel is monitored and well guarded, and they are, and is not
thought to present immediate safety or security concerns. But
the presence of this spent fuel at these sites is costly and
really prevents the use of those sites for more economically
productive uses that would benefit the communities.
So my question is, being very parochial about this, but I
have to be because I think it is an example of what lies ahead,
I would like to know whether the Commission regards a
recommendation of taking the stranded fuel from shutdown
reactors first as a must-do task regardless of the ultimate
decisions that are made on permanent disposal and reprocessing.
Mr. Scowcroft. I think the short answer is yes.
Ms. Matsui. OK. And you also, too, Mr. Hamilton.
Mr. Hamilton. Yes. We think the strongest case for
consolidated storage facilities can be made with regard to the
so-called stranded fuel. But we also think that that
consolidated storage facility is necessary for a variety of
reasons, safety is a big one, but it has advantages of
flexibility, it creates a backup storage capability, it is a
very excellent platform for research and development. There are
a lot of reasons why it is important to move this spent fuel
from these sites where it now is to consolidated storage. That
is an important one, stranded fuel.
Ms. Matsui. All right. That is great to know. On this
consent-based, on the siting aspect, we are also having to look
at the transport related activities, too. I would imagine
obviously where the sites are located would obviously sort of
be a determinant to a certain degree what kind of transport
activities would have to occur.
Do you foresee going through the same process with the
transport related activities, and many communities would be
along the way on the transport, transportation aspect, would
you look at this being more of a consent-based way of looking
at this as far as the transportation aspect of it also?
Mr. Hamilton. Well, in our original draft report we did not
address the question fully of transportation. In the final
report because of a lot of feedback we had on the draft report
we elaborated on transportation. We think it is a very big
large issue. The record of transporting spent fuel in this
country is very good. I don't think there has ever been a
really serious accident. However, if you create consolidated
storage facilities, several of them around the country, two or
three, you are obviously going to increase the amount of
transportation necessary to get to those storage facilities.
Ms. Matsui. Right.
Mr. Hamilton. All of us who have represented constituents
know that they are uneasy about transportation of nuclear waste
to the point that many communities are very--many people are
very fearful of it. So I think an enormous amount of work has
to be done to educate people about the safety of the process. A
lot of planning has to be done, a lot of preparation has to be
done, before you get to the point of major transportation of
this fuel. We have really got a psychological hurdle to get
over, I believe.
Ms. Matsui. So in essence then, though, the siting and the
transportation will have to be considered at the same time.
There might be some wonderful sites, but the transportation
aspects of it might be negative.
Mr. Hamilton. Absolutely, yes, indeed. It is a very
important part of our recommendations. If you cannot assure
people that you can transport this stuff safely you are going
to lose the battle.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady's time is expired. I would just
add, too, I think part of your report talked about the fund
money going to developing and build out transportation systems,
which is also I think a very valuable part of what you have
done.
Now the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Cassidy, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cassidy. Hi, gentlemen. I am privileged to be in front
of the two of you. I am struck in your report that you are even
pessimistic about the ability of a closed nuclear fuel cycle to
make a difference right now, and you mention that there are
concerns about the merits in commercial viability. You know
more about this than I, which is why I am asking the questions
and you are answering. But don't I know that European countries
and perhaps Japan have already implemented closed fuel cycles
and that in turn reduces waste by a quarter.
Now, first I will--that said, why would you--but your
statement is that you are concerned about the commercial and
scientific merits. So knowing that it is being done but knowing
that you have this concern, how do you reconcile the two?
Mr. Scowcroft. Well, I would say basically the notion is
that recycling is done for a variety of reasons. And in talking
with the experts on it no one was able to say that reprocessing
in order to reduce the amount of waste at the present time was
economically practical.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, I have read something by the CEO of
AREVA, the French concern that does nuclear, they claim that
now they reduce waste down to a quarter of what the waste would
be with their reprocessing. Now, is that hyperbole or is that
rooted in fact?
Mr. Hamilton. Well, what came through to us I think was
that, in listening to the experts, and I think neither the
General nor I qualify as experts here, is that there are just
enormous uncertainties that exist about the merits and the
commercial viability of different fuel cycles and the various
options you would have, technological options. Given that fact,
we didn't try to make a judgment there. We really weren't
qualified to do that I think.
Is reprocessing-recycling a possibility in the future? Of
course it is. And you are exactly right, several countries are
using it and are reducing, not eliminating, nuclear waste. But
I don't think our nuclear community, however defined, is quite
ready to say this is the future.
Mr. Cassidy. That is also what I don't understand, Mr.
Hamilton. Is it because of previous decisions made by, say,
President Carter that we have not committed to reprocessing, or
is there actually a technical barrier that our guys cannot
embrace? I hate to think the French can do better engineering
than we.
Mr. Hamilton. I do not know the answer as to why we are
where we are with regard to recycling. I think I am correct in
saying that, and maybe the panel that follows us will be better
qualified to answer that question, I think I am correct in
saying that the nuclear community at this point is not ready to
say that this is the best way to proceed reprocessing. Other
options have to be explored.
Mr. Scowcroft. I think that is correct. And most countries
who recycle, like France, don't do it to save money. And
recycling changes the nature of the waste stream. It also
isolates certain materials like plutonium which then become a
great security problem.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, let me ask you, if--it does seem though
if we are going to commit, as the President has committed, to
building some new nuclear power plants, that one, it would be a
logical time if we do have that technology to integrate the
two. But secondly, if you have the potential to decrease your
waste down to a fourth of what it would be, is it possible that
we could use this fund set up to manage the waste to partly
fund whatever Federal subsidies would be required, bond
guarantees, et cetera, for the development, assuming that we
could work out the issues of security for plutonium, et cetera?
Mr. Scowcroft. Well, to be honest, we didn't get into that
much detail about the allocation of funds. But we do recommend
that recycling options as well as research on new reactor
design continue, absolutely, without identifying the source.
Mr. Hamilton. I think the 1982 act makes it clear with this
polluter-pays concept behind it, that that is to be the funding
mechanism to ensure that all costs of disposing of commercial
fuel will be paid.
Mr. Cassidy. So if there is an alternative mechanism that
in the initial steps of disposal would decrease the volume
significantly, theoretically at least, that would be within the
kind of intent of the law?
Mr. Hamilton. That would be my understanding of the law. I
don't have the language of the law in front of me, but that
would be my understanding.
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you both. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time is expired. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Butterfield.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. Let me join Dr. Cassidy and
others for their extraordinary service to our country. Thank
you very much for coming back and thank you for your
willingness to tackle this incredibly important issue. I also
want to thank the other members of the Commission. All of you
have worked so hard.
As many of you know, I reside and represent a good portion
of the great State of North Carolina. My State has a robust
nuclear portfolio with nearly 30 percent of our electricity
provided at relatively low cost by nuclear energy. However, the
issue of waste disposal has been a concern, to put it mildly,
for many years. Even before I came to Congress I was concerned
about this, if for no other reason than it is expensive. North
Carolinians don't like to lose $900 million of their money to
what some people would call a worthless fund. Therefore, I want
to see this body and the regulators take steps to move beyond
the tired, unsuccessful battles of the past to something
productive and with real milestones. That said, I have several
questions about the report and hope that you can help me
clarify some of this.
I am intrigued by the idea of the consent-based approach to
siting a facility. However, I am a little doubtful about it. My
question is, what case studies, case studies, did the
Commission review in consent-based siting that have worked in
the past, and what lessons might be gleaned from those
experiences?
Either one of you may answer that.
Mr. Hamilton. Well, the successful example in this country
is the New Mexico plant, WIPP. One of the members of our
Commission was Senator Domenici, who had a lot to do with that
and of course could speak to it in great detail. But we
consider that an example of consent-based siting. Several of
the other countries, Sweden, Finland, Spain, have basically
followed a consent-based process that has been successful.
Mr. Butterfield. General, anything you could add to that?
Mr. Scowcroft. No.
Mr. Butterfield. Is it unlikely that a community, and one
of my colleagues made reference to New York City, that might be
an extreme example, but is it unlikely that a community might
have 100 percent support for such a site? I think that is
probably unlikely. How does the Commission think that we might
measure the whole notion of consent?
Mr. Scowcroft. That is one of the ambiguities in the term
``consent-based,'' and you all have a lot of experience in how
you determine consent. We think it has to be an iterative
process. The chairman pointed out the differences between
Nevada counties and Nevada State in terms of their attitude
toward Yucca. So how do you determine consent? We have a
section which discusses it in considerable length, but it is an
imprecise process and we say it needs to be iterative.
Mr. Hamilton. At the end of the day the parties have to
reach an agreement; that is, consent. And so if you want a test
as to whether or not you can get consent, the test is can the
parties reach an agreement voluntarily amongst themselves, the
parties being this new organization, local, State, tribal
communities. So that is the key. But as I tried to suggest,
this process is going to be complex, it is not something you
are going to be able to predict ahead of time. The parties are
going to have to work it out. But we think it has to have the
characteristics we have spelled out in the report. It has to be
adaptive, it has to be flexible, transparent, there has to be a
lot of consultation involved, and there has to be a lot of give
and take back and forth. But the test of consent will be can
you reach an agreement.
Mr. Butterfield. But you certainly mean more than 50
percent?
Mr. Hamilton. What is that?
Mr. Butterfield. You simply mean more than 50 percent or a
simple majority of the affected?
Mr. Hamilton. I would think so. You are talking about a lot
of different bodies here. You are talking about tribal
governments, you are talking about State governments, local
governments, county governments, city governments, there are
all kinds of people, Federal Government, that can get into the
act here and will because there is a lot at stake. And we don't
suggest that process is going to come smoothly; it is going to
take a lot of work and a lot of skill to negotiate these
agreements.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you, gentlemen. You have been very
kind. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time is expired. I now
recognize the gentleman from New Hampshire, Mr. Bass, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bass. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank you
gentlemen for being here today. Thanks to the wonders of modern
communication or the Internet, I would like to read you a brief
paragraph from the Nashwood Telegraph, Monday, February 17,
1986. I was a sophomore State legislator at the time. It says,
not in my backyard you won't. Nobody wants a nuclear waste
disposal site next door. Nobody wants a nuclear waste disposal
site in their neighborhood. Nobody wants a nuclear waste
disposal site in their town. Nobody wants a nuclear waste
disposal site in their area. Nobody wants a nuclear waste site
in their State. OK, that takes care of the United States. And
then it goes on to discuss the fact that Hillsborough, New
Hampshire, which is about 15 miles from my home, is not the
right place to locate what is now Yucca Mountain.
Having qualified myself there, I say to you that you have
in your testimony, quote, that we need an explicitly adaptive,
staged and consent-based process. And I know you have addressed
that question to Mr. Butterfield most recently and understand
the problems associated with that. It is my view that 27
years--1986--27, is that right, 26, 27 years later we are where
we are today, and it would be a shame if we had to go back to
1986 again at the cost--you know, the torture that we would go
through as a Nation to get to where we were in 1986, it would
hardly be worth the cost, you know the benefit for that.
My question for you gentlemen is do you have
recommendations in your report as to what the DOE should do
now? I understand that this report process, and so forth, has
cost $5 million or $4 million. Do you have any specific
recommendations to the Department of Energy for the short term,
for short-term action?
Mr. Scowcroft. Well, if I could make a comment on your
general notion. What we determined in our research is that the
approach we use, which is a top-down approach, you do it,
hasn't worked. And in New Mexico with the WIPP plant and in
Sweden and in Finland and approaching in Canada, the approach
of consent, come to an agreement on it, show the advantages,
make it worthwhile, is showing promise, and that is why we are
recommending that approach to it.
Mr. Bass. But I think you also recognize the fact that
these nations have different governmental structures and
cultures, and so forth, that make it easier for that.
Mr. Scowcroft. No question about that.
Mr. Bass. And I can tell you from personal experience that
this is 1986. By 19--let's see, where are we in the
presidential cycle? We are the first in the Nation primary.
Every single candidate that came to New Hampshire had to vow on
a Bible that they would never support a nuclear waste site in
New Hampshire, otherwise they wouldn't get a single vote. I am
just giving you the historical context here. That is the way
our system is and that is how it works.
Mr. Hamilton. We spell out in the 13th chapter of the
report the actions that the DOE needs to take right now and in
the future. I can read that to you but I don't think it is
necessary to do it. We gave a lot of thought to your question
as to what do you do now and what does the DOE have to do, what
does the Congress have to do, and we tried to spell that out in
one of the chapters of the report. That is not, incidentally,
in the executive summary.
Mr. Bass. Thank you. I would conclude by saying that I was
taken by Chairman Shimkus' slide showing the level of consent,
if you will, that exists today in the region. Knowing what this
country has gone through to get where it is today not to
consider this site and move forward on it I think is a terrible
mistake. And I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. Just for
clarification to people who are watching us here, the rules of
the committee say that if you are a member of a subcommittee
then you get to ask questions first. We are joined by Mr.
Inslee. He is going to patiently wait until his time to come.
So I would now recognize Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. Are you ready?
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. No.
Mr. Shimkus. Then I will turn to Mr. Harper for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I have listened to
your testimony in going through this process, you know, and I
guess your Commission work was what, about a 2-year----
Mr. Scowcroft. Two years.
Mr. Harper. Two years. And aren't you glad it is over?
Mr. Scowcroft. Yes.
Mr. Harper. But we certainly thank you for investing that
amount of time in what is a very emotional subject. Of course I
have to say the idea of forming anything new up here is
anything less than inspiring. And so to think about forming
some type of new agency or organization I am not sure that we
can endure perhaps another dysfunctional group, but perhaps
this is where you have landed.
I would like to just read to you something that was put out
by, that was said by the Nuclear Energy Institute, Edison
Electric Institute, American Public Power Association, National
Rural Electric Cooperative Association, the National
Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners, and the
Nuclear Waste Strategy Coalition, what they said last week
about Yucca Mountain. We continue to believe that the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission's review of the DOE's license application
for the proposed Yucca Mountain in Nevada repository should be
completed to determine whether it is a suitable site. You know,
your report says that we need a geologic repository.
Do you agree or disagree with those groups that we ought to
take advantage of these billions of dollars that have been
spent so far on Yucca Mountain and find out if it is indeed a
suitable or unsuitable repository.
Mr. Hamilton. We----
Mr. Harper. Do you want me to just move to the next
question?
Mr. Hamilton. Look, a commission was formed. We operated
under a mandate and under rules, we followed those rules, and
the rules were we were not going to get into Yucca.
Mr. Harper. And certainly--but your duties are over, so I
am asking the question. We have the beautiful report right
here. So the question is should we with all the money, the
billions of dollars that have been spent, should we not at
least--does it not make sense to find out if it is indeed
suitable or not?
Mr. Hamilton. Let me respond this way, and this is not
really a direct answer to your question, but I think it is a
fair response. There has been a feeling here for 30 years or
more that once the next election comes the results of that
election will be so decisive that Yucca Mountain will be
resolved one way or the other. It hasn't happened. It has not
happened. Now, it may happen the next election. I don't think
it is likely, but it could happen. And that is a possibility.
Our view, however, is that we have now had 30, 40 years
experience, and as a country we have not been able to reach a
solution to the problem. You can blame whomever you want to. I
suspect there is plenty of blame to go along, and we have heard
some specific names just today. But the fact is that the
process we are now following has not worked for whatever
reason, and it continues to roll up huge costs for the American
taxpayer. Liabilities explode into the future, and there are
all kinds of damages to the American national interest.
OK. We have to find a way forward. We have got to find a
way forward to solve this problem. It could be the next
election will solve it. I don't think it will, but it could be.
It hasn't in the past. So we are operating on the assumption
and the Commission that we had to try a new way forward and
that is what we did.
Mr. Harper. You put a lot of emphasis on the consent-based
process----
Mr. Hamilton. Yes.
Mr. Harper [continuing]. On how to do, how someone should
move forward on this. But it appears, certainly looking at the
map that the chairman pulled up of local consent that is there,
it met what appears to be that criteria, but yet someone else
was able to intervene, whether that is the Senate majority
leader or someone else. How do we get to the point of where we
can actually make a decision on this? And I have to say Yucca
Mountain has met that criteria yet it has been rejected. So my
confidence level is not real strong, and my time is up, but it
appears to me that we should complete this licensing process,
get back on track and let's find out if indeed it is a suitable
process.
I thank you both for your time. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Gardner, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Gardner. I thank the chairman for the time. And thank
you to the panel for being here and sharing with us your work,
and certainly appreciate the work that you did. A couple of
questions, and it has been touched on here a couple of times
today already, and so I just want to maybe go into them a
little bit further. So when you are looking for the most cost
effective approach for new strategies that you discussed in the
report, did you compare that to the time and cost to continue
work to gain regulatory and public acceptance of Yucca
Mountain?
Mr. Scowcroft. No, we did not because we did not consider
Yucca Mountain or any other site. We discussed a process. And
going forward theoretically if our approach is accepted Yucca
Mountain, Nevada can come forward and be evaluated on a consent
basis like everybody else.
Mr. Gardner. But obviously the money we have already put
into Yucca Mountain is significant?
Mr. Scowcroft. Oh, no question about that, no question
about that.
Mr. Gardner. Your testimony states that finding sites where
all affected units of government, including the host State or
tribe, regional and local authorities and host community, are
willing to support or at least accept a facility has proved
exceptionally difficult. That is a quote from the report. So
how do we ensure that a unit of government remains supportive
of or committed to accepting a repository?
Mr. Hamilton. I don't think there are any guarantees here.
Look, this process of siting, forget Yucca Mountain for a
while, this process of siting is going to be a very difficult
process. What we believe is that the Federal Government or any
entity cannot force the decision down the throats of a local
community, and that is exactly what the Congress has done.
Mr. Gardner. I mean, I have----
Mr. Hamilton. That won't work in our view.
Mr. Gardner. I have 15 metric tons of nuclear waste in my
district.
Mr. Hamilton. How much?
Mr. Gardner. Fifteen metric tons, which is stored for Fort
St. Vrain, which is being managed by the Department of Energy
in Colorado. If we were to go forward with Yucca Mountain, if
we were to go forward with the repository, it would be a safer
place for that than stuck at St. Vrain.
Mr. Hamilton. Well, I don't know the conditions there
obviously.
Mr. Gardner. But in general isn't it better to have a
repository than leaving it scattered across the country?
Mr. Hamilton. We believe it is better to have consolidated
storage facilities and a repository in place.
Mr. Gardner. So we are more safe with a Yucca Mountain type
facility than we are without it?
Mr. Hamilton. We are more safe with consolidated storage
and a sound repository.
Mr. Gardner. And so how do we keep a party from later then
refusing or somebody who is unable to perform under the
agreement? Is there anything we can do under this analysis?
Mr. Hamilton. Sure. First of all, you can ask communities
to volunteer.
Mr. Gardner. And if the community volunteers----
Mr. Hamilton. And if you don't get it then you may have to
offer some incentives to get the communities to accept the
waste. There are a lot of advantages to accepting waste. You
create a lot of jobs in a community. That is the New Mexico
experience. So there are techniques that can be used to
persuade, if you would, among them the ones that I mentioned.
Mr. Gardner. And that leads I guess to another question. I
have got ICBM sites in my district. And we are happy to have
them part of our national defense. Jobs are created because of
them. But what if we decided in Colorado that we no longer
wanted those ICBMs there, would we have a choice, should we
have a choice?
Mr. Scowcroft. You know, I don't think that is really a
question for the Commission as it is a question for you all. I
mean, you are the custodians of the Federal system under which
we live. I would point out that next door in New Mexico the
WIPP plant has been extremely successful and the local
communities are leasing land because they hope to expand their
role. So it is not impossible to do because they have found it
very worthwhile to have a disposal site in their district.
Mr. Gardner. And I guess I would follow up with the
findings of your report. What assurance or commitments do you
have, conversations you have had with the administration that
they will act on your recommendation?
Mr. Scowcroft. We have had none.
Mr. Gardner. OK. So this is a report that may just go into
the Ethernet?
Mr. Scowcroft. We were asked to produce a report and we
have done the best that we are able to do.
Mr. Gardner. So have you consulted with Secretary Chu about
the potential next steps by the agency?
Mr. Scowcroft. Oh, yes.
Mr. Hamilton. We have reported to the Secretary our
findings. We have discussed them at some length with him and
his advisors. We have reported to the White House staff.
Mr. Gardner. And what should we expect as a result of those
reports?
Mr. Hamilton. Well, they can speak for themselves. I
believe they recognize, first of all, that we have a very
difficult problem that needs to be solved, that we haven't
found a way to solve it. And they take seriously our
recommendations. I can't cite a single person within the
administration who says I endorse all of your recommendations.
Are they receptive to it? Yes. Have they asked a lot of
questions about it? You bet they have. And that is the
appropriate role for them and for you.
Mr. Gardner. Have they given you a timeline?
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Hamilton. Yes, we spell out a timeline in the report.
We say for a consolidated storage facility 10 to 15 years, I
believe, and for a repository 15 to 20. Those are guesses. But
the point is that it is long term. This is not a problem that
is going to be resolved in the next year or two.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time is expired. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Washington State, Mr. Inslee, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Inslee. Thank you, gentlemen, for your long public
service. This is another step in that. We really do appreciate
it. But coming from the State of Washington I have to say that
I really am alarmed by the failure of public process and
something that I just think is a disregard of the law in this
instance that led to this Commission. And that is a serious
issue. And that is serious language to use, but I think it fits
this circumstance. We have seen NRC Chairman Jaczko order his
Commission to shut down review of the Yucca application leading
to further delays. And it is very, very troubling to me to see
this very talented and dedicated Commission really directed
from the start not to consider Yucca, which I believe to be the
law of the United States of America. And you are not
responsible for that, I want to make that very clear, as to
where responsibility lies for this. But we have spent over $12
billion and 30 years moving forward in Yucca, and now we are at
this point where we have a commission that I liken to sort of
the group that is scouting the best NBA--since Representative
Hamilton is one of our great all-star basketball teams I will
just use that metaphor. It is kind of like asking you to scout
for the NBA and told whatever you do don't consider that
Michael Jordan young guy. And I think that is the situation
that we were in. And you can't just do a good scouting job and
not take a look at that young number 23. And this really hits
home in my State. We are home to the Hanford site, nine former
nuclear reactors, we were a stalwart in the Cold War, and now
we still have that residue in my home State and close to the
Columbia River--53 million gallons of radioactive and chemical
waste and 177 underground tanks at one time. We have been
preparing and planning for Yucca for disposal since 2002. I
have got thousands of my State people getting this ready to
ship to Yucca and it is going to be all dressed up and no place
to go. And I have been working on this since the mid-1980s to
not see my State become a de facto interim storage in
substandard conditions. So this is of great concern to me. And
I am really concerned that if we do require, quote, a consensus
it basically is going to require my State to become a de facto
repository for these wastes through my grandchildren's, and I
get a new one this week I hope, her lifetime. And I think that
is the route we are on if we don't follow the law.
So I guess the first question I have, and I just want to
make clear, does anything in this report suggest in any way
that Yucca would not be suitable to consider for scientific
reasons?
Mr. Hamilton. No.
Mr. Scowcroft. No.
Mr. Inslee. I appreciate that. And by the way, I appreciate
your personal service. I think you have articulated the
position of the Commission well and the limitations of your
decision. This is kind of a difficult situation for you, and
you have been in difficult situations before. But I guess
looking to the future if we are unable to reach the consensus
that you have suggested perhaps we should look for, does it
effectively make the current situation in the places that now
house the waste the de facto permanent storage sites, permanent
in the foreseeable future? Isn't that a fair statement? If you
share the view that I have that that consensus is going to be
harder to find, then an obligation to follow the law which we
have in place, doesn't it make these places de facto permanent
sites?
Mr. Hamilton. We visited Hanford. Those people were very
gracious to us. And we had a hearing there. And I think all of
the frustrations which you have expressed came out to us very
strongly. And I don't criticize them in the least for thinking
that they could become a permanent site because they have had
it so long and the risks, as you have said, to the Columbia
River and elsewhere are real. The frustrations in our inability
to resolve this problem are huge. There isn't any doubt about
that. And there are a lot of people who have very, very
legitimate complaints. We listened to miles and miles of
testimony expressing the frustrations people have with the way
the Federal Government has handled the waste problem. And that
is one reason we recommend a new organization, because we think
the DOE can't do it, it has lost credibility on it. So the
frustrations are there.
The question is, however, what do you do, how do you get
out of the box? It is the law, you are correct, that Yucca
Mountain is the repository. The only problem is we can't
enforce the law. That has not been a solution. It may be the
law but we can't enforce it. OK. Is that a good thing? No, it
is not a good thing. It is always good if you follow the law.
But you can't. And you haven't been able to for 40 years. Now,
you can sit around and hope that it is all going to be resolved
if the next election breaks right. And that has been exactly
the hope for 40 years and it hasn't worked.
Now, we got a problem, we got a problem in this country
that is very, very difficult to solve. We don't know if we got
the answers here. We think we have got a good approach. And we
think it is the only path on the table, if you would, to get us
out of the box. And if you stand around and insist on Yucca,
Yucca, Yucca, which people have been insisting on for a long,
long time, but have not been able to pull it off, we think the
result of that is an impasse, a failure to solve the problem.
Where do you go? You can go for another 40 years and not solve
the problem. We are trying to indicate a path forward. That is
what we are trying to do.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman's time is expired. The Chair now
recognizes the other Member from the great State of Washington.
Cathy McMorris Rodgers is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And I too just want to say thanks for your work and thanks for
being here. Like so many, I have been in and out. And I kind of
want to-- you know, coming from Washington State, we pay close
attention to Hanford. And the part of the report that really
suggests that a site like Hanford could become a de facto
repository I think is what raises the greatest concern. And I
would just--I would like to start by just asking what would
you, what do you see is the future of Hanford then and what
role do you see Hanford playing moving forward?
Mr. Hamilton. Look, I think you have got to give those
people in Hanford some hope. It is exactly as Mr. Inslee said,
they are so frustrated now because no progress has been made on
this. The problem is getting worse and they have every right to
be discouraged, frustrated and mad. What hope do we give them?
The hope is that if you adopt our resolutions they will have
the hope, a real one, of establishing a consolidated storage
disposal--consolidated storage entity within 10 or 15 years,
say. That is a rough guess. Now, that is something they haven't
had. And it gets them out of the feeling that they are going to
be permanently dealing with this stuff. We think the process we
have set forward gives them real hope, a genuine hope, which
they don't have today under present law.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. I guess what that approach ignores
is the consent decree that has already been agreed upon with
the Federal Government and a lot of concerns that have been
raised about the location of Hanford next to the Columbia River
and an agreement that was put in place that said we were going
to move that waste off site and the importance of moving that
waste off site. And so that is what we would concede to be the
concern. And I am not sure that the fears and the anger will go
away by simply just saying, OK, in 15 years----
Mr. Hamilton. Well, you are exactly right about that. Those
fears--you can't wave a magic wand here, you can't undo the
sins of the past, they are done, they are in place. All you can
try to do is correct the problem. And that is what we are
trying to do. Now, if you got a solution, and I am not pointing
this to you directly, a better way to solve this problem, we
are certainly open to it.
Mr. Shimkus. If the gentlelady would yield, I would suggest
a solution would be for the administration to follow the law as
written. With due respect to my colleagues, we understand that
there is a 1982 Waste Policy Act, we have 1987 amendments to
that, we have votes. You want to talk about consent, Mr.
Hamilton. Consent was decided here in Congress by numerous
votes, whether that is the vote to fund the science study,
which we had 297 Members of the House. We throw out the word
Congress as--you know, Congress consists of two Chambers. The
House has historically consistently spoken in support of Yucca
Mountain.
Mr. Hamilton. That is right.
Mr. Shimkus. And what is interesting on the legislation to
address the Nevada veto, that was a 306 to 117 vote. And do you
know what the United States Senate did? They voice voted it,
they voice voted it. So my question--and we are going to hear
in the next panel some comments about it. This isn't a failure
of the science or the studies. And I would reject the premise
that we have failed. My stated position is this President and
this majority leader have failed to comply with the law, and
that is why unfortunately they have asked you to spend a lot of
good time, effort and energy covering their rear ends on this,
and that is unfortunate.
I yield back to my friend.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And I would just say I am hopeful that the courts are actually
going to rule in favor of enforcing the law and that the
administration's efforts to terminate Yucca will actually be
stopped and that they will require that the Yucca application
proceed. So we will wait for that day. Thank you very much.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady yields back her time. And the
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Kinzinger, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all
very much for your work on these issues and for coming in front
of us today. I am glad we are talking about this. This is very
important. It may not be on the national radar and the front
page of the newspaper every day, but it is extremely important
I think to the future of energy in this country.
Actually, Illinois' 11th district that I represent is the
largest nuclear district in the country. We have three plants,
six reactors, and we have a home of where there was originally
going to be nuclear recycling in Morris, Illinois, which is now
a spent fuel storage pool. So we have four areas where fuel is
stored in my district. Given as how we have paid $15 billion
into this fund, including many of the rate payers in my
district, it has been now over a quarter of a century. So when
I go back home to tell the people in my district that the
Federal Government is responsible for the waste, how long
should I tell them that it is going to take to create a
corporation to build community consensus--I don't have--there
you go. Can you hear me now? It is red. Maybe I will move.
Mr. Green. You are welcome to come to one of these mics on
our side.
Mr. Shimkus. That is the bipartisan nature of this
subcommittee.
Mr. Kinzinger. I am back. OK. Great. So as I was saying,
when we talk about building the corporation, building community
consensus, constructing interim sites, what kind of a time
scale are we talking about? I mean, the fear is we are talking
another quarter century. And so as you continue to have waste
buildup on-site it is a serious issue. So what are your all's
inputs in what you think this is going to take from a time
perspective?
Mr. Hamilton. Well, creating a new organization will take
legislative action. And we talked about that a little earlier
today here I think with Chairman Barton. Neither he nor I think
it can be done in 2012, and it is likely to be at least a 2-
year and maybe 3- or 4-year project to create a new
organization. Now, that doesn't mean you don't do anything
between now and the time the organization is created. I think
there are a lot of things that the DOE, and these are spelled
out in detail in the report, can do now to begin to prepare for
establishing a repository and a storage facility. Specifically
in the report we take a guess and we say that in order to
establish a storage facility you are talking 10 to 15 years and
15 to 20 years on a repository, so you are talking about a long
length of time. There isn't any doubt about it.
Mr. Kinzinger. The next question I had, in reading through
the report I was disappointed with the Commission's timeline
for developing advanced reactors to recycle used fuel. I
understand the report is based on a consensus and members had
differing opinions on whether to recycle nuclear waste, but I
would like to know would a demonstration project if we were
able to get one off the ground and online, would that shorter
the time estimate? Is that something you could see as being
positive in bringing that technology closer?
Mr. Scowcroft. Well, we had a panel, a subcommittee, look
at this and they consulted the nuclear experts, if you will.
And what we are doing is reflecting the best thought that our
own nuclear scientists have presented. So what we say is we
support a vigorous R&D program both in reactor development and
in recycling, reprocessing spent fuel. But farther than that we
wouldn't go because that is not fundamentally what we were
asked to do.
Mr. Hamilton. We want to keep options open in the future.
And we believe a lot of advances in nuclear energy technology
have the potential to deliver a lot of benefits. We don't rule
out R&D on recycling and reprocessing. This could be the
answer. We think it is premature now to say that it is the
answer, but it could be. And we certainly want to proceed with
research and development on it.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you. And I thank you gentlemen and
would echo the chairman's comments of earlier. I would love to
see the law of the land become the enforced law of the land and
would love to see Yucca Mountain opened up. But with that said,
I appreciate your time and I yield back to the chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time. We would
like to thank you for coming for 2 hours. If you had known you
had to do this when you accepted the Blue Ribbon Commission
mission, you may have said no. But again, with all sincerity it
does for me personally to say if I am able to live long, to
stay active, to stay vibrant, you guys are a credit to our
country, and we do appreciate your time. We will dismiss this
panel so you can get out of here before anyone else shows. And
ask the second panel to come join us.
Thank you very much.
We would like to thank our second panel for joining us and
sitting through the first panel. I think we found that very
informative and educational and I think that will add to the
second one.
What I would like to do is you all have 5 minutes for your
opening statements. We know your formal testimony is submitted
for the record, and I am going to do a basic introduction, and
then we will move right through once I formally introduce you
all here. First, we have Mr. Lake Barrett, President of L.
Barrett Consulting; he is the former deputy director of the
Civil Radioactive Waste Management of the U.S. Department of
Energy, formally.
Dr. D. Warner North is the president of NorthWorks,
Incorporated, catchy name. A consulting professor in Stanford's
department of management and science engineering. Dr. North is
a former member of the U.S. Nuclear Waste Technical Review
Board and a member of the board of radioactive waste management
at the National Research Council. Welcome.
Mr. Martin G. Malsch is a partner of Egan, Fitzpatrick,
Malsch and Lawrence. Previously Mr. Malsch served as the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission's acting general counsel, deputy
general counsel and inspector general. He represents the State
of Nevada in litigation relating to Yucca Mountain testifying
on his on behalf, welcome.
Dr. Edwin Lyman, is that pronounced right?
Mr. Lyman. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Is a senior staff scientist for the Union of
Concerned Scientists, Dr. Lyman's research focuses on the
prevention of nuclear proliferation and nuclear terrorism. We
have Mr. Thomas A. Schatz is the president of Citizens Against
Government Waste. And Mr. David A. Wright is the chairman of
the board and the president of National Association of
Regulatory Utility Commissioners, he is also the vice chairman
of the South Carolina Public Service Commission. Gentlemen,
welcome and with that, we would like to start with Mr. Barrett,
you have the time for 5 minutes for your opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF LAKE H. BARRETT, PRESIDENT, L. BARRETT
CONSULTING; D. WARNER NORTH, PRESIDENT AND PRINCIPAL SCIENTIST,
NORTHWORKS, INC.; MARTIN G. MALSCH, PARTNER, EGAN, FITZPATRICK,
MALSCH & LAWRENCE; EDWIN LYMAN, SENIOR SCIENTIST, GLOBAL
SECURITY PROGRAM, UNION OF CONCERNED SCIENTISTS; THOMAS A.
SCHATZ, PRESIDENT, CITIZENS AGAINST GOVERNMENT WASTE; AND DAVID
A. WRIGHT, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REGULATORY
UTILITY COMMISSIONERS

STATEMENT OF LAKE H. BARRETT

Mr. Barrett. Thank you, Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member
Green, and other members of the committee. Thanks for the
opportunity to provide my personal views regarding the Blue
Ribbon Commission's recommendations. The Nuclear Waste Policy
Act established a scientific regulatory and political
administrative process for safely disposing of our Nation's
spent nuclear fuel and high-level radioactive waste. And this
process lawfully selected Yucca Mountain as the Nation's first
repository site as the BRC properly states on page 12 of their
report.
Unfortunately, this administration has succumbed to
politics and have reversed much of the process that has been
made over last 25 years. Although this Commission was created
partially as a cover for the administration's actions, it has
produced a very thoughtful report with excellent useful
recommendations that should be implemented regardless of the
future of Yucca Mountain.
It is not the fault of the BRC that they were not allowed
to examine the obvious and lawful Yucca Mountain geologic
repository disposal solution. Despite such a politically
imposed shortcoming, they produced a well-reasoned report with
excellent conclusions. I strongly urge the administration and
Congress to act promptly to incorporate the BRC recommendations
into our existing national program and get our Nation's nuclear
waste disposal program moving forward again.
I strongly agree with the BRC's finding that a solution to
the Nation's spent fuel management needs is urgently needed and
the substantial cost of inaction is mounting every day. The BRC
properly concludes that a national geologic repository is the
foundation of any national spent fuel program. Although they
were not allowed to say it, that site exists today at Yucca
Mountain. They clearly confirm there is no new technological
silver bullet that can replace the need for a geologic
repository like a Yucca Mountain. Although they were prevented
from considering Yucca Mountain, I believe most of their
recommendations are applicable to Yucca Mountain.
Clearly, everyone wishes that a consensus agreement could
have been established between the Department of Energy and the
State of Nevada. Clearly that was my personal goal when I
directed the program. Unfortunately, political positions in
those times prevented any meaningful negotiations to resolve
Nevada's issues. One step in the right direction today would be
to finish the Yucca Mountain NRC licensing process in an open
and transparent manner to independently resolve all of Nevada's
safety and environmental concerns. I am personally very
confident that the site will be safe for well over a million
years.
Completing the nearly finished NRC licensing process would
hopefully make safety evident to all Nevadans such a
politically-driven, fear-mongering sound bites would be seen
for what they are, and a meaningful negotiation could be begin.
Such a negotiation would lead to the necessary changes,
assurances, and substantial benefits that Nevada deserves from
the Federal Government for acting in the national interest.
Such a binding agreement would be of great value and be of
mutual benefit to all Nevadans and the rest of Nation as well.
The BRC report properly highlights the need for Federal
action to remove spent fuel which is stranded at shut-down
nuclear reactors. To achieve this important goal in a timely,
effective manner the BRC correctly recommends a partnership,
consensus-based, consolidated interim storage facility. In my
view, that process should start immediately. It is not a
technical problem, it is a problem of our collective failure to
act in our mutual national interest with respect to the host
State.
DOE has the authority, under existing law and capability
with its commercial contractors to act now on many of the BRC
recommendations, such as working to develop consensus hosting
partnerships. It is also a factor DOE's commercial contractors
made significant progress in developing over 10 State and local
hosting expressions of interest for the past global nuclear
energy partnership facilities. Although that program no longer
exists, the volunteer hosting partnership concept fits
perfectly with the BRC recommendations and our national needs
today.
DOE should now task their existing commercial nuclear
contract support teams to engage with potentially interested
communities and States to explore mutually beneficial hosting
partnerships arrangements. This simple but important first step
will begin the process of developing what I envision as a
volunteer, integrated used nuclear fuel management R&D center,
and possibly a volunteer host for the needed second geological
repository.
I believe this Nation stands at a critical ethical
crossroad on nuclear waste management. We owe our grandchildren
a protected disposal solution for used nuclear fuel in high-
level radioactive waste that our generation has made. In my
view, it is irresponsible to just continue kicking the problem
down the road to the next generation just because someone has
localized political pressure during a primary campaign.
Solutions are at hand, and the Blue Ribbon Commission, despite
its politically imposed restrictions, has provided useful
actionable recommendations, that can greatly enhance and
preserve what has already been achieved. Let us not waste this
opportunity. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Barrett.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Barrett follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Now I would like to recognize Dr. North for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF D. WARNER NORTH

Mr. North. Thank you for this opportunity.
Mr. Shimkus. Dr. North, I think you need to press the
little button there.
Mr. North. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, now it is on. Ranking
Member Green and other members of the subcommittee, I strongly
endorse the BRC final report and its recommendations, the
Commission and its staff have produced an excellent document
within its scope. BRC states that national policy has, ``been
troubled for decades and has now all but broken down.''
I would have preferred more clarity at the outset in this
report as to where responsibility for this impasse lies. DOE,
NRC and the Nuclear Waste Technical Review Boards worked
diligently and commendably to implement the Nuclear Waste
Policy Act. The impasse comes from the law established by
Congress, inconsistency and national leadership, and opposition
by State political leaders, especially Nevada. The impasse did
not come from people like Lake Barrett and many others who have
devoted many years of their professional careers to
implementing the existing law in the work on Yucca Mountain.
Much of BRC's guidance is consistent with findings and
recommendations of earlier reports. There are no major
breakthroughs in understanding or from new technology. The
Nation needs geological disposal, it is the only long-term
solution. There is international consensus on how to do it.
Many other nations are making progress. Our progress has
stopped, our country has a liability of $50 billion, 30 billion
from ratepayers in the nuclear waste fund. And my figure is
from the 2011 financial report to the United States Government,
plus 20 billion in legal penalties for failure to fulfill
contracts. This number should not continue to grow.
The new consent-based approach BRC recommends is not a new
idea but one that has been around for decades. It would be new
for the U.S. Federal Government, a change from existing law.
Siting success is defined by BRC as a legally binding
agreement among the parties. This is formalizing what was
described in the Republican presidential candidates' debate in
Las Vegas as a pretty good deal. New Mexico negotiated a pretty
good deal with the Federal Government on WIPP, more pretty good
deals could restore U.S. progress. Deal-making is a societal or
political matter, not overcoming technical challenges. Perhaps
there will be some benefit to looking at flexible and
significant incentives. The technical community should be
assuring safety and minimizing cost, but this is not something
where we can help a lot.
Many State governments have opposed the siting of a nuclear
waste facility in their State. Nevada established an
organization to oppose such a facility, the Nevada Nuclear
Waste Project Office in 1985. According to the Web site, the
mission remains the same, not improved scientific understanding
and support for wise decision-making but opposition. In
contrast, local government entities near Yucca Mountain such as
Nye County have expressed support for the facility. The
presentation of the map I thought was most appropriate.
Can the Federal Government go from opposition to pretty
good deal with one or several States? During my service on a
nuclear waste technical review board 20 years ago, DOE had a
program in place that developed the system planning for
packaging and transporting spent fuel which TRB reviewed and
encouraged, but Congress cut the appropriations forcing this
work to be deferred. A lead time on the order of a decade is
needed before waste transport begins. For WIPP timely and
effective advance planning for the transport of waste was done
by DOE in cooperation with State and local agencies.
DOE and the administration should carry out the steps in
chapter 13, Congress should take steps needed to implement the
recommendations, but more discussion and debate will be needed.
DOE should designate a senior official as BRC has recommended.
This senior official should be supported by staff and
consultants at the same level of excellence as the staff and
consultants who participated in the preparation of the BRC
final report. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. North follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. I would like to recognize Mr. Malsch for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARTIN G. MALSCH

Mr. Malsch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Minority
Member Green and other members of the subcommittee. I
appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony today regarding
the Recommendations of the Blue Ribbon Commission on America's
Nuclear Future released just last week. My name is Marty
Malsch, I am a partner in the law firm Egan, Fitzpatrick,
Malsch & Lawrence which specializes in nuclear energy and
nuclear waste matters. As the chairman has indicated, I do
represent the State of Nevada on Yucca Mountain matters. My
testimony today represents my own views and they do not
necessarily represent the view of the State of Nevada.
In accordance with the committee's rules, I will proceed to
offer a brief oral summary and would like to have my full
testimony included in the record.
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Malsch. The BRC studied the history of successful and
unsuccessful attempts around the world to develop geologic
repositories for radioactive waste. Its recommendations based
on this study and other factors are thoughtful and well
supported. We owe a debt of gratitude to the BRC members and
the BRC staff for their willingness to serve, their dedication
to the task, their openness to diversion of ideas and opinions
and their careful analysis of problems and feasible solutions
to the nuclear waste management issues confronting America
today.
While I generally support all of the BRC's recommendations,
I would like to focus my testimony today on four especially
important and closely connected ones. First, I agree there
should be prompt efforts to develop one or more geologic
disposal facilities, although not in the sense that we need to
select and license a repository in the near term. We are not
facing any disposal crisis because vitrified high-level waste
and spent nuclear fuel can be stored safely for a long time,
but in many of the Nuclear Waster Policy Act organizing and
staffing a new waste management organization, and implementing
a new consent based site selection process as the BRC has
recommended will take considerable time. We should start the
process promptly especially the process to make necessary
legislative changes.
Second, the BRC recommended an adaptive stage facility
licensing and development process whereby project managers are
able to reevaluate earlier decisions and redesign or change
course where new information warrants. This recommendation
addresses, I believe, what is one of the key lessons from the
past that premature commitments to one site should be avoided.
There should be multiple opportunities to assess the quality of
the technical program and the safety case supporting the
decision-making process and to pull the plug when warranted.
Third, I support the BRC's recommendations that there
should be a new organization devoted solely to implementing the
waste management program. DOE has not performed well here and a
new organizational approach is clearly needed.
Fourth and most important, the BRC recommended a new
consent-based approach to future siting waste management
facilities. I believe that a consent-based site selection
process is not just good government, it is a frank concession
to reality and one of the key lessons that must be learned from
history.
We should not assume that the objections of a host State or
local government or Indian tribe will melt away and that they
will be ready to deal if the NRC grants a license or
construction authorization. Nor should we assume that the
preemptive powers of the Federal Government are so great and
that State and local rights and preferences are so undeserving
of respect that a site can always be thrust upon an unwilling
host State government or tribe. This means must be found to
elicit the cooperation, or at least the acquiescence of the
host State government or tribe.
I agree with the BRC that a successful site selection
decision will most likely result from the negotiations between
the implementing organizations and the potentially affected
governments and that it will be desirable for these
negotiations to result in some form of legally enforceable
agreement. I also recognize that a State, local or tribal
government's ability to veto a repository project cannot last
indefinitely. Otherwise, the uncertainty of whether a project
could ever successful would be so great that any significant
investment and it would be imprudent. Ending the veto can be
matter of subject negotiation between the waste management
organization and the governmental entity.
The BRC report includes a brief summary of the U.S.
experience in developing geological repositories and draws some
conclusions based on this experience. My written testimony adds
some details about this experience focusing on Lyons, Kansas,
and Yucca Mountain, Nevada. I believe these are worth
considering because they add substantial context and support
for the BRC's recommendations and conclusions.
In conclusion, almost everything that could go wrong with a
geologic repository program in the United States has now gone
wrong. It would be unfortunate if the nuclear power program in
this country floundered because of because of poorly chosen
policies for managing spent fuel and high-level radioactive
waste. And the citizens living near DOE legacy sites deserved a
better program than the one they got. The BRC has now offered
and recommended a path forward. We have ample time to consider
the BRC's recommendations and get things right. Thank you for
your consideration of my testimony.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Malsch follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Now I would like to recognize Mr.--Dr. Edwin
Lyman, sir, recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF EDWIN LYMAN

Mr. Lyman. Thank you. On behalf of the Union of Concerned
Scientists, I appreciate the opportunity to present our views
on the recommendations on the Blue Ribbon Commission. I would
like to thank Chairman Shimkus and Ranking Member Green and
other members for hearing us out.
The Union of Concerned Scientists is neither pro nor anti
nuclear power, but we have served as a safety and security
nuclear watchdog for over 40 years. We are deeply concerned
about global climate and we have never ruled out an expansion
of nuclear power to cope with those problems provided that it
meets high standards of safety and security. However, the
Fukushima Daiichi accident has revealed significant
vulnerabilities in nuclear safety that really need to be
addressed if nuclear is going to be a serious option in the
future and the management disposal of the nuclear waste is
clearly a major factor in that.
Before proceeding, I would like to point out that UCS has
never had a position for or against Yucca Mountain or any other
site, we simply don't have the geological expertise to be able
to assess a site's ability independently. We commend the
Commission staff of the BRC for an excellent report and think
they have addressed very well a very challenging set of issues.
We reviewed all eight recommendations, and agree with most of
them, but our greatest area is of agreement concerns, the
absence of a recommendation. We were pleased to see that the
Commission did to not call for an immediate change in U.S.
long-standing policy not to reprocess spent nuclear fuel. So we
do concur with BRC on that.
UCS has long opposed reprocessing primarily because it
produces Plutonium and other weapons-useable materials that
greatly increase the risk of nuclear terrorism, nuclear
proliferation, and at the same time, do not provide any
benefits for waste management. Now we heard earlier about
figures provided by AREVA that claim they can reduce the volume
of nuclear waste for final disposal through reprocessing. I
reviewed those numbers and I can say the factor of 4, which we
heard earlier this morning is not technically valid and I would
be happy to provide more details on that.
Be also believe if the BRC had endorsed reprocessing, it
would have send the wrong message to the rest of the world
control, undermining efforts to control the growth of separated
Plutonium. For instance, in Japan today, they are currently
reconsidering the start up of a large reprocessing plant at
Rokkashomura, which has been idle because of the technical
problems and the ramifications of Fukushima. Japan already has
45 metric tons of Plutonium, of which 10 tons are in Japan that
is on the order of a thousand Nagasaki-type weapons, Japan just
simply doesn't need any more Plutonium. And we are just glad
that the BRC did not give the signal that would have given
coverage to Japan for restarting that facility.
On the recommendation for creating a new entity independent
from Department of Energy, we agree with that, but we believe
that it is very important to limit that entity to the
constraints called for in the report with, based on transports
storage and direct disposal, spent fuel and high-level waste
with only limited research and development to support those
activities.
We did disagree with the BRC on the urgent need for
centralized interim storage. We still are not persuaded that
there is a good reason to cite our new centralized interim
storage facilities, either for operating or for shutdown
reactors. And we are concerned that an effort could to distract
from the goal of citing a geological repository. Simply too
many moving parts, too many potential sites being considered,
too much incentive money that would have to go around we think
could really interfere with the goal of finding a repository
which we think we agree as a fundamental requirement.
We do think that spent fuel can be stored safely and
securely for probably 100 years at reactor sites provided that
the NRC upgrade its safety and security practices.
In particular, we are continually concerned about the long-
term storage of spent fuel in wet pools under densely-packed
conditions. We believe that poses a greater threat of large
radiological release, and we encourage the thinning out of
those pools by transferring spent fuel into dry casks. Dry
casks are safer but do need to be protected especially against
sabotage, and we also call for increased protection against
sabotage in dry cask facilities.
Finally with regard to research and development, we believe
a limited program of R&D on nuclear energy continues to be
appropriate, but we think it needs to be focused, needs peer
review, and that the merits of those programs need to be under
constant observation so we don't waste taxpayer money on
options like reprocessing that have not shown to be successful
in the past. I thank you and would be happy to take your
questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Dr. Lyman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lyman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Now I would like to recognize Mr. Shatz for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS A. SCHATZ

Mr. Schatz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Green,
other members of the subcommittee. My name is Tom Schatz, I am
president of Citizens Against Government Waste. The
organization was founded in 1984 by the late industrialist, J.
Peter Grace and nationally-syndicated columnist Jack Anderson
to build support through the implementation of the
recommendations of the Grace Commission, which was established
by President Reagan. CAGW was, as I said, founded in 1984, that
was a year after President Reagan signed into law the Nuclear
Waste Policy Act of 1983. And yet, we have certainly seen a lot
of wasteful expenditures over the years, but the fact that we
spent all this money and come up with zero in terms of anything
being sent to Yucca Mountain is certainly one of the largest
examples of wasteful spending we have ever seen. Usually we are
looking at examples of ear marking a few million here and
there, but we are talking about tens of billions of dollars
that have been spent, and based on some of the estimates,
possibly $100 billion, and now we have a Commission coming in
and saying let's pull the plug on all of this and start over.
So we understand and appreciate the outrage that has been
expressed by some of the members here today. And while we are
usually pretty expressive about our concerns on this, maybe we
understated some of the comments in our testimony.
Yucca Mountain has been certified, nuclear waste fund has
assessed ratepayers between 750- and $780 million each year
since 1983. As everybody has mentioned, $15 billion spent to
evaluate sites to get Yucca Mountain going. We have 65,000
metric tons, and not one spent fuel rod has been sent to Yucca
Mountain or anywhere else for permanent storage.
And the fuel languishes at 75 sites in 33 States so it is a
little difficult to hear people say we don't have a problem, we
can just leave it there. Clearly that is not only a problem, it
is also against the law, because all of those facilities went
into operation understanding that the fuel would be sent to a
permanent repository.
The White House, unfortunately, made good on President
Obama's campaign promise to close Yucca Mountain, no funding in
the fiscal year 2011 budget, but the determination to close
this facility was not based on science or technology. The
administration stated the decision was predicated upon a
proposed change of department policy for managing spent nuclear
fuel, but they didn't come up with an alternative plan except
to call on some very distinguished gentlemen to create a
commission and issue a report that took 2 years, cost $5
million at a time when another $2 billion in liability was
assessed against the Department of Energy.
The fact that the Commission couldn't review the
suitability of Yucca or evaluate any site certainly creates
another problem because we are back starting over based on
their recommendations with the new organization. Perhaps this
new corporation will be as effective as maybe Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac or some other Federal corporation that's done such
a great job with our tax dollars over the years.
And we had consent, as the chairman's chart showed, the
local community said yes, the State of Nevada itself in 1975,
the legislature said yes. So if we had a ``consent-based
agreement,'' what is to stop that same community 10 years later
from saying, no, we don't it want in the middle of
construction? This is a national issue. There is local consent,
and as many have mentioned, there are a handful of people that
are getting in the way of moving this forward.
It seems that even the commissioners admitted that
indirectly, that Yucca should have moved forward, at least the
licensing should have moved forward because if we don't do
that, we are going sit here for another 10, 20, 30 years trying
to figure out where to put all of this nuclear waste.
Utility industry estimates it is a $50 billion liability,
DOE says 20 billion, but the Department of Energy estimate is
based on a promise that Yucca would accept fuel in the next 8
years. Clearly that estimate is now quite low.
There's also a report sitting out there that has not been
released, the safely evaluation report volume 3 the science-
based and technology committee has it, I think taxpayers should
see it. Because this will also establish the science on this
issue and hopefully move some of the politics out of the way.
The BRC noted that this generation has an ethical
obligation avoid burdening future generations with the entire
task of funding a permanent solution for hazardous materials.
We agree, that burden should not be passed on to the next
generation along with a lot of other burdens that are going to
be passed on to the next generation based on Congress's failure
to act on other good ideas to cut spending. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Schatz.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schatz follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. And now I would like to recognize Mr. Wright
for 5 minutes, sir.

STATEMENT OF DAVID A. WRIGHT

Mr. Wright. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman, Ranking
Member Green.
Mr. Shimkus. Your microphone.
Mr. Wright. It is on, I believe, I will pull it closer. My
name is David Wright, and I am a commissioner with the South
Carolina Public Service Commission, and I serve as president of
the National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners on
whose behalf I am speaking today. NARUC and State utility
commissions in 40 States served by nuclear generated
electricity have been involved in the troubled history of
nuclear waste disposal since 1983. That is when the utilities,
which own the fuel, were required by the Nuclear Waste Policy
Act, to enter into contracts with DOE. Those contracts called
for payments of fees for nuclear-generated electricity to the
Treasury for deposit into the nuclear waste fund to pay for the
cost of disposal of used fuel beginning in 1998.
Disposal has not happened, but the fee payments continue to
be made. Or as a former Florida utility commissioner summarized
the status in 1991, the government has our money, we have their
waste. It is now 20-plus years later, and we still have the
government's waste.
Utilities passed the cost of the fees to their customers
through their electric bill. In addition, and because of the
government's failure to open Yucca, customers, through their
rates, have had to pay additional amounts to cover the cost of
reracking utility spent fuel pools to accommodate more spent
fuel. And have had to pay for onsite dry cask storage as well
as the increased security required there.
Moreover, all taxpayers, through the judgment fund, have
had to pay damages for the lawsuits brought to date as well as
those to come. In 2009, the administration pronounced Yucca
Mountain not a workable option, and that it intended to
terminate the repository development there, a position contrary
to the law of the land. In March 2010, DOE asked the NRC's
Atomic Safety Licensing Board for permission to withdraw the
application with prejudice. In June, the ASLB rejected the
request. The decision was appealed to the NRC. While the NRC
was disposing of the license matter the President directed that
the Secretary of Energy appoint the Blue Ribbon Commission on
America's nuclear future to consider and recommended a new
strategy, a strategy that soon became evident would be a post-
Yucca strategy.
In 2010, NARUC and several other parties petitioned the
Court of Appeals under the NWPA, to challenge DOE's authority
to withdraw the Yucca Mountain license application, but the
case dismissed because there had been no final agency action by
the NRC on the appeal of the board's decision rejecting DOE's
request. The NWPA mandates that once the Yucca Mountain license
was submitted. The NRC had only 3 years to complete the review
proceedings, those 3 years have expired. Currently, the NRC
faces a mandamus action to force it to complete the required
review in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia circuit. NARUC is one of several petitioners in that
suit. Our reply briefs were filed last Friday.
Notwithstanding, our pro Yucca position, NARUC was closely
involved in the work of the BRC, we wrote letters, gave
testimony, provided comments to the subcommittee and attended
the public meetings. As for the recommendations, we have the
following points: 1, reform with nuclear waste fund is,
essential; 2, regardless of Yucca Mountain, we will need
another new repository. The lessons of Yucca and others suggest
the consent-based siting approach may get better reports but
will require patients; 3, we have long favored consolidated and
home storage on a parallel track with Yucca, but find the
report vague as to quantity, duration and cost as well as what
the effect will be on the fee if the nuclear waste fund is to
be used to pay for storage; 4, we agree with the concept and
benefits of a new Federal corporation that can focus solely on
the waste management mission; 5, transportation planning and
coordination with States and others cannot begin soon enough.
There are two areas where we disagree with the Commission
report. A, the report says, ``Overall we are confident that our
waste management recommendations can be implemented using
revenue streams already dedicated for this purpose.'' There are
no cost estimates to substantiate that belief, which likely
also assumes the $26.7 billion under the nuclear waste fund is
assured; B, the report further says, ``We know what we have to
do, we know we have to do it, and we even know how to do it.''
While we may wish that were true, our assessment is that there
were too many people who are content to pass the problem along
to future generations and leave the waste where it is.
Continuing to kick the dry cask down the road should not be an
option.
So yet another study calls for prompt action, yet despite
on paper a financing plan, implementation relies on leadership
from the administration and the Congress. NARUC stands ready to
assist on behalf of ratepayers who may not even realize it, but
they are already paying for safe waste disposition. Thank you
for listening.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wright follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. Now I would like to recognize
myself for the first 5 minutes of questions. And just to follow
up, Mr. Wright, I would cut the Blue Ribbon Commission a little
slack because I think they do know what they need to do, long-
term geological repository; they do know how to do it because
Yucca Mountain is there to do it. So I think in them saying
that, that--I mean, that they were very careful if you read the
whole document in saying, no, we are not supposed to, but we
are not limiting it and stuff like that.
So let me first start with Dr. Lyman just as an aside, I
appreciate your testimony. I have had some good battles with
your organization on climate. But your position on nuclear
power and carbon dioxide emissions, it is very clear: If we are
going to go in that route, if electricity generation is
boosting 30 percent or 27 percent in 30 years and you keep the
same ratio of 20 percent electricity generation, that would be
37 new nuclear power plants, that just exacerbates the problem
we have with nuclear waste. Whether we go in that direction I
don't know because of natural gas and things. But I did
appreciate your testimony. I wanted to give Mr. Barrett and Dr.
North a chance to comment on comments from the first panel.
Mr. Barrett, do you have anything you want to publicly say
about our 2 esteemed members of the commission who were before
us?
Mr. Barrett. I believe they are great public servants to
America and have done many great things and they deserve a lot
of praise for a job well done. I am very unhappy and
disappointed that they were constrained so due to the political
actions of this administration.
Mr. Shimkus. I like both, and I want to key on because you
could tell, I got frustrated at the end when they kept stating
how we have failed to act. And we have known a long time in
this process, it does take a long time. We are right at the
cusp of really doing that. And now I think the frustration--Dr.
North, in your testimony, you hit the nail on the head and you
have said we have had long working public servants over decades
to get here now because of the fault of who? The politicians
were not there.
Mr. North. I have to say as once his critic when I was on
the TRB, there has been a lot of oversight and criticism and
get it right on DOE from lots of places, including the Nevada
Waste Project Office. On TRB meetings, I was amazed how much
they would come in and try to help pointing out technical
problems on Yucca so that we could find solutions to them. So
there has been a huge investment here by the technical
community, but the issues I thought former Congressman Hamilton
spoke to about the difficulty of electoral politics in the
United States and getting a large enough majority in the
Congress to override the present majority leader in the Senate,
is that politically realistic? We might hope and pray for it,
but it seems to me that what the presidential candidates have
been saying, we need a pretty good deal, maybe a good place to
back up to and think about what might be done, either in Nevada
or in other sites.
For example, the State of Washington, the basalt rock was
considered as a potential host site when DOE was looking at
five sites and picking three, and I was brought in to be a
consultant on the methodology they were using to make the
choice. Or New Hampshire, we were looking at granite as the
rock for the second repository program. On the eve of a
presidential primary, the second repository program went away.
It seems to me these are failures in leadership rather than
failures in the technical community. And if States wish to
submit a bid because they think it will be a pretty good deal,
we definitely need to talk. New Mexico is talking, maybe other
States will be attracted to this, maybe even Nevada.
Mr. Shimkus. My time is short. Let me go--how many of you
would agree that the nuclear waste fund mechanism should be
fixed so that managers of it can have access to the money paid
into it, yes or no. Mr. Barrett?
Mr. Barrett. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Dr. North?
Mr. North. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Malsch?
Mr. Malsch. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Dr. Lyman.
Mr. Lyman. Yes.
Mr. Schatz. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Very good. My time has expired. I now would
like to turn to my ranking member, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. I have a number of questions, but first, let me
say politics in Washington, we are shocked that is being done.
We have a President who campaigned in Nevada saying he was
going to shut down Yucca, we have the majority leader in the
Senate saying that. We know what happens in New Hampshire, it
is an early State, that is why we have Iowa with corn
subsidies, ethanol, which coming from my part of the country, I
am not a big ethanol person, as our chairman knows, so that is
the dilemma we are in. And the Blue Ribbon Commission gave us
somewhat of a way we can get out of it.
I have been to Yucca Mountain, I think some day, Senator
Reid will not be there anymore than any of us will be here and
that will be a possibility. But between now and then, we need
to get serious about doing particularly interim storage
facilities so we take it out of our site base that we are
doing. It is not just in the United States.
I was surprised last year because of what happened in
Japan, Germany are now shutting down their nuclear power
plants. So I guess they will buy more gas from Russia, or maybe
they will frack it because there are some places in Eastern
Europe that have shale.
So politics is part of our governance, and we have to deal
with it and sometimes we have to survive. And that will change,
and that is what elections are about.
Mr. Malsch, one of my concerns is consent-based process
necessary and how it could help with the potential approval of
some type of Yucca Mountain-type facility in the future. After
spending time in Nevada in talking with New Mexico Members of
Congress, even though the southern part of New Mexico likes
what is going on now and would like to expand it, nobody thinks
that the New Mexico legislature will approve it. And so if we
are considering consent-based on some legislative body, we will
be back where we are in Nevada with everybody who runs for
office in Nevada, Republican or Democrat, says I am against
Yucca, so you will see the same thing, not in my backyard. In
fact, Congressman Bass talked about it in New Hampshire.
If we base it only on consent, we will not get there, that
is where, I think, the frustration was in the 1980s when
Congress made that decision for Nevada, because they couldn't
get anyone else to settle on it.
I don't want to rehash the history, but in your testimony
you offer a few key lessons on efforts to site repositories in
Kansas and Nevada that we could apply to move forward to a new
strategy. First, you suggest the Federal Government not commit
to repository until the appropriate scientific investigation is
complete. That seems a no-brainer that we should do that. Can
you explain how the Federal Government failed to heed this
lesson in both Kansas and Nevada and how, if we change, the
likelihood of success?
Mr. Malsch. Well, certainly in Kansas, the AEC pressed
forward in the face of--with only very incomplete
investigations and didn't pay sufficient attentions to the
advice of experts in Kansas, including the Kansas geologist.
And ultimately the project failed.
In the case of Yucca Mountain, the Congress decided that
Yucca would be the only site to be studied and characterized in
the face of incomplete information, and information was even
incomplete when the President recommended the site to the
Congress because it took another 6 years even to complete the
license application after the site recommendation was made.
I think I agree with the Blue Ribbon Commission that there
has to be an iterative process in which decisions are made on
an iterative step-wise basis consistent with the level of
information available. It would be one thing for a State or
community or tribe to agree, for example, to have a site
investigated; quite another to agree prior to the completion of
the investigations with repository or even for that matter,
centralized storage facilities. You have to go step by step,
you can't ask too much in the earlier stage. I think, really,
that premature commitments its Lyons, Kansas and Yucca greatly
eroded the credibility of the program, and I would hate to see
that repeated again.
Mr. Green. I am going run out of time. There is a history
of Congress overriding States' decisions, and obviously the
Yucca Mountain is one of them, but the 2005 energy bill that we
passed on siting at that time, we needed importation of L&G,
and a great many States would not allow those facilities to be
built, obviously Texas and Louisiana we build them everyday. We
took away that permission and Federalized that permitting
process, because our country in 2005 needed natural gas. Now
some of those plants are actually retooling to export it.
So there are times where the Congress makes a decision for
the country and doesn't necessarily get the consent of the
local States, but we have to have a process that gives them
time, but I think there is a National imperative we have to
have some place to put nuclear waste instead of storing it
where we have it now. Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. I agree, I think that is the debate on eminent
domain, local people have--that someone has to make some
decision sometimes. I would now recognize my colleague from
Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
gentlemen for being here this afternoon and this morning. If I
could start with Mr. Wright. There were some suggestions made
to the Commission that instead of using geologic repositories
or central interim storage facilities, that they should be--
maybe the waste should be held on site and hardened on site
storage. Do you have any comments on that?
Mr. Wright. Well, I don't think that is a good idea. You
know, when you talk about harden on site storage, that is not
what was mandated by the Nuclear Waster Policy Act nor is that
what the contracts that all the utilities which own the fuel
are compelled to enter with DOE.
There are technical and operational factors that should be
considered, and this little added benefit to the cost. And it
is probably well intended the process, but it is a little--I
don't know, it begs the question and then what, and you miss
the opportunities, I think, to take advantage of consolidation
of fuel and the associated economies of scale that come with
that.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Mr. Barrett, what should we expect to
see out of DOE next if this administration is going to take the
Commission's recommendation seriously?
Mr. Barrett. I hope Secretary Chu directs the staff to move
forward on things that the BRC has recommended, start the
consensus process, let's see if it is going to work, let's see
if they bring in a consensus site. We know the issue is not
with the locals. We know the issue rests in the State capital.
Santa Fe has not spoken to New Mexico yet. Let's find out, will
they speak in a reasonable condition. So let's start the
consolidated storage process. Let's move forward, they can do
it under existing law, and I hope the Secretary does it very
soon.
Mr. Shimkus. Would the gentleman yield for one second?
WIPP is not high-level waste. We have to make that clear.
We are making them synonymous, and they are not.
Mr. Barrett. That is absolutely true. WIPP is only defense
true waste, is not high-level waste at all, but the people in
the southeast of New Mexico have aspirations to do that.
Mr. Latta. Let me ask the other panelists, what should the
DOE action be that would demonstrate concrete and rapid action
take up on these recommendations? Anyone?
Mr. North. I think in the near-term, they can provide the
staff support for discussion on these issues and we will need a
good deal of such discussion. But until the money is made
available to go forward, for example, the planning of the
packaging and the transportation will be very difficult. The
problem here is that spent fuel is stored in dry casks and can
be moved only in very special transporting casks.
Some of these casks can be designed in such a way to serve
multiple purposes, but they are very expensive, they are very
heavy and if you have an accident involving them, you really
want the State and local authorities to know how to handle
that. So for WIPP with a much easier transportation problem for
transuranic waste, this was done over the period of a decade
with a lot of funding and a lot of cooperation between the
parties. The process was put on hold for transporting and
packaging spent nuclear fuel. It needs to be restarted and in
my judgment it will take at least a decade to get it to where
we need it for doing the transport wherever it is going to go,
an interim storage facility or a geologic repository.
Mr. Latta. Anyone else?
Mr. Malsch. I would like to add to what Dr. North just said
that the Commission has recommended a number of actions, that
could be implemented administratively without legislation to
deal with the unfortunate status and use of the nuclear waste
line. I think those things should be considered promptly.
Mr. Latta. Well, let me ask this to the panelists again
that, I have sat through a lot of hearings in here with NRC and
DOE. With the administration's track record right now, do you
think there will be any stalling or delaying to get this thing
done? Anyone?
Mr. Barrett. I hope not. There is a big responsibility that
they have when they swore their oaths of office to uphold the
law. I hope that Secretary Chu now that he has the results from
the BRC which doesn't show any new path forward that we ever
thought of before, and we have always thought about
consultation cooperation agreements that he would resume
licensing and move forward.
Mr. Latta. Mr. Wright, and I know, Mr. Chairman, my time
has expired, but he was going to answer, Mr. Wright.
Mr. Wright. If it is appropriate. You know, it is going to
take leadership on a number of levels, all across this country
to get moving, but I think that we need to--we have got to move
forward with things as simple as providing funds just for the
completion of the license app, that is a simple thing to do.
But we also need to take what is in the BRC and look at what we
can all agree on and move forward on, rather that wait for some
giant legislative package to come through, because I think the
bigger the package, it probably is going to move very, very
slow. So I think we need to be a little bit specific in what
everybody can agree on and move forward.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired and
I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Louisiana for 5 minutes.
Dr. Cassidy. Mr. Malsch, you may have addressed this
earlier, I was in a committee hearing earlier, but Chairman
Shimkus put a thing up there, he asked what is local; and he
showed how all these surrounding counties in Nevada actually
favor this project. But, obviously, Senator Reid does not and
he has effectively used his power to kill it.
So let me just ask you what is local? Is it the people that
live next door, in the next county, in the next two counties,
or is it the Senator that represents.
Mr. Malsch. Well, I think that--I mean, it obviously
includes the people that live and work closest to the facility,
but it also includes the people, as I have stated, as a whole,
because the facility can impact the State as a whole, not only
in terms of its own operations but in terms of the
transportation that is necessary.
Mr. Cassidy. That is true of the entire country, correct?
Mr. Malsch. That is true of the entire country.
Mr. Cassidy. And if you bring this in from Georgia and you
were to bring it all the way across, assuming it is I-10, you
are going to affect my State, Louisiana. So again,
theoretically somebody in India is affected. So do we have a
workable definition of local more workable than anyone that may
potentially be affected?
Mr. Malsch. Well, I think the Commission recommended a
negotiation process and an iterative consent-based process that
involves the State, local governments and Indian tribes. I
think the relationships among those is going to vary.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, at some point though, one of my favorite
quotes--I don't mean to interrupt, I only have 3 or 4 minutes
left--is a Samuel Johnson quote: ``No one likes change, even
from worse to better.'' Now, I can see it is easy for some well
funded group to whip up emotional opposition, particularly when
there are reports that are not being released that may show the
safety of this project. So I am a little bit kind of concerned
that as long as there is somebody well funded who wants to show
pictures of mutant animals that we won't have--so going back to
my definition, what is local? If it is not the country
surrounding and the county surrounding the counties which
surround, indeed what is local?
Mr. Malsch. Well, I think that has to be worked out on a
facility-by-facility basis, but I think you have to include
both the local governments, Indian tribes and the State just as
a practical matter. As the Commission said here this morning,
this is not going to be easy, it is going to be very difficult,
but I really do see it as the only reasonable path forward.
Mr. Cassidy. Is it a path or is it a dead end? I am asking
that not rhetorically, but I mean, because you obviously are an
attorney representing the State of Nevada, you got a position,
I understand that. At the same time knowing the emotional
aspect of this, it just seems almost like almost it can't
happen as long as you define local so broadly.
Mr. Malsch. Well, I really think we should not be so
discouraged. I mean, it has worked reasonably well in the case
of one geologic disposal facility in New Mexico. It worked and
is apparently working in several foreign countries.
Mr. Cassidy. And I gather from the earlier testimony that
it worked there because they have a different structure so the
central government was better able to impose its will upon a
State government; is that correct or incorrect?
Mr. Malsch. I am sorry, are you talking about foreign
countries?
Mr. Cassidy. Yes. In Spain, for example, the Federal
Government can make a decision the province could not object
sort of thing. Is that correct? I don't know that. I am just
asking.
Mr. Malsch. I am not sure that is correct. I would have to
go back and read the report.
Mr. Cassidy. Let me go back to--thank you--Mr. Wright. I
have read Dr. Lyman's testimony so I am familiar with that.
Going back to the reprocessing question which we had earlier,
again, if you read AREVA, which I gather Dr. Lyman objects to
theirs, but I am sure it would be vice versa. But you also said
that you are not sure that the reprocessing is ready for prime
time. I ask this not as an advocate but as someone who is
curious. Why would you not say it is not ready? Do you not
believe AREVA, but you do believe Dr. Lyman, or you see where I
am going with that?
Mr. Wright. I guess to be really clear about it, I mean,
the technology, it depends on what you are going to be picking,
what technology you are looking at. You know, are you looking
at some new generation of technology. So until we kind of
determine which way we want to go there I believe that is what
we mean. I don't think--we haven't been--we haven't picked one
yet or even several to choose from. You know, they are doing--
we used to have the technology and now France has it.
Mr. Cassidy. But at the French I understand there AREVA has
even proposed as a private entity to set up a reprocessing
plant, which obviously logically would be right next to a
regular nuclear power plant, if you will. They seem to feel
like they have it. And I know that Dr. Lyman objects to this
but they claim that they are reducing the amount of waste.
Mr. Wright. Well, there is no question it would probably
reduce the amount of waste and probably what would be left if
you did it in a way that you took care of the proliferation
issues, the half lives would be less, you have less waste. I
mean, that is just common sense that would tell you that would
probably be the case. How much that reduces I don't know. But
DOE was looking and exploring something a number of years ago
with the GNEP program. And they went around to places,
including one in South Carolina, around Akin, where we had a
big meeting, a willing host site. But it was a willing host
site for the fabrication of the fuel and also for a reactor,
and then as long as it was an approved pathway out to a
geological repository with the waste that was left. Because no
matter what you do in a commercial back end of the cycle you
are going to have waste. That stands alone from the defense
waste which is not a candidate for reprocessing. And we are
going to have defense waste no matter what. We got to put that
somewhere.
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Dr. North, I was curious, you were looking at
this book and it looked like you wanted to comment.
Mr. North. Yes. I was going to say the National Academy of
Sciences did an exhaustive study on separation and reprocessing
in 1996. My committee, the 2001 National Academy Report, looked
at this issue, and we had access to the same staff who had done
the investigations earlier. So the BRC cited in an end note our
committee's report in this area. The problem is the geologists
became too good at finding high grade uranium ore. So using
plutonium and mixed fuel is too expensive. It is an economic
issue. But several hundred to let's say 1,000 years from now we
may have depleted all the high grade uranium ore. And at that
point being able to retrieve spent nuclear fuel and reprocess
it then may be economically very important. And the fission
products will have died way down and so less radioactivity, it
will be easier to do it.
So I think there is a very strong argument for
retrievability. Even if reprocessing isn't economic now, it may
become so in the future. And ask the French and the British and
maybe the Japanese about the economics of their present process
and I think they will tell you that it is a problem.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. That is very, very helpful. We are
going to end here. Instead of just placing this in the record I
just want to reiterate a couple things. On the House vote to
override the Nevada disapproval in May 2002, that vote was 306
to 117. As I said before, the override was a voice vote in the
U.S. Senate, which I found amazing. I also want to put the
report language out of the House, just highlighting Congress is
both of us but there are two chambers. In the report language
for the House to pay for the BRC study, I quote, therefore, the
committee makes the $5 million for the Blue Ribbon Commission
available provided that Yucca Mountain is considered in the
review. That was pulled out by the Senate. We are just again
addressing the facts. Finally, we did have an appropriation
vote to fund the scientific study co-authored by my colleague
from Washington State. That vote on the floor was 306 to 117.
The House has spoken numerous times that it is the will of
the House that we move forward on Yucca Mountain, and we hope
that we can get there some day in the near future. With that, I
do appreciate your time, I look forward to working with you in
the future, and with that I will adjourn the hearing.
[Whereupon, at 12:45 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


