- REAUTHORIZATION OF PDUFA: WHAT IT MEANS FOR JOBS, INNOVATION, AND PATIENTS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REAUTHORIZATION OF PDUFA: WHAT IT MEANS FOR JOBS, INNOVATION, AND
PATIENTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 1, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-110

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov
_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

76-491 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman                      DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

_____

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JIM MATHESON, Utah
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  officio)
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...............................................     3
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     8
Hon. Leonard Lance, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New Jersey, opening statement...............................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Hon. Tim Murphy, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................    12
Hon. Phil Gingrey, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Georgia, opening statement.....................................    12
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    15
Hon. John D. Dingell, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Michigan, prepared statement................................    59
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, prepared statement..............................    79
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, prepared statement.........................   202

Witnesses

Margaret A. Hamburg, Commissioner, Food and Drug Administration..    16
Prepared statement...........................................    19
Answers to submitted questions...............................   203
Geno Germano, President and General Manager, Specialty Care and
Oncology, Pfizer, Inc..........................................   100
Prepared statement...........................................   103
Answers to submitted questions...............................   237
David L. Gollaher, President and Chief Executive Officer,
California Healthcare Institute................................   113
Prepared statement...........................................   115
Answers to submitted questions...............................   240
Richard F. Pops, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Alkermes,
on Behalf of Biotechnology Industry Organization...............   123
Prepared statement...........................................   125
Answers to submitted questions...............................   243
David E. Wheadon, Senior Vice President, Scientific and
Regulatory Affairs, Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers
of America.....................................................   137
Prepared statement...........................................   139
Answers to submitted questions...............................   247
Allan Coukell, Director of Medical Programs, Pew Health Group,
The Pew Charitable Trusts......................................   154
Prepared statement...........................................   156
Answers to submitted questions \1\...........................
Diane Endquist Dorman, Vice President, Public Policy, National
Organization for Rare Disorders................................   162
Prepared statement...........................................   164
Answers to submitted questions...............................   251
Daniel A.C. Frattarelli, Chair of Pediatrics, Oakwood Hospital
and Medical Center, on Behalf of the American Academy of
Pediatrics' Committee on Drugs.................................   175
Prepared statement...........................................   177
Answers to submitted questions...............................   255

Submitted Material

Summary, undated, of H.R. 1483, the Drug Safety Enhancement Act
of 2011, submitted by Mr. Dingell..............................    62
Statement, dated February 1, 2012, of the National Community
Pharmacists Association, submitted by Mr. Pitts................    89
Statement, dated February 1, 2012, of the National Association of
Chain Drug Stores, submitted by Mr. Pitts......................    92

----------
\1\ Mr. Coukell did not answer submitted questions for the
record.

REAUTHORIZATION OF PDUFA: WHAT IT MEANS FOR JOBS, INNOVATION, AND
PATIENTS

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 1, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R.
Pitts (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Burgess, Shimkus,
Rogers, Myrick, Murphy, Gingrey, Latta, Lance, Cassidy,
Guthrie, Bilbray, Griffith, Pallone, Dingell, Towns, Capps,
Schakowsky, Gonzalez, Ross, Matheson, Markey, Eshoo,
Christensen, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Clay Alspach, Counsel, Health; Michael
Beckerman, Deputy Staff Director; Mike Bloomquist, General
Counsel; Anita Bradley, Senior Policy Advisor to Chairman
Emeritus; Andy Duberstein, Deputy Press Secretary; Paul
Edattel, Professional Staff Member, Health; Debbee Keller,
Press Secretary; Ryan Long, Chief Counsel, Health; Carly
McWilliams, Legislative Clerk; John O'Shea, Professional Staff
Member, Health; Heidi Stirrup, Health Policy Coordinator; Alli
Corr, Democratic Policy Analyst; Eric Flamm, FDA Detailee;
Karen Lightfoot, Democratic Communications Director and Senior
Policy Advisor; Karen Nelson, Democratic Deputy Committee Staff
Director for Health; and Rachel Sher, Democratic Senior
Counsel.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The chair
recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
Today, we will discuss reauthorizations of the Prescription
Drug User Fee Act, PDUFA, the Best Pharmaceuticals for Children
Act, BPCA, and the Pediatric Research Equity Act, PREA, all of
which expire September 30 of this year. We will also discuss
pharmaceutical supply chain issues.
PDUFA was first authorized by Congress in 1992 with the
goal of expediting human drug applications through the FDA
approval process. Under the act and its subsequent
reauthorizations, the drug industry pays user fees to FDA, and
FDA commits to meet certain performance goals. I am pleased
that the industry and FDA have reached an agreement for PDUFA
V, and I look forward to hearing more of the details from our
witnesses. Under the agreement, industry would pay over $700
million in fiscal year 2013, and higher amounts in the
remaining 4 years.
The PDUFA V agreement is designed to speed new drugs to
patients awaiting treatments and cures, while ensuring the
highest safety standards. It is also designed to make the
approval process more timely, predictable, and certain for drug
sponsors and the venture capitalists who fund new drug
research.
Among the highlights, the agreement increases the
communication between FDA and drug sponsors, specifically
building contacts and meetings into the regulatory review
process. To increase the efficiency and predictability of the
review process, a new 60-day validation period will be used for
FDA and drug sponsors to communicate, interact and plan before
the clock officially starts.
We are also here to discuss the Best Pharmaceuticals for
Children Act and the Pediatric Research Equity Act. BPCA gives
FDA the authority to extend a 6-month period of market
exclusivity to a manufacturer in return for specific studies on
pediatric use. Under PREA, a manufacturer of a new drug or
biologic is required to submit studies of a drug's safety and
effectiveness when used by children.
Most prescription drugs have never been the subject of
studies specifically designed to test their effects on
children. Yet, when no pediatric-approved drugs exist for an
illness, doctors often prescribe these medications to children,
relying on the safety and effectiveness demonstrated with
adults, in the absence of clinical data on how the drug may
work in a child. As a father and grandfather, I view
reauthorizing BPCA and PREA as a step toward obtaining that
data and ensuring that our children and grandchildren receive
the correct medications and correct dosages when they are ill.
We should not forget that Americans are the most innovative
people on earth, and the United States leads the world in new
drug development. Some 4 million jobs in the United States are
directly or indirectly supported by the drug industry.
If the goals of the PDUFA V agreement are realized, we will
continue to be the world leader in new, safe and effective
life-saving and life-enhancing drugs; American patients will
have timely access to treatments and cures for everyday
maladies, chronic illnesses, and terminal diseases; and we will
keep good, well-paying jobs here in the United States.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. I would like to thank all of our witnesses for
coming today and now yield to the vice chairman, Dr. Burgess.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Madam
Commissioner. Thank you very much for being here. Thank you for
the hospitality you have shown to me and my staff on the two
times we ventured out to the FDA during your tenure. I
certainly appreciate the time you spent with us.
We are here to talk about the User Fee Act
reauthorizations, but we are also here to ask some questions
about how the FDA as a whole is successfully accomplishing its
mission. If we don't understand where we are, it is hard to
know where we are trying to go, and this committee has already
laid an aggressive schedule and foundation for the user fee
reauthorizations. Certainly, today's hearing is going to be a
big part of that because it is an issue of patient safety, and
we are all for patient safety. That is not a partisan issue. We
are also all for creation of American jobs. That is not a
partisan issue, or should not be a partisan issue either.
And the big question I have is the lack of predictability
driving American drug manufacturers out of the country. We are
trying to encourage job growth and innovation in this country.
Does the FDA's slow approval process send venture capitalists
elsewhere where they can find more stability? Is there a way to
continue to streamline the approval process of single-molecule
drugs where you have the most regulatory experience?
The FDA must have the infrastructure and programs in place
in order that innovations are dealt with in a fashion that
assures safety for the patient and a straightforward and
streamlined approved process.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the recognition. I will yield
back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Waxman, for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Pallone, for allowing me to give my statement at this point.
Today, we begin, once again, the process of reauthorizing
the UFAs and our pediatric drug testing laws. I have been a
part of this process since the inception of each of these
programs, starting first with the Prescription Drug User Fee
Act in 1992. In every reauthorization, we have worked together
on a bipartisan basis. Of course, that is how it should be,
given the role these laws play in helping FDA fulfill its vital
public health mission.
The drug and device user fee programs ensure that FDA gets
critical dollars to allow the agency to complete its premarket
review in a timely manner so that patients have access to
therapies at the earliest possible time. The Best
Pharmaceuticals for Children Act and the Pediatric Research
Equity Act give FDA the authority to obtain information about
the use of drugs in children. And this year, for the first
time, we will be establishing two new programs to help speed
FDA's review of low-cost generics and biosimilars.
As we begin this process, these are the primary goals we
need to keep in mind. We must reauthorize and establish these
essential programs in a timely way so that FDA can do its job
protecting the health and safety of American patients. It would
be irresponsible to allow this legislation to become a vehicle
for the wish lists of members seeking to move their own
controversial bills. I hope we should continue the long
tradition of UFA bipartisanship and work together to ensure
this does not happen.
I am concerned, however, about some of the bills our
counterparts across the aisle have suggested will be under
consideration. Some of these bills would prevent FDA from
insisting on adequate data from clinical trials and forcing it
to approve drugs and devices on an incomplete record. These
proposals would prove disastrous for the safety and efficacy of
our drugs and devices. Another would enrich the pharmaceutical
industry by gutting the time-tested system of incentives
provided under Hatch-Waxman. The cost of this windfall would
fall on the backs of American patients who under that proposal
would be forced to pay monopoly drug prices for 15 years.
Another controversial proposal the majority intends to
consider would fundamentally reform FDA's mission by adding
things like ``economic growth, innovation, competitiveness, and
job creation'' to the agency's priorities. The title of this
hearing suggested our colleagues across the aisle also believe
that creating jobs should be one of FDA's many
responsibilities. I hope we would all agree that FDA should not
take jobs into consideration when it is reviewing the safety
and effectiveness of a new medicine. We want FDA to ensure that
our drugs and devices are safe and effective. Whether jobs will
be created is simply not a part of that scientific public
health equation. As a matter of fact, some of the new drugs, if
they are higher priced and don't do any more than the older
drugs, may be a financial burden and one could then evaluate
that at FDA, which is also not FDA's appropriate role.
It appears that many of these proposals are driven by
rhetoric insisting that FDA has become too demanding of
companies seeking to market their drugs and devices. As a
result, innovation and jobs are being driven abroad. When we
examine claims as serious as these, we must insist on data and
on facts. Biased anecdotes from individual constituent
companies do not qualify as fact. I am aware of no reliable
data showing that these claims are true. To the contrary, I am
aware of some studies showing, for example, that FDA actually
approves drugs faster than our counterparts in Europe. I am
also aware of a study showing that FDA is quite flexible in its
requirements in reviewing orphan drug applications. NORD is
here today and will testify on this study.
We should all be united in the goal of ensuring that we
have a strong, well-resourced FDA that is armed with a full
complement of authorities to protect us from unsafe drugs and
to assure that those drugs work. That is FDA's fundamental
mission, and it is in no one's interest to have a weak FDA.
American consumers depend on FDA. If Americans lose confidence
in the FDA, they will lose confidence in the pharmaceutical and
medical device industries as well.
One final point. I appreciate that we are looking at the
increasing globalization of our drug supply as a feature of our
hearing. It is critically important issue. FDA has indicated
that it needs an updated set of tools to deal with this
dramatically different marketplace, and I look forward to
hearing more on this issue from our witnesses today.
Mr. Dingell, Mr. Pallone, Ms. DeGette and I have proposed
legislation, the Drug Safety Enhancement Act, that will go a
long way toward providing FDA with these much-needed resources
and authorities.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Lance, for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LEONARD LANCE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Congress first authorized PDUFA in response to lagging
approval times for prescription drugs at the FDA. Under the
agreement, the FDA collects funds from drug sponsors to help
expedite the human drug approval process. Not only has PDUFA
improved the approval times of drugs, but the past
authorizations have led to improved safety policies, better
communication and improved regulatory processes at the FDA.
The current reauthorization, PDUFA V, includes provisions
to provide the FDA with tools to make safe and effective new
medicines available to patients in a more efficient, consistent
and timely manner while maintaining the high review standards
for safety and efficacy. Additionally, the agreement contains
new provisions to address problems that have arisen since PDUFA
IV. This includes the implementation of a new benefit risk
framework, patient-focused drug development, standardization of
the risk evaluation and mitigation strategies, and a new
implementation plan for the rare-disease program, something
that is close to my heart.
I look forward to hearing from the panels on their views on
the agreement and working with my colleagues on both sides of
the aisle on the committee to reauthorize this vitally
important legislation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield the balance of my time
to Dr. Murphy.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lance follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TIM MURPHY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Murphy. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
As this committee begins the processing of reauthorizing
the Prescription Drug User Fee Act, it is important to look
back at where we were when this was first enacted.
Prior to the first PDUFA agreement in 1992, it took almost
2 years for the FDA to review new drug applications and roughly
70 percent of all new drugs were entering the market overseas
before they became available to U.S. patients. By 2007, review
time for new drugs had been reduced to just over 1 year. The
backlog of applications that had been built up prior to PDUFA
had been cleared, and today, 50 percent of new drugs are now
marketed in the United States first, making us the world leader
in bringing new treatments to market.
The certainty and transparency provided to drug
manufacturers as a result of PDUFA have been key drivers of
economic development in the biopharmaceutical sector. In 2009,
the industry was directly supporting almost 650,000 jobs and as
many as 4 million jobs indirectly while boasting a total
economic impact of $918 billion annually.
Now industry and the FDA have come together and negotiated
an agreement that seeks to expand transparency and consistency
in the drug approval process while continuing to ensure patient
safety. As this committee reviews this agreement, we must have
three priority goals: one, ensuring the safety of patients;
two, facilitating access to new treatments for patients as soon
and as safely as possible; and three, establishing a review
process that continues to allow U.S. pharmaceutical jobs to
flourish. Let us gather the facts on these three essential
goals and work together towards a bill that saves lives and
saves jobs.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield to Dr. Gingrey of
Georgia.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PHIL GINGREY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF GEORGIA

Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman from
Pennsylvania for yielding to me.
The reauthorization of the FDA user fee program presents
Congress with the opportunity to improve upon the current U.S.
drug and device approval pathway. These hearings also present
us with an opportunity to work together for patients and
businesses back home in our districts who tell us that reform
is long overdue. I look forward to working with my colleagues
on both sides of the aisle to accomplish this worthy goal.
To Dr. Hamburg, a special welcome. It is good to see you
before this subcommittee again, Dr. Hamburg. You and I have
spent time talking over the past year and a half about the
potential that regulatory science holds as well as the need to
spur antibiotic drug development, and I want to commend you for
your leadership in these fields and personally thank you for
your support of our efforts on Generating Antibiotic Incentives
Now, the GAIN Act, H.R. 2182. My GAIN Act original cosponsors,
Gene Green, Ed Whitfield, Diana DeGette, John Shimkus, Anna
Eshoo, Mike Rogers, and the latest edition, and not the least,
Ed Markey, thank you for your efforts and that of your staff on
the GAIN Act. This is truly a bipartisan piece of legislation.
We created it together. We have advocated for it together, and
it is because of our combined efforts that it has a real chance
of becoming law.
Finally, thank you to the long list of GAIN Act supporters,
and specifically, the Pew Charitable Trust, which I see will be
testifying on the second panel.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the time and I
yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gingrey follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and yields to the
ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Pitts, and I welcome
today's hearing and I am very much looking forward to working
together on the critical business of this subcommittee.
This is the beginning of a multi-month process in this
subcommittee that will involve many hearings, lengthy
deliberations, negotiations amongst members and staff, and
final legislation on critical FDA policy.
The User Fee Acts, which has become known as the UFAs, will
include reauthorizations of some successful and some not as
successful FDA programs. This will be our subcommittee's
opportunity of working alongside the FDA, industry and other
stakeholders to build upon and improve these critical programs.
It will also include some new programs such as a generic drug
user fee program that I am optimistic will help to advance
generic drug utilization in this country.
But today's hearing will focus on the reauthorization of
the Prescription Drug User Fee Act, otherwise known as PDUFA.
Originally authorized in 1992, PDUFA has provided FDA with the
additional resources it needs to efficiently review an
application for a new drug or biologic to enter the
marketplace.
I would like to first applaud the FDA and the brand drug
industry for coming together on this thorough and responsible
agreement. PDUFA has been a remarkable success, giving patients
access to safe, effective and breakthrough medical treatments
while supporting the advancement of science and promoting a
thriving pharmaceutical industry in the United States, and I
know that we all agree that failure to reauthorize PDUFA in a
timely manner would be extraordinarily disruptive and a misstep
for all parties involved, so I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses about the important compromises made in this
agreement and how it will help to strengthen the PDUFA program
overall.
That said, I would like to note that as we set out to
reauthorize this program for a fourth time, an important issue
remains unresolved, and that is the growing globalization of
the drug marketplace. I believe that Americans deserve the
confidence that the drugs they rely on will help them get
better and not make them more sick. That is why along with Mr.
Dingell, Mr. Waxman and Ms. DeGette, I will be advocating for
critical provisions of the Drug Safety Enhancement Act to be
included in these reauthorizations. The bill would equip the
FDA with the increased authorities and resources it needs to
keep pace with an increasingly international marketplace of
products. It is imperative that the FDA play a role in
improving quality and safety standards of manufacturing
facilities abroad. This legislation process presents a unique
opportunity for this subcommittee to make extraordinary changes
to enhance our drug safety laws, and it is my hope that my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle, consumer advocates and
the regulated industry, can all come together to ensure we
address the safety of the Nation's drug supply in a meaningful
way.
Also under discussion today is the reauthorization of two
pediatric programs, the Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act,
BPCA, and the Pediatric Research Equity Act, PREA, which are
designed to provide necessary research on the appropriate use
of prescription drugs in pediatric populations. These programs
have been crucial in the successful cultivation of important
research used by doctors and parents to better determine what
kind of drug therapy is safest and most appropriate for a
child. Above all else, we must ensure that the prescriptions
our children use are tested appropriately and deemed safe. I
believe that we can all agree that we have an enormous
responsibility to our children to make certain that they have
access to the best possible medical treatment. BPCA and PREA
are two different but complementary approaches towards
accomplishing that goal.
Now, the regulatory authority granted to FDA under PREA is
linked to the expiration of BPCA and thus will also expire at
the end of this fiscal year. I understand there are proposals
being offered by some members on the subcommittee that would
sunset the expirations on both programs, and I have some
concerns with that approach, so I am eager to hear from our
witnesses about their views on the linkage and expiration of
these programs.
Now it is time for us to get to work on these critical
issues. It is my hope that our subcommittee can work in a
bipartisan manner and produce strong consensus legislation, and
again, I want to thank all our witnesses for being here today,
including Dr. Hamburg, who I have to say with regard to Dr.
Hamburg, she has been incredibly cooperative, come to my
district and I know other districts to talk about the FDA, and
I do believe we have made substantial progress under your
leadership, so I want to commend you for that. Thanks.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
We have two panels today. Our first panel will have just
one witness, Dr. Margaret Hamburg, the Commissioner of FDA, and
we are happy to have you with us today.
Dr. Hamburg, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MARGARET A. HAMBURG, COMMISSIONER, FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION

Ms. Hamburg. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members of the
subcommittee. I am Dr. Margaret Hamburg, Commissioner of Food
and Drugs, and I really do appreciate this opportunity to
discuss the reauthorization of both the Prescription Drug User
Fee Act and legislation to promote pediatric drug testing, laws
that will expire if not reauthorized this year. I will also
talk about FDA's efforts to promote science and innovation as
well as the continuing challenges of ensuring the safety of
medical products in a global marketplace.
I am joined today by Dr. Theresa Mullin, who is the
Director of the Office of Planning and Informatics in the
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, and Deborah Autor,
Deputy Commissioner for Global Regulatory Operations and
Policy. Dr. Mullin actually served as FDA's lead negotiator
during the recent PDUFA reauthorization discussions and leads
our long-range planning efforts within the Center for Drug
Evaluation and Research. I have also charged Ms. Autor, Deb
Autor, in a new role recently to really help the agency to
adapt to the challenges of globalization and import safety as
the Deputy Commissioner of a newly organized entity to really
focus on these important challenges. Both are very
distinguished and they are available to help answer some of the
questions that you may have based on their ample experience and
knowledge.
I am pleased to report that we have transmitted our
recommendations for three user fee programs to help fund our
prescription drug, generic drug and biosimilar review programs
to Congress ahead of schedule. I am also very placed to
announce this morning that FDA and industry have also agreed in
principle to a user fee program for medical devices.
Congress first enacted the Prescription Drug User Fee Act,
also known as PDUFA, back in 1992, as was noted. Before PDUFA,
FDA's review process was understaffed, unpredictable and slow.
Patients in the United States often had to wait for new
products that were already available in foreign countries.
PDUFA revolutionized the drug approval process by providing the
funding necessary for us to conduct faster, more predictable
reviews.
In the nearly 20 years since PDUFA was first enacted, FDA
has approved over 1,500 new drugs and biologics. In the last
fiscal year, FDA approved 35 new groundbreaking medicines,
actually the largest number second to only one other year in
the last couple of decades. We were able to approve two new
treatments for hepatitis C, groundbreaking medicines using more
advanced science, targeting molecular targets linking
diagnostics and therapeutics. We approved the first drug for
Hodgkin's lymphoma in 30 years and the first drug for lupus in
50 years, and just this week we approved innovative new drugs
to treat cystic fibrosis and skin cancer, and we did it ahead
of our PDUFA performance goals. The United States now in fact
leads the world in the introduction of novel drugs.
We look forward to working with the subcommittee on the
fifth authorization of PDUFA. In keeping with the requirements
Congress put into place, we negotiated this new PDUFA agreement
with industry while regularly consulting consumer, patient and
health care professional organizations. The agreement contains
several enhancements that address the concerns raised by
industry and public stakeholders as well as the agency's
priorities. These enhancements include initiatives to improve
communication between FDA and industry to speed up drug
development, advance the science behind drug regulation,
particularly around rare diseases, enhance the way FDA
evaluates the risks and benefits of therapies, modernize FDA's
drug safety system, and require electronic submission and
standardize the format of the data that we receive. Together,
these improvements, along with additional funding industry will
be providing under the agreement, will allow us to maintain our
Nation's leadership in drug development while preserving our
high standards for safety and efficacy.
On the same timetable for reauthorization as PDUFA are two
laws designed to ensure that drugs are appropriately tested for
their use in children, entitled the Best Pharmaceuticals for
Children Act and the Pediatric Research Equity Act, also known
as BPCA and PREA. These two laws have dramatically improved our
understanding of the safety and efficacy of drugs prescribed
for our children, and I want to thank Representatives Mike
Rogers and Anna Eshoo, who are leading the reauthorization
efforts on these important laws.
Before enactment of BPCA in 1997, all too often, health
care professionals were forced to rely on imprecise and
ineffective methods to provide medications for children such as
adjusting dosing based on weight or crushing pills and mixing
them in food. But today, as a result of BPCA and PREA,
approximately 400 drugs have been studied and labeled
specifically for pediatric use. We welcome the opportunity to
work with Congress to reauthorize these successful programs.
Lastly, I will turn to the challenges posed by
globalization and FDA's efforts to meet these challenges.
Today, approximately 40 percent of the drugs Americans take are
manufactured outside our borders and up to 80 percent of the
active pharmaceutical ingredients in those drugs come from
foreign sources. Over the next decade, FDA will transform
itself from a domestic agency operating in a globalized world
to a truly global agency fully prepared for a regulatory
environment in which product safety and quality knows no
borders.
To achieve this transformation, the agency is developing a
new, more international operating model that relies on
strengthening collaboration, improved information sharing and
gathering, data-driven risk analytics, and the smart allocation
of resources. We are eager to work with Congress to ensure that
our regulatory authorities keep pace with an increasingly
globalized world.
So I thank you for the opportunity to testify today and I
am happy to address any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hamburg follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and I will now
begin the questioning and recognize myself for 5 minutes for
that purpose.
Commissioner, I believe the PDUFA agreement contains
helpful improvements to the drug review process, and I am
particularly interested in the process improvements for the
review of new molecular entities. Would you explain these
improvements and how they will add to the predictability and
transparency of the review process?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, there are a number of important
elements. One is, you know, to really focus on the
transparency, consistency and predictability issues that are so
important to industry that you mentioned through enhanced
communication and sitting down early in the process and midway
through the process to really make sure that we all understand
where we are, where we are going, what are the expectations,
and to be able to, you know, much more rapidly surface issues
as they emerge and address them so that we can, you know,
really streamline the process and avoid unnecessary delays or
confusion.
Mr. Pitts. I understand that FDA and the industry have a
tentative agreement on the medical device user fees. As you
know, Chairman Upton and I have set a deadline of reauthorizing
the user fees by the end of June. I think my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle would agree that reauthorizing the user
fees by the end of June is in the best interest of the FDA and
the American people. We received the three other user fee
proposals by January 15 but we did not receive the medical
device user fee proposal as required under statute. Given the
need to reauthorize the user fees as soon as possible, when
will the FDA send us the legislative language and the proposed
agreement for the Medical Device User Fee Act so this committee
can begin its work? Could you give us a specific date? And how
does the Administration plan to expedite the process so the
committee can get the device information as soon as possible?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, we are really delighted to be able to
come before you this morning and say that we have an agreement
in principle, and that was actually just announced within the
last hours. There are still some i's to dot and t's to cross.
We will move as swiftly as we can to be able to present it to
all of you to begin to work on it. We do want to follow the
process that Congress laid for us of course, though, which does
require that the recommendations be presented at a public
meeting and also that a docket be opened with at least 30 days
of comment. As soon as we have finalized this agreement and we
are very nearly there, we will begin that process, and while I
can't specify an exact date, we are very mindful of the
timeframe that you have set forward and are very appreciative
of that timeframe that you have set forward, and we are very
eager to move this as swiftly and as surely as possible. This
is an important agreement and one that we are very, very
pleased to be able soon to finalize and move to this next
stage.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. Companies that want to manufacture
prescription drugs in the United States are at a competitive
disadvantage because there are manufacturing plants in China
with very little oversight. Now, there is a 2-year inspection
requirement for domestic manufacturers but no similar
requirement for foreign manufacturers including those located
in China. Shouldn't we ensure that our regulatory oversight
system does not create an uneven playing field for American
manufacturers? Wouldn't a risk-based inspections approach make
more sense in ensuring resources are spent inspecting higher-
risk facilities like those in China rather than setting
arbitrary statutory requirements?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, I think the issue of how we can really
respond to the globalized world that we live in where there are
manufacturing facilities around the world that are making
products coming into the United States is one of the most
important challenges before us and certainly one of the
priorities that I have taken on during my tenure as
Commissioner. We very much need to rethink many of the ways
that we have traditionally done business. Many of our
authorities were actually put in place in a world that looks
very different back when President Roosevelt created the modern
FDA in 1938. Most drugs were in fact produced in this country
and that is certainly not the case anymore.
So we are both trying to expand our ability to do
inspections internationally, which are more complex and a bit
more costly. We certainly are trying to introduce risk-based
approaches so that we use our limited resources as widely as
possible. We are also trying to work more closely with
regulatory counterparts who share this challenge of having to
do inspections in many more places and many more countries so
that we can actually share information and begin to in many
instances, you know, rely on the work of others to leverage
resources towards the goal of expanding our presence
internationally and, as you say, leveling the playing field so
that people who have manufacturing overseas don't have to wait
longer than those that are producing domestically. We also
think that by more coordination with regulatory authorities, we
can reduce the burden on industry by having more harmonization
of standards, approaches and expectations and perhaps reducing
the overall number of inspections that they will be subject to.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and yields to
the ranking member, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Hamburg, in your testimony you mention the challenges
posed by increasing the global marketplace. As you know, Mr.
Dingell, Ms. DeGette, Mr. Waxman and I have introduced a bill,
the Drug Safety Enhancement Act, that gives FDA some
authorities and an infusion of resources to address these
challenges. Could you comment on the bill and whether FDA
supports the bill? Some have asserted that FDA already has the
authority to do some of the things that are included in the
bill and that FDA could just proceed with its current
authority. Can you comment to what extent that is true and
whether having explicit new authority would be helpful?
Ms. Hamburg. You know, we really do feel, as I mentioned,
that the ability to respond to the challenges of a globalized
world is among the most important issues before us and that we
really have increased vulnerabilities and increased demands
that, you know, really threaten our ability to fulfill our
critical mission to ensure the safety of products that the
American people use and count on, so we are very eager to work
with the members of this committee and Members of Congress more
broadly to identify authorities that will make a difference in
our ability to better ensure the safety of the supply chain and
these important products that are being manufactured and
distributed on a global basis to enable us to do better
screening of products coming into this country, to be able to
act when we identify products that are coming in that may pose
a risk in terms of safety and quality, so we are very, very
interested in the work that you are doing, appreciate your
leadership and stand ready to provide whatever information that
we can.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. A topic that has garnered a lot of
attention over the years is the issue surrounding conflicts of
interest on FDA's advisory panels. Obviously, if the advisory
committee is to be credible and useful, it has to have a
limited number of members who have conflicts. In the 2007
legislation, we included a provision that prohibited FDA from
seating more than a certain percentage of conflicted advisory
committee members, but both before and since the 2007 law, FDA
has encountered difficulty trying to fill advisory committees
with qualified and unconflicted members, and many have asserted
that the waiver caps are to blame, but my understanding is that
FDA has not come close to hitting those caps. So I am concerned
about reports of weakened advisory committees because I think
they are very important.
I wanted to ask you, do you agree that FDA has indeed
encountered problems in filling advisory committees in recent
years, and what is the impact, if so, of these vacancies on the
ability of FDA to obtain expertise? Have there been instances
in which the advisory committee meetings were delayed because
FDA could not identify a sufficient number of outside experts,
and to what extent are the waiver caps the problem or, you
know, related to this?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, this is a very important issue and one,
you know, that very much goes to our ability to bring the best
possible science to bear on our decision making. We also must
have a process that has integrity, and so we have been, you
know, working on this issue, talking with stakeholders and
reviewing our policies and experience. It is one of those
issues unfortunately in a way that the more you get into it,
the thornier and more complex it gets, and on the one hand,
there are people who would like to see us step away and relax
some of our conflict-of-interest policies so that we can bring
those individuals who are most expert to the table to serve on
our advisory committees, and there are others on the other end
of the spectrum who are very, very concerned that we need to
have individuals who do not have----
Mr. Pallone. I am just trying to--because my time--
specifically, have there been problems filling these advisory
committees in recent years?
Ms. Hamburg. At the present time, as you noted, we are not
bumping up against our cap in terms of waivers, and we have
actually been making an aggressive effort to fill empty slots
on our advisory committees and have made progress. It is a
challenge to get people on our advisory committees for many
reasons, both that it is a huge time commitment and----
Mr. Pallone. Do you have any ideas about what you could do
to improve it----
Ms. Hamburg. Well, I think----
Mr. Pallone [continuing]. And whether we could help in some
way with the legislation?
Ms. Hamburg. You know, we have been looking at this pretty
closely and we don't at the moment see major areas where a
legislative fix is required but I think it is something that we
want to continue to work on. The input and engagement with our
various stakeholders is absolutely crucial, and, you know, the
role of the advisory committees is, you know, very foundational
to a lot of what we do and so we want to make sure that we have
the right balance of expertise without conflict of interest
that might compromise the value of the input of those
individuals, and we do think that transparency is a very
important aspect of moving forward on this, and that is a
strategy that enables often individuals to be able to bring
their expertise with fuller understanding also though of their
engagement either with sponsors of a product or an industry or
positions that they have taken in the past on related issues.
Mr. Pallone. I thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Lance, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning to
you, Dr. Hamburg. I have not had the privilege of meeting you
previously, and it is my honor to do so.
On the front of advancing personalized medicine, what steps
might the FDA be taking to modernize the current regulatory
structure? I have a bill in the hopper, the Modern Cures Act,
that I believe might be able to be helpful in this area.
Ms. Hamburg. Well, it is such an important area and we
certainly are on the cusp of dramatic advances in terms of
opportunities for care and treatment, and we are already seeing
breakthroughs including a new therapy that was announced
yesterday for cystic fibrosis where we are able to really see a
therapy targeted to individuals with a particular genetic
marker and really treat the underlying pathway of a disease in
a new way.
With respect to activities at the FDA to enable us to
really realize the potential of personalized medicine, a major
area of focus is the investments in advancing regulatory
science that we have embarked on with our colleagues in
industry and academia, and I am very happy that a focus on new
investments in regulatory science is part of the PDUFA V
agreement because I think that will enable us to further
develop the tools that will matter to both drug development and
regulatory review and enable us to really target therapies for
the people who will respond or for the people who will have
unacceptable adverse consequences of therapy. We can also
stratify populations and learn who will benefit and who will
perhaps have unacceptable risks.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
Ms. Hamburg. There is one other thing. I have also
reorganized the agency in order to try to bring new leadership
in, and we have a Deputy Commissioner for Medical Products who
has a background in personalized medicine, and he will be
working across drugs, biologics and devices to coordinate
activities, which is very important to make personalized
medicine real.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
Ms. Hamburg. I am sorry.
Mr. Lance. I look forward to working with you on that.
Section 9 of the goals letter, enhancing regulatory science
and expediting drug development, includes a subsection on
advancing development of drugs for rare diseases. Specifically,
the proposal provides for by the end of fiscal year 2013 that
the FDA will complete a staffing and implementation plan for
the CDER rare disease program within the Office of New Drugs
and a CBER rare disease liaison within the Office of Center
Director, and the FDA will increase by five the staff of the
CDER rare disease program and will establish and fill the CBER
rare disease liaison position. Would you please indicate to the
committee assurances that you can provide that these additional
staff will lead to greater efficiency and not create an
additional layer of delay with no or limited value?
Ms. Hamburg. You know, I think that we are moving in a
direction that is very positive and will help support and
extend our efforts in the rare and neglected disease area. I
think it is an area where we have made terrific progress in
terms of being able to work with sponsors to identify new
promising drug candidates and move them through the system
where we have been able to apply new and better science and
more flexible regulatory tools, innovative clinical trial
designs being one important aspect of that, and I think you
will have the opportunity to hear more about that.
But I think the new proposal in the PDUFA agreement will
enable us to have some individuals who are really focused on
some of the unique needs and concerns in the rare and neglected
disease areas and to be able to work across many components of
the agency to ensure that we are doing all that we can,
bringing the best possible science to bear and never forgetting
this important aspect of drug development and getting new
products to the people who need them.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Commissioner. And finally, on
biomarkers, innovative drug development is increasingly
dependent on the use of new biomarkers of disease to target the
right patients. What is the FDA doing to encourage the use of
biomarkers in drug development?
Ms. Hamburg. It is such a key aspect of how we can bring
new and better science to bear on drug development and drug
review. We already have been, you know, quite involved in
biomarker development including through the biomarker
consortium that brings industry and academia together with
government, both FDA and NIH, to try to identify and validate
biomarkers for regulatory use. Biomarkers have an essential
role to play in identifying potential toxicities so that if a
drug is going to fail, it can fail early and we can speed the
process. Biomarkers have a critical role to play in terms of
serving as surrogate end points for clinical trials so that we
can get important information about whether a drug is working
or not without having to have extended trials and follow the
whole course of the disease to give us early indications, and
in other ways, you know, really gives us tools to accelerate
the drug development process and the review process. It is an
area that industry shares our excitement and enthusiasm about
the opportunities in science, and I think its inclusion in the
PDUFA V agreement reflects that we think that by focusing on
this area, we can really make huge strides forward.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentlelady from California, Ms. Capps, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you so much for your testimony, Dr. Hamburg, and for
being with us today. You and your team have done such terrific
work coming together on the PDUFA V agreement, and I look
forward to working with you to move this bill forward. I also
wanted to acknowledge that while these user fee agreements are
a critical piece to ensuring that the FDA has the resources to
do its job and continue to be the gold standard in this work
around the world, at the same time we here in Congress must not
shirk our responsibility to adequately fund the agency so that
you can do that work, and I hope that in our bipartisan
agreement that we will also work across the aisle during the
appropriations process to do just that.
I hope to get to two topics in this very fast-moving 5
minutes that I have. In your testimony, Dr. Hamburg, you
mentioned the Sentinel system for postmarket surveillance. This
program holds great promise for more efficient and effective
postmarket surveillance to protect the public's health, save
money on research and curb potential drug recalls. Your
testimony says that PDUFA V will allow user fees, and this is a
quote, ``to determine the feasibility of using Sentinel to
evaluate drug safety issues that may require regulatory
action.'' Would you explain just a little bit more, not too
long, about what that means? How do the goals described in
PDUFA V differ or expand upon the pilot projects that have
already been completed in PDUFA IV?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, of course, FDAAA began us on the path of
really strengthening our postmarketing surveillance
capabilities and focusing on safety in the postmarket setting,
and what we hope to be able to accomplish now with PDUFA V is
to really use the data available in the postmarket setting and
the data management and analytic tools to be able to very
quickly ask and get answers to questions of an emerging drug
safety concern. If we hear that a particular drug might be
associated with an elevated risk of another kind of problem, we
can query the database, and we are now up to 100 million
patient lives in the database, and can answer that will help us
to determine the level of concern associated with an emerging
safety issue and help us decide, do we really need to ask for
additional clinical studies to further evaluate the safety risk
or are we comfortable with a determination that it doesn't
appear to be a true correlation.
Mrs. Capps. I understand. That is important. Do you have
the authority--should you need to expand the scale of this
program, do you have the authority on your own to evaluate and
make decisions along the way?
Ms. Hamburg. I believe that we have all the authorities
that we need, and obviously PDUFA V will help to give us
additional resources that we need, and part of what is exciting
about what we are doing as well is that it is a real
partnership working with the private sector and the broader
patient community in terms of being able to access important
data, which of course is utilized in a patient-confidential
manner but----
Mrs. Capps. Great.
Ms. Hamburg [continuing]. We do now have these large
information resources that enable us to do things that we
couldn't do before.
Mrs. Capps. Great. Another topic, in your testimony you
touched on the scale-up of electronic submissions to the
agency, and in July I asked your colleague, Janet Woodcock,
about reports that clinical trial data submitted to the FDA do
not routinely reporting based on sex or other important
demographics. As you may know, this issue is one we have long
struggled with. It is a key component of a bill that I have, my
Heart for Women Act. In her response, she noted that while she
couldn't confirm these reports, the use of electronic
submissions would make it easier for the FDA to identify if
companies are indeed submitting the disaggregated data as
required by law. Can you tell me where the agency is at this
moment on moving toward an electronic-only submission system
and what are the benchmarks put forward in PDUFA V for that
kind of adoption?
Ms. Hamburg. Yes. Well, we are very excited about this
component of PDUFA V. It has many benefits, both streamlining
and modernizing our systems to help speed review and reduce
burdens ultimately on both industry and our staff, but it has
the additional benefit that it will enable us to deal with data
in much more targeted ways and to be able to ask and answer
critical questions around such important matters as gender and
race and age and other factors that we very much need to
understand more deeply to be able to provide the best possible
products and the best possible care to our citizens.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and recognizes
the gentleman, Dr. Burgess, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Commissioner, again for being here.
Commissioner, we need your help. Last year, February 2011,
this committee sent a letter regarding documents from the Food
and Drug Administration relating to the issue of contaminated
heparin, and you recall that national tragedy was prior to your
becoming Commissioner but at the same time we are having
difficulty coming to a conclusion on that, and while I
recognize that you talked about the issues of globalization,
you are no longer going to be a domestic agency but a global
agency, I mean, here is where you have to show value because
you had a compound manufactured in communist China that was
used to adulterate a biologically derived product, heparin, a
blood thinner. This hypersulfated chondroitin sulfate that was
used to contaminate the heparin was a molecule that was
produced in a lab and patented in the People's Republic of
China and found its way into our drug supply with loss of life
in dialysis centers when people were administered a bolus of
heparin.
Last year, February 23rd, the committee sent a letter. Your
Office of Legislative Affairs has documents from at least four
employees but we don't have them at the committee level. In
November, your agency committed to a timetable to complete the
production of heparin documents by the end of January 2012. We
are there but we don't have any documents. So what has been
happening over at your Office of Legislative Affairs for over 6
months? This is a poor reflection on the agency and one where
our committee and you all need to work together and it is not
happening.
Ms. Hamburg. Well, as you point out, heparin was a very
serious event that we all take very seriously in terms of the
initial response at the time but also making sure that we have
the systems in place to prevent that particular problem from
occurring again or other similar problems. I am surprised by
what you say. I am eager to work directly with you to make sure
you are getting what you need because my sense was that our
staff was spending literally thousands of hours culling through
documents for you, answering questions, briefing committee
staff on these issues, that we had sent up some 50,000 pages of
documents. But if you----
Mr. Burgess. If I may interrupt, that may be the case but
we don't have them, so over the next 2 weeks can we elicit your
help in getting this committee and the Subcommittee on
Oversight and Investigation the information that it needs?
Ms. Hamburg. Absolutely. I commit to working very closely
with you to make sure that you are getting the materials that
you are requesting and need.
Mr. Burgess. Well, we are grateful for the more
sophisticated testing that would reveal this problem in the
future for new heparin but if there is someone out there who
seeks value in contaminating our drug supply chain, it may not
be heparin next time, it may be something else, and I don't
have a sense that we understand what happened when this
adulteration occurred.
We are all concerned about drug shortages. You hear about
it. It is in the newspapers. There is a particular
chemotherapeutic agent named Doxil which you are probably
familiar with that has the company apparently involved in the
manufacture of Doxil has said they are not going to make any
more, so now we are in a tough spot because other companies are
willing to take up that slack but all remaining Doxil has to be
used for treating patients. It can't be used for doing the
clinical trials, randomized clinical trials that would be
necessary. So what options do we have in this very rare
situation to allow the patients who are depending upon that
chemotherapeutic agent to continue to receive it and at the
same time speed the approval of generic doses of Doxil?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, I am not familiar with all the details
of the particular case of Doxil that you raise. But it is
speaks to a set of important issues around drug shortages in
terms of, you know, really needing to work closely with
companies to get early warning when decisions are made to
discontinue manufacturing or if they believe that there is an
emerging quality or manufacturing concern to help identify
other sources of available product to treat the conditions that
patients may have when there are potential shortages and to
help work with sponsors to expedite the standing up of
manufacturing capability.
Mr. Burgess. Right. We appreciate this is a complex
problem, a multifactorial problem, but in this specific
instance what we're asking is, Can you use your flexibility on
the issue of bioequivalents to help get these patients the
drugs that they so desperately need?
Ms. Hamburg. You know, as I said, I don't know enough about
the specifics in terms of the option in that case so I would
not want to comment in the setting. I will certainly go back
and make sure that the people with the direct knowledge and
expertise address that.
Mr. Burgess. We will follow up with that. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Dr.
Hamburg, for being here. I have four questions and I am going
to get right to them, but I do want to associate myself with
Ms. Capps' complimentary remarks to you and also the need to
make sure that we adequately fund the FDA.
My first question is this. There was a 2010 report from the
HHS Office of Inspector General which found that ``80 percent
of approved marketing applications for drugs and biologics
contain data from foreign clinical trials.'' So my question is,
does the FDA have adequate resources to do clinical trial
oversight in places like China and Peru?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, this is part of the overall growing
demands on FDA in terms of oversight of both foreign
manufacturing facilities and research that is being done in
other countries. It certainly is something that we are putting
time and attention to. We are working both with the regulatory
authorities in a wide range of countries----
Ms. Schakowsky. Do you have the resources to----
Ms. Hamburg. We need additional resources in order to be
really provide the level of oversight that we think is
necessary and appropriate, and we need some new models for
doing business as well in terms of coordination with regulatory
authorities sharing information and also increasing regulatory
oversight capacity in many countries to ensure good clinical
practice.
Ms. Schakowsky. So it is authority and resources, right?
Ms. Hamburg. Indeed.
Ms. Schakowsky. I have been very interested in the issue of
cosmetic safety, and here is my question. It relates to
authority. If the FDA had reason to believe a cosmetic product
was harmful, could it issue a mandatory recall of that product?
Ms. Hamburg. I believe that we could work with the company
to encourage a voluntary recall, but in order to pursue a
mandatory recall, we would have to engage with the court system
and pursue it through that venue.
Ms. Schakowsky. There has been a lot of publicity around
the product, the hair straightener product, Brazilian Blowout,
and I know that the FDA wrote to the manufacturer to inform
them they had determined their products to be both misbranded
and adulterated, but apparently it is still being used in
salons across the United States. So do you plan any further
actions against the manufacturer of Brazilian Blowout?
Ms. Hamburg. It is my understanding that we are involved in
some continuing discussions with the manufacturers trying to
better understand the issues involved and working with them
around our concerns. I also believe that OSHA is engaged on
this issue in terms of some of the workplace health concerns
around the people that are providing the services in those
beauty salons.
Ms. Schakowsky. Right, the employees there, OSHA has moved
in on their behalf.
Now, I want to ask you about the ubiquitous advertising,
direct-to-consumer advertising that we see on television. Some
of them, I have to tell you, seem like if you really listen to
all the cautionary things, it is like ``and death could
result'' it seems like always at the end. It is almost humorous
to me while you see people skipping through the flower fields.
Anyway, what I am asking is that do you actually have any
resources for direct-to-consumer advertising monitoring to
ensure that consumers do have a balanced understanding of the
drugs and the risks advertised to them, the accuracy of those?
Where are you with monitoring those direct-to-consumer ads?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, we do have a group that is charged with
working on the oversight of direct-to-consumer advertising and
there is a process that involves the screening of the direct-
to-consumer advertisements.
Ms. Schakowsky. But you didn't have fees for that, right?
Ms. Hamburg. We don't have fees associated with that. I
gather that in the last PDUFA negotiation, this has been
identified as possible area of focus, but actually including it
was moved away from for a number of reasons that I think may
have included the willingness to match or include budget
authority. I am not sure of all the details but it was
considered in PDUFA IV but----
Ms. Schakowsky. Let me just say----
Ms. Hamburg [continuing]. But it is not part of PDUFA V.
Ms. Schakowsky. Given the prevalence of those ads on
television, it seems to me that that would be a major focus,
and I hope we can work together to make that happen. Thank you.
Ms. Hamburg. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and recognizes
the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Guthrie. Thanks, Dr. Hamburg. Thanks for coming. It is
nice to have you here today. I have a related question, I want
to get to another question, and it is related because it is
user fee related. On the Tobacco Control Act, I have a question
on that. The concern is, there is a user fee by tobacco
companies to fund the Center for Tobacco Products, and my
understanding, there is not transparency in the use of that
money in terms of performance reporting or financial reporting
like it is in PDUFA, you have to account for where that money
is being used. My understanding is, there is not a report, not
required statutorily for you to issue a report. I wonder if you
have any comment on the transparency or use of those funds.
Ms. Hamburg. Well, the user fees that are involved in
supporting the tobacco program and its activities are
scrutinized, and we have developed, you know, very strict
oversight mechanisms and firewalls in terms of their targeted
use for tobacco program activities, but you are correct that
the legislation did not require the same kind of performance
reporting as for other user fees, and, you know, I think that
are obviously--I would certainly understand that Congress would
like to know more about how those user fees are being utilized.
I would say that, you know, we take, as I said, the oversight
of those resources and their appropriate use very seriously and
do have a stringent process that is involved with that.
Mr. Guthrie. Yes, I don't think anybody has commented that
you all were using it improperly, just that they don't have the
access to the information that you do. So if I implied that, I
apologize. But just the idea that other user fee programs, and
maybe we should have financial reporting. Of course, Congress
didn't ask you to do that when we passed that bill before.
The one thing, and I have been kind of focused on a little
bit is this use of guidance documents, so I know it is not
right on PDUFA but while we are here talking about that, and
just a couple of examples, and I'm not getting into the details
of specifics, but just like draft guidance for industry and FDA
staff commercially distributed in vitro diagnostic products. I
know that is very detailed. But when that was issued and it
went forward, there were citations about 2 weeks after guidance
document. Well, first it was brought forth as nonbinding, not
for implementation, but my understanding is that the FDA has to
take an action citing that guidance document I guess 2 weeks
after implementation. So the question is, and I want to leave
you time to respond, essentially the Administrative Procedures
Act has the rulemaking process and there is some concern that
FDA is using the guidance documents in a way that should be
through the whole rulemaking process and comments. A lot of
stakeholders have brought that to our attention. Do you have
any comment on the use of guidance documents as binding even
though they say nonbinding?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, you know, we have found a lot of
interest from the industries that we regulate in the role of
guidance. There may be some mixed views, but I will tell you
that what I generally hear is that guidance is very useful in
giving an indication of where the agency is, where we are going
and thinking about a particular problem. While they are not
binding in the same way that rulemaking is, they are much
quicker to put forward and they are welcomed. In fact, one of
the things that I think came up in the PDUFA negotiations was
examining ways to actually support the guidance production
system because there are a lot of areas, personalized medicine
being one, where it would be helpful to sponsors of products to
have more guidance in order to know what directions to pursue
and get the insight into our thinking and approaches. So I
think that it is overall my sense is very useful but I think it
does sometimes create an uncomfortable situation where people
don't know whether it is an enforcement document or whether it
is simply guidance.
Mr. Guthrie. See, I don't disagree with anything you said
there at all. I think that you are absolutely right. People
want some direction because the rulemaking process does take
time so where is the direction we need to go in the interim,
but I guess the concern is when they become treated like rules,
that they didn't actually go through the Procedures Act, and
that is a just a concern that we have.
Thanks. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and yields to the
ranking member emeritus from Michigan, Mr. Dingell, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you. I commend you for
this hearing. It is very much needed, and significant reform of
food and drug laws is very much needed.
I ask unanimous consent my opening statement be inserted
into the record at this point.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dingell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Dingell. I would like to begin by making a couple of
observations. We have renewed PDUFA on a number of occasions
and have expanded to a number of other activities by Food and
Drug for a fee is now paid willingly by the industry. Each time
this legislation has been extended, it has been extended with
the active support of the industry. I authored PDUFA for some
very interesting reasons. This committee conducted an extensive
investigation of Food and Drug involving some serious
misbehavior, accepting of gratuities and things of that kind,
because of the fact that the agency did not have the resources
to properly handle the issuance of permits for new
pharmaceuticals, and the end result was, there were huge
numbers of complaints from industry and some very unfortunate
corruption existed in the agency.
One of the interesting things, and I hope my colleagues
will listen to this, about PDUFA and one of the reasons that it
and its half sisters and brothers have been supported by the
industry is that a good pharmaceutical brings into the
manufacturer, or did at the time it was first put in place,
about $250 million a year, and if each time that a company
found that it is delayed in putting a pharmaceutical to work
and getting approved, that company finds that it has massive
losses, massive losses stemming from the fact that it cannot
market while its patent, which exists for 17 years, is running.
Food and Drug does not have the resources to do this.
Now, Food and Drug is also moving forward to see to it that
they have legislation which would enable them to begin to
collect fees for certain changes in the law with regard to
other pharmaceutical regulatory activities by that agency.
These would impose the same burden on foreign manufacturers,
who are now bringing in huge amounts of counterfeits and other
unfortunate things into this country, to the great detriment
and the hurt not only of our law but also of American
manufacturers and Americans who are being poisoned. I would
observe that we had a rather hideous example of this when a lot
of Americans were killed or seriously hurt by heparin which
came in.
So these questions first of all to Commissioner Hamburg.
Has the law kept up with the changing environment? Yes or no.
Ms. Hamburg. No.
Mr. Dingell. It is badly in need of change, is it not?
Ms. Hamburg. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. And you have a number of changes which you
will suggest for the record on this matter. Is that not so?
Ms. Hamburg. We would love to work with you on this.
Mr. Dingell. But the answer is yes?
Ms. Hamburg. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. It is also so that these will enable you to
address not only changes in domestic production and the law as
regards to domestic production but also with regard to the
foreigners who are now sending in huge amounts of unsafe
pharmaceuticals that you simply do not have the resources to
address. Is that not so?
Ms. Hamburg. It is correct.
Mr. Dingell. Unfortunately, yes. Now, does Food and Drug
have the authorities, the resources to adequately oversee such
a heavily outsourced drug industry?
Ms. Hamburg. We don't currently have the resources----
Mr. Dingell. You don't have the resources, do you?
Ms. Hamburg [continuing]. To fulfill as we would like our
mission.
Mr. Dingell. Good. I am giving you easy questions. These
are all yeses or nos.
Ms. Hamburg. It is hard to answer just yes or no.
Mr. Dingell. Unless I indicate otherwise.
Now, will you submit for the record the key authorities
that FDA needs to oversee the drug supply chain?
Ms. Hamburg. With pleasure.
Mr. Dingell. Now, one of the additional problems that you
have is that the components are now coming in from overseas. In
the case of heparin, it was the components which caused the
damage to the health of the American people, was it not?
Ms. Hamburg. We believe that the contaminant was introduced
into the crude heparin preparation, yes.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you.
Now, I have, Mr. Chairman, an analysis of H.R. 1483, the
Drug Safety Enhancement Act of 2011, and I would ask unanimous
consent that it be inserted into the record at this point.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Dingell. Madam Commissioner, one last question. You are
familiar with the provisions of 1483. They are significantly
similar to the additional powers and resources that Food and
Drug received in the last couple Congresses ago to address the
question of food safety, and you are finding that those new
authorities are working very well there, are you not?
Ms. Hamburg. Those new authorities are very, very
important. We of course are struggling to fully implement the
demands of the Food Safety Modernization Act but we are moving
forward, and the additional authorities really are able to put
us in a position to do things that are very, very important to
prevent problems and address them swiftly.
Mr. Dingell. And they particularly allow you to control
imports and to address the question of possible seizure of
unsafe pharmaceuticals which you had previously no capacity to
address. Is that not so?
Ms. Hamburg. That is correct.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I have used more time than I am
entitled to. Thank you for your courtesy.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from Georgia, Dr. Gingrey, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Dr. Hamburg, I love you just as much as the chairman
emeritus does. He said he had some easy questions for you. In
that spirit, I definitely have one that I think is easy but
another one that may not be quite so easy. First, for the
easier of the two, I am holding in my hand a news report that
ran yesterday from U.S. News and World Report, and it reads,
``Antibiotic-resistant bacteria found in 37 United States
states.'' Can you tell me your thoughts on the magnitude of the
threat that antibiotic-resistant bacteria pose to the United
States patients?
Ms. Hamburg. Antibiotic resistance, as you well know, is a
huge and growing problem and one that we must take very
seriously. We are seeing across various, you know, classes of
antibiotics more and more resistance. That is greatly worrisome
in terms of, you know, rendering important tools for
controlling disease and preventing spread. We are seeing them,
you know, rendered useless, increasing the burden of disease
and the costs of care and potentially putting us in a position
in some instances where we don't have the kinds of therapeutic
interventions that we have come to expect, so it is something
we need to address and we need to address it together, and FDA
has a critical role to play.
Mr. Gingrey. And I really appreciate that. I will put in
more plug for the GAIN Act. So much for the easier of the two.
Now, this next question is not meant to be unfriendly at
all but I think it is very important. Ranking Member of the
Health Subcommittee, Mr. Pallone, sort of addressed this
earlier. I want to follow up on what he said, though.
A number of constituencies, both patients' groups and
industry, recognize there are great advancements in our
understanding of the human genome and science behind biologics.
These same constituencies, however, have shared with me their
concerns regarding current conflict-of-interest rules governing
the FDA. Their contention is this: If the rules are not changed
to take into these emerging sciences nor the limited number of
individuals who understand these emerging sciences, these
sciences may progress beyond the FDA's ability to understand
how to properly assess the science. And I understand that
currently the cap on the waivers for these conflict-of-interest
rules has not been reached but I also understand that there are
maybe a number of obesity drugs, as an example, within the FDA
review process that have been stalled because of a preconceived
lack of understanding of the science behind the drugs. I will
cut right to the chase. Simply put, I do not believe the FDA
cap is the issue here. I just want to understand this. Is it
the FDA's contention that changes to the current conflict-of-
interest rules governing the FDA advisory panels would not
benefit the FDA, patient groups or businesses when considering
whether to invest in new drug development?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, I think your question raises a number of
really important points and of course goes beyond simply the
conflict-of-interest rules and the advisory committees but how
do we bring in the best possible expertise as we pursue our
regulatory oversight of critical products to address critical
medical and public health needs, and advisory committees are
one important element of that but there are other ways that we
do it as well.
You know, for example, you mentioned obesity drugs. Well,
we have a working relationship now spearheaded out of George
Washington University where we are trying to bring together
critical partners to help us think through how we can really
improve our regulatory pathways for obesity reduction drugs
including, you know, health care providers, scientific experts
and patients. So I think there are different ways to bring in
expertise, and part of what is exciting in PDUFA V, I think, is
the focus on investments in regulatory science, which is an
important venue for bringing the right expertise together,
framing the right questions and making sure that we bring the
best minds to bear in getting the critical answers.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, let me interrupt you because I am just
about out of time, and I am encouraged to hear that and I thank
you for that response, but that is why I am supportive, quite
honestly, of my colleague from Texas, Dr. Burgess's bill in
regard to lifting these caps on waiver so that we have that
expertise and maybe we approach it from two aspects, but thank
you very much, Dr. Hamburg, and Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from Arkansas, Mr. Ross, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Commissioner
Hamburg, thank you for joining us today.
I believe that keeping a safe, affordable emergency inhaler
available without a prescription, specifically Primatene Mist,
is critical for asthmatics. Therefore, I am a little confused
as to why the FDA took Primatene Mist off the market after
December 31st of last year. Primatene has been available for
over 40 years, and now, because of an environmental issue, not
a health issue but an EPA environmental issue, the FDA has
pulled Primatene from retail shelves and will not allow the
existing supply chain to be sold. Here is why this concerns me.
If the FDA allowed the existing supply to be sold, asthmatics
could have access to an over-the-counter emergency inhaler for
at least the next few months until another affordable over-the-
counter emergency inhaler without harmful environmental
impacts, as alleged by the EPA, is approved. Not only did the
FDA deny access to the Primatene Mist in our supply chain but
you have now stopped the phase III studies for development of
an over-the-counter replacement for Primatene, and now
Americans are without an OTC emergency inhaler and probably
will be for the rest of the year when there are at least a
million units of this inhaler sitting in a warehouse in
California.
So Americans now have to go see a doctor. If they get a
prescription, then they have got to get it filled if they can
afford it as a substitute for this over-the-counter product,
and here is where it really hits home for me. I represent a
very large, a very rural, a very poor district, and Primatene
Mist can be purchased over the counter for asthmatic patients
for 20 bucks and prescription albuterol is costing those same
patients 50 to 65 bucks, and the cost is not only to consumers
but also to the government. It is estimated it is costing our
government, the federal government, between $300 million and
$1.1 billion due to asthmatics' increased hospitalizations, ER
visits and an increased cost of going from the over-the-counter
inhaler to one that requires a prescription, and of course,
much of this cost of the $300 million to $1.1 billion obviously
is coming from Medicare and Medicaid because there is not
another OTC emergency inhaler.
So these figures are taken from the FDA's final rule
ordering the removal of Primatene Mist based on not 2012 but
2008 cost estimates. So when we say it is costing the
government $300 million to $1.1 billion, those are probably low
numbers, and I believe that the denial letter from the EPA
states it deferred to the FDA in denying the sale of the last
remaining units. In other words, the EPA left it up to FDA. FDA
chose not to. A lot of folks where I come from, they can't
afford a $50 substitute for a $20 product that they have been
taking for way too many years because of their asthmatic
condition.
And so I would ask or suggest that you look into resolving
this issue by considering releasing the remaining units of
Primatene Mist and expedite the development of an emergency
over-the-counter inhaler for asthma that is affordable and back
on the U.S. market as soon as possible, and I would love to get
your comments and thoughts on that.
Ms. Hamburg. Well, it is obviously a complicated issue, but
I think it is important to understand the broader context and
the medical issues here. As part of the Montreal convention,
there was a move--there was an environmental issue, as you
point out, to remove chlorofluorocarbons from various products
including asthma inhalers. It has been a very long transition
period and we have been working with the various manufacturers
of asthma inhalers to transition towards other delivery
vehicles that don't have the CFCs. Of course, the manufacturer
of Primatene Mist has been part of these discussions and they
were given an extended period, some additional time for
transition and we had indicated that we would welcome an
application for another product.
But in terms of the concerns you raise about the public
health of individuals, I want to make it clear that there
really is--we engaged in a very broad process of consensus
development about the medical necessity of this product,
talking with health care providers, scientific experts, public
health professionals and patients and patient groups, and there
is great concern about Primatene Mist or over-the-counter
epinephrine-based--solely epinephrine asthma inhaler being used
without the oversight and management of a medical provider and
is really in the best interest of patients that have asthma,
which can be a very serious and life-threatening condition, to
have a medical provider. There are better treatments for the
management of asthma overall. The epinephrine inhaler is a
transient effect that briefly improves moderate symptoms but
doesn't address the underlying cause of the asthma, and so we
really think that in the best interest of individuals having
access to a medical provider, going to a community health
center where you pay on the basis of your ability to pay, local
free clinic or public hospital or there are also sponsored
programs to make medicines available at cheaper rates by
various companies is important to the overall health and
wellbeing of individuals suffering from asthma.
I recognize the inconvenience of not being able to get an
over-the-counter product for immediate relief if you don't have
your prescription inhaler with you, etc. We really tried to
make it a smooth phase-out process with ample warning and
information, both to enable patients to find alternative
products and health care providers and to ensure that the
health of individuals would be protected. But I understand the
issues that you are raising and the concerns that you have.
Mr. Ross. Well, it is not about convenience, it is not
about trying to sell these million units that are in a
warehouse in California. It is about having a product that
people can afford. Too many of my folks can't afford to go to a
doctor. They can't afford a $50 inhaler. They are having a
tough time affording a $20 inhaler. I am just saying we ought
to continue--whatever CFCs are out there, they have been out
there and people have been on this stuff forever in order to be
able to breathe, and we ought to find a way to be able to let
them continue to get it until another over-the-counter product
that is EPA approved can be developed. Otherwise they can't
afford it. They are going without it. They are showing up in
the emergency room and it is costing our government well over a
billion dollars as we make this transition.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The chairman
thanks the gentleman and recognizes the gentleman from Ohio,
Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Commissioner,
thanks very much for being with us today. I really appreciate
it, and very interesting testimony today.
I would like to just kind of switch a little bit over on
the pediatric side, and I see in your testimony you state, you
know, that both these statutes, the BPCA and the PREA, continue
to foster an environment that promotes pediatric studies and
builds an infrastructure for pediatric trials that previously
were nonexistence. If I could, I would just like of like to--
from experience I have had, I have talked to a lot of pediatric
docs, researchers, hospitals and parents of children that have
severe illnesses, and I guess I would like to ask you, first of
all, what they see is that the adult side sometimes is getting
more of the dollars that are going in for the research, and on
the second question, when these drugs are coming through, are
they getting equal treatment as the adult medicines that are
going--when the FDA is making its determination decisions?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, I think that the BPCA and PREA
legislation have been enormously helpful in creating a
framework to really focus attention on the importance of doing
pediatric studies on drugs that had previously really been only
studied in adult populations and providing some incentives to
move in that direction. We still have a considerable ways to
go. There are, I think, reasons why pediatric trials often are
not as likely to be done as adult trials that include both the
recruitment issues of getting kids into trials, both logistics
and ethics issues, and----
Mr. Latta. Can I interrupt you right there? To solve that
then, when you are talking about getting the kids into the
trials and also the ethics issue, how should we go about trying
to get that changed or promote to get more children into them
so that these drugs can be----
Ms. Hamburg. Well, I think that this path is a good one and
we need to continue these programs and strengthen them as it
becomes more routine for drug sponsors to be expected to also
examine the drugs in pediatric populations, you know, both
creates a very different climate where there is now an
expectation and a commitment and accountability for doing so,
and it also, I think, helps to expand the opportunities and the
expertise for doing pediatric clinical trials. But I think it
is an area--obviously it is not exclusively within the realm of
FDA but where we need to as a nation be continuing to put more
attention and resources to create pediatric clinical trial
networks, to train the clinical researchers to do that work,
and to encourage both on the medical product and the medical
device side more innovation and attention to the needs of
pediatric populations.
Mr. Latta. Let me ask then, in your testimony you say there
is slow but deliberate process that is being made in setting
the safety and the efficiency of the approved therapies for
certain ages. Would you say that would be the same thing, it is
trying to get these--getting the children into these tests, or
how would you address that statement in your testimony?
Ms. Hamburg. You know, to be honest, I am not quite sure
the question you are asking, but----
Mr. Latta. You state that slow but deliberate progress is
being made in these studies and again, is that going back to
the whole issue of trying to get the children and maybe infants
into some of these studies and the ethics side?
Ms. Hamburg. I see. There definitely are some additional
barriers I think to recruiting pediatric patients into clinical
trials, and we need to work on those, and it is--I think it is,
as I said, a broader issue of really having the support for the
clinical trial networks, the training of the pediatric
researchers, the education of both families and pediatric
community providers about the importance of pediatric clinical
trials and the opportunities that they can represent for both
individual patients and for extending knowledge about
appropriate pediatric care, so I think it is something that we
really do need to work on and we need to work on it together.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, my time is expired and I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from New York, Mr. Towns, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and also the
ranking member for holding this hearing today. Also, thank you
very much, Commissioner, for being here.
PDUFA has been an effective and essential tool in assuring
that safe, effective drugs are brought to the market in a
timely fashion. However, we must be certain that we are
striking the proper balance between the benefits of speedy
approval of new treatments and the risk that different patient
populations are willing to accept in order to gain access to
them.
Let us also keep in mind that different patient groups may
be willing to tolerate different degrees of risk. This is why
it is crucial for FDA to communicate with the affected patient
population when reviewing new treatments.
In your written testimony, Commissioner, you indicated that
the FDA takes into consideration the benefits and risks of new
drugs on a case-by-case basis. Considering the degree of unmet
medical needs and the severe or morbidity of the conditions the
drugs intended to treat when conducting this assessment, do you
see the input of the patient population affected by the
condition?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, we do, and one of the exciting things
about the PDUFA V framework also is a real focus on developing
better strategies to formalize and systematize how we think
about benefit-risk and importantly the engagement of patients
and their perspectives, and part of what we hope to accomplish
over the next 5 years, if this PDUFA agreement is reauthorized,
is to in a formal way through a series of public meetings, four
a year over the 5-year period to really target different
disease conditions and engage with the patient community about
their perspectives of the available drugs, their experience of
benefits and risks, what kind of risks they are willing to
tolerate, etc., and that will be, I think, very, very useful,
in addition, you know, really building on work that we do every
day as we look at important products in terms of thinking about
what are the other options available to patients and how
serious, life-threatening, life-disrupting is the condition,
and we do weigh risks and balance them with benefits, and in
our approvals we are often willing to accept a considerably
high level of risk in some cases when there is true benefit to
the patient.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, and let me say to my
colleagues, I hope we recognize the importance of making
certain that we fund you adequately as we make some demands as
we move forward.
I applaud the agency for instituting the accelerated
approval process in 1992. Do you feel that the program has been
successful, particularly in the rare disease space?
Ms. Hamburg. You know, it has been a very valuable program
and we have seen, you know, a high number of drugs move forward
through the accelerated approval process. We also--and many of
them, a large percentage have been in the rare and neglected
disease space. We also often give a full approval straightaway
to rare and neglected diseases when we have, you know, good
science, a good product and an impact on the underlying
condition that is meaningful. So I think we have made enormous
progress in the last couple of decades moving forward in orphan
drugs, rare and neglected diseases and have been able to apply
a lot of regulatory flexibility in how we approve those drugs,
and I think you may be able to hear more about that in the
second panel from the NORD representative.
Mr. Towns. Let me ask you, what challenges do you face with
orphan drugs? What challenges do you actually face? Very
quickly.
Ms. Hamburg. Well, very often, the challenge is how to do
the science that enables us to get the answers that we need. If
you are talking about small numbers of patients, how can you
tailor the clinical studies so that you can get robust,
meaningful answers with only a small number of patients. I
think historically also there were concerns about incentivizing
industry to want to work on some of these disease areas where
there would be limited patient numbers, and I think that the
orphan drug program and the incentive structure there has
helped to shift that dynamic, and I think that as we really
begin to draw on the advances in science and technology today,
there are very special opportunities in the rare and neglected
disease areas to produce the kinds of product like the way we
were able to approve yesterday for cystic fibrosis. We were
able to really see a targeted therapy for a particular
underlying genetic marker and really provide a breakthrough
treatment, even though the number of patients with that
particular condition is quite limited. In this case, we are
estimating about 1,200 cystic fibrosis patients.
It is a very exciting time and it is an area where I think
there is a lot of opportunity, and PDUFA obviously has
identified that as an area where we can make some real
progress.
Mr. Towns. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Myrick, for 5 minutes
for questions.
Mrs. Myrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate you being here today, and that is kind of
along the same lines of what I wanted to talk about and that,
is, the guidelines for approval of certain drugs. While the FDA
is tasked with protecting public health, I don't think it
should be in a position of withholding or removing approval of
drugs that treat fatal illnesses. When a patient is expected to
die imminently from a disease, the FDA's decision of whether or
not to approve that drug should be made on a different metric
than the approval of a drug that is intended to treat a less
serious condition.
Your agency does claim to factor this in, and I know you
see it as part of your mission to move treatment forward for
patients, but it doesn't seem to me that you give enough weight
to the fact that dying patients will tolerate a riskier drug.
Sometimes they won't respond and will succumb to the disease
but sometimes they respond well, and aggregate clinical data
doesn't always reflect that properly. So can you just tell me
why the FDA shouldn't have a separate metric for determining
approvals for diseases like metastatic or otherwise fatal
cancers, ALS and other deadly illnesses?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, we do, as we were discussing earlier,
you know, really take very seriously the importance of
balancing risk and benefit and recognizing when you have a
serious life-threatening illness with no or limited other
treatment options. The proposed drug must be viewed in a very
different context than if it is one of six potential drugs for
a disease, you know, that has only a very minor impact on the
tasks of daily living. So we do take that very, very seriously,
and if you look at our approvals, it is clear that as I said,
in some instances, there is significant risk associated with a
drug that we will approve, but we do at the end of the day have
to ask the question of, is there an overall benefit to the
patient, and that can be very difficult and challenging. But
that is, you know, an important part of what we are charged
with.
I think, again, you mentioned the sort of stratified
populations, that there may be some who respond and some who
don't, and that is why the deepening of the scientific
understanding is so important and to continue to work as PDUFA
V, you know, has indicated in the area of regulatory science
and really identifying how we identify--we need to really
define who are the subpopulations of responders so that we can
target the benefits to the people.
Mrs. Myrick. No, I understand. We have talked about that
before. That is one that I refer to simply because of people
that I know who are very successfully being treated with that
for other than the uses that you had approved.
Also, with the compassionate use process for terminally ill
patients who have very few other clinical options, it doesn't
always work very well. Companies understandably worry that
patients who don't fit the trial guidelines who have completed
the trial for their drug will negatively alter their clinical
data if they are allowed to take an experimental treatment
under a compassionate use exception. Yesterday, a 41-year-old
ALS patient was in our office, and he saw significant symptom
improvement while involved in a clinical trial, but his
participation in the trial ended and then he was denied access
to the drug under compassionate use because of these concerns.
So in your opinion, what else can FDA or Congress, for that
matter, do to improve the likelihood that patients with no
other clinical option can access treatment through
compassionate use? I mean, this is an ongoing problem. I
understand where you come from but it is also pretty hard to
look somebody in the face and say I am sorry, I can't help.
Ms. Hamburg. Well, it is, you know, a huge issue and one
that certainly without knowing the specifics of that instance,
you know, we do try to work with patients' families and
providers under those kinds of circumstances to see if we can
help facilitate access to a product.
Mrs. Myrick. Can we refer him to you?
Ms. Hamburg. Pardon me?
Mrs. Myrick. Can we refer him to you?
Ms. Hamburg. You know, I think you could. You know, I can't
make any promises but----
Mrs. Myrick. No, I understand.
Ms. Hamburg [continuing]. Absolutely and we can----
Mrs. Myrick. He is so young, you know.
Ms. Hamburg. Yes, no, and, you know, it is an area that we
need as a society to continue to work on.
Mrs. Myrick. Well, my time is almost up so I will yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and yields to
the gentleman from Utah, Mr. Matheson, 5 minutes for
questioning.
Mr. Matheson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Dr. Hamburg,
welcome. Thank you for coming today.
I would like to focus my questions on a national track and
trace program or a drug pedigree issue, which I know Mr.
Dingell talked about and some others as well. You probably
know, I have worked with my colleague, Mr. Bilbray, and a lot
of stakeholders on crafting legislation to implement a single
national pedigree standard. Last year, February 2011, the FDA
held a 2-day track and trace public workshop. One of the
reoccurring concerns from stakeholders at the workshop was the
need for timely guidance on a single national pedigree standard
prior to States going off and implementing their own systems.
Implementation of a national standard could take years to
implement. Could you speak to the timeframe necessary for
Congress, the FDA and industry to act on this? And in speaking
on that also, if PDUFA passes without a national pedigree
solution included, what are the implications for where we are
going to be in terms of our domestic pharmaceutical supply
chain over the next 5 or 10 years?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, it is a very important question, and
since I happen to be sitting next to an expert on this topic
and you have been hearing me talk an awful lot, I think I may
actually let my colleague, Deputy Commissioner Deb Autor,
respond to that because she really has been working on those
important issue for a very long time.
Mr. Matheson. Great.
Ms. Autor. Thank you. Congressman, as you mentioned, we did
hold a public workshop on track and trace and we have had over
120 participants in that workshop and a lot of comments that
have been submitted to the docket on a track and trace system.
We are working hard on working on those standards, and I would
be happy to talk to you more about how we can work together
towards a national uniform pedigree system. We are concerned
that if a national system doesn't go into place, we run the
risk of having a patchwork of State laws including California's
law that is scheduled to go into effect in 2015. We believe
track and trace provides very important assurances to the
integrity of the drug supply by giving us and industry and
pharmacies and consumers the information they need to know to
be assured that their drugs are safe and effective.
Mr. Matheson. Do you think the FDA needs further authority
from Congress in order to implement a national standard?
Ms. Autor. Yes. We have authority now to implement
standards but it is not clear in the law that those standards
will be binding on everybody in the industry, and it is not
clear that they would effectively preempt State law, so in
fact, I think national legislation on this would be useful.
Mr. Matheson. That is good to know.
Now, the safety of our pharmaceutical supply chain has an
important overlap with the drug shortage issue that we have
been talking about. I saw a survey by the American Hospital
Association that showed 42 percent of those hospitals facing
shortages purchased a more expensive product from a new
distributor. However, in this instance, there is no meaningful
way for that hospital to be sure the drug they are buying has
traveled a safe and secure path. Do you think a single national
pedigree standard would help hospitals ensure the integrity of
products bought outside their normal source of supply?
Ms. Hamburg. I think, you know, that the issue of supply
chain and shortages are linked but they also have many distinct
characteristics, and I think that as we are grappling with the
drug shortage problem, which is, as you know, a very real
problem and growing, you know, we are trying to look at all the
critical factors that are involved and, you know, they range
from issues of limited numbers of manufacturers of a given
product to aging production facilities, to cost reimbursement
issues, and some of the issues around consolidation of
providers and manufacturers.
The issue of the security of the supply chain and quality
being built into both manufacturing and assurances of quality
throughout the supply chain obviously play a role in shortages
to some degree, and also understanding the supply chain is
important in understanding what kinds of products and quality
products people might be accessing in relation to a shortage.
So it is a complicated issue.
Mr. Matheson. And I know there are a lot of separate issues
in the two. It just seems to me that in a shortage situation,
that----
Ms. Hamburg. In a shortage situation, it is absolutely
critical that whatever you are using as an alternative product,
we can know is safe and high quality.
Mr. Matheson. Yes, shortages create stress on the system,
and stress creates opportunity for bad things to happen.
Mr. Chairman, my time is up. I will yield back. Thanks.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and yields to the
gentleman from Louisiana, Dr. Cassidy, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Cassidy. Dr. Hamburg, thank you for being here.
Now, I have learned to say in this job, I know what I have
been told, not what I know, so let me just preface this by
this. I am told that there is a difference between calendar
days and FDA days, so on page 4 of your testimony where you
mention that the FDA approval phase of new drug development has
shrunk. I heard previously people come and say you have got to
be kidding, they kick it back to us, they don't include this,
and actually the time has grown. I have learned to say what I
have been told, not what I know, so I come to the font, if you
will, to say is that true? Is calendar days actually longer
even though FDA days are theoretically shorter?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, in terms of the way the performance
goals have historically been structured, you know, in fact, one
is looking at the FDA time and the clock can be stopped for
different kinds of activities and ultimately what matters to
patients and, you know, truly what matters to all of us
involved in the process is how long does it take for a product
to actually get to the person who needs it. But I think one of
the things that has been very, very encouraging as we have
watched the PDUFA process really take hold in terms of the
resources capacities and focus of our review activities is that
we have seen the number of drugs approved in the first cycle
increase and it is over 60 percent now, I think, which means
that we are getting drugs to people in the first review
process, which is really critical because----
Mr. Cassidy. Now, your answer suggests to me that indeed
calendar days may have increased for any given drug but it
doesn't go through two cycles so maybe net it is less.
Ms. Hamburg. On the drug side, I don't believe that that is
the case. The device side, it is a little bit of a different
scenario, and that is why I was sort of avoiding speaking to
specific details, but on the drug side, we are seeing changes
in the absolute time that it takes to get a product to market
in really across-the-board way, particularly for priority
review.
Mr. Cassidy. Let me go to my next question. I thank you. We
will later hear testimony from the Pew Health Group, which kind
of relates to something which we previously spoke about, that
if you are a domestic pharmaceutical, you are getting reviewed
every 2 years, and if you are overseas, it may be every decade.
And I understand here we are now creating resources but in a
previous conversation, you mentioned that union contracts limit
the ability of FDA to assign people to go overseas to inspect.
Now, does this address that issue as well?
Ms. Hamburg. You know, I think that the union issue is
really not central to the discussion. The issue about the
increased cost complexity demands on the system of increasing
the numbers of international inspections is, and we are really
embarked on a series of activities to be able to strengthen our
capacity to have a global presence and either directly inspect
or get inspectional information.
Mr. Cassidy. So you imply that, if you will, as a
workaround so even through the contract may inhibit it, you
have a workaround in which you could third party it?
Ms. Hamburg. You know, I think that the union issue is
really a non-issue here. We work closely with the union around
the activities of union employees.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, that is a little bit different than what
we heard last time in which we were told that people had to
volunteer, they could not be assigned, and that sort of thing.
Ms. Hamburg. Well, we definitely seek volunteers for our
foreign inspectional activities. We are addressing it in a
number of ways. We do have a dedicated foreign inspectional
cadre that really like to travel and have specifically
volunteered.
Mr. Cassidy. So just a pointed question, knowing that right
now it is every 10 years or so overseas, if you had tomorrow to
say listen, we haven't inspected them for 5 years, you two are
going and we expect an inspection report from you in however
long it takes to do an inspection report, would you be able to
do that?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, we are dramatically ramping up our
foreign inspections and we are doing it through both using
domestically based inspectors who travel overseas. We are doing
it through having foreign offices and inspectors who are based
in country. We are doing it sharing inspectional information
with our regulatory counterparts in other countries.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, if I may interrupt, because I am almost
out of time. I don't mean to be rude. But nonetheless, we are
only doing it every 10 years. What do you project if we have
this hearing 3 years from now that the frequency of inspection
of an overseas plant will be by whatever mechanism we assign
staff to do so?
Ms. Hamburg. We are looking ultimately for parity between
our domestic inspectional schedule and our foreign inspectional
schedule. We want a level playing field, and it is interesting,
we are not talking today so much about the generic user fee
agreement but the foreign inspection are a particular issue
around generic drugs and their manufacture and actually through
leadership from the generic industry, you know, we have a
first-time-ever user fee agreement that very much focuses on
how can we strengthen the resources and programs to meet those
demands of foreign inspections.
Mr. Cassidy. Mr. Chairman, you have been very generous.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
the questions from the members of the subcommittee. We will go
to the rest of the members of the committee, and the chair
recognizes Dr. Christensen from Virgin Islands for 5 minutes
for questions.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you for the opportunity to sit in
on this important hearing and to be able to ask questions.
Most of the questions that I had around risk and benefit
balancing and how it affects the time I think have already been
asked several times and answered, so I am not going to ask that
one. But I have a specific question on supply chain that
relates to the territories, and I don't really expect you to
answer it right this minute but maybe giving me an opportunity
to work with your staff on it. The medicines that come to the
U.S. Virgin Islands are sometimes held by Food and Drug through
Customs in Puerto Rico and almost always confiscated when they
are being sent back to their supplier. We are outside of the
Customs zone. That is part of the problem. But we are part of
the United States. Our pharmacists are licensed, trained and
licensed in the United States, and we are purchasing from U.S.
companies. So what we would like to pursue is having a waiver
or some special procedure to avoid this problem because it is a
great burden to my hospitals and my pharmacies and of course,
it had a deleterious impact on patients' access to clinically
important drugs, and I am hoping that as you look through a new
international regulatory system that we can find a way to fix
that within that. So again, if you want to comment on it, fine,
but I think it is----
Ms. Hamburg. Well, only to say thank you for bringing this
to our attention, and I think that we would like to work with
you to better understand the nature of what is happening and
why and what can be done to address it.
Mrs. Christensen. Right. And we have talked in the previous
administration about it, so some of your staff may know about
it, but I know it is a fresh one for you.
Could you tell me how the FDA's new Office of Minority
Health works, for example, with the Office of Pediatric
Therapeutics to ensure that racial and ethnic minority children
are appropriately, ethically and adequately included in drug
research on children and pediatric populations?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, we are just standing up this new Office
of Minority Health. It was actually something--the opportunity
to put it in place was part of the health care reform act, and
it is intended to sort of cut across the full range of
activities within FDA but with a special focus on a set of
important scientific, medical and public health issues
including how can we assure the appropriate representation of
racial and ethnic minorities in clinical studies and I think
there are huge opportunities both to work with our Office of
Women's Health and our pediatric offices but to work across,
you know, all of the medical product areas so that we can
really address these critical concerns.
Mrs. Christensen. On BPCA and PREA, often in children, the
side effects of medicine or anything might not be seen for many
years. Is there a requirement for the pharmaceutical industry
to follow children for a certain period of time after they have
been involved in clinical trials?
Ms. Hamburg. You know, I am not sure that I can give you
the complete response. We obviously have ongoing efforts to
monitor adverse events, whether they are near term or long
term, and our ability to do that in a meaningful way is
enhanced by what we have been able to do in terms of
strengthening our postmarket surveillance activities. In
certain disease areas, there might be a particular concern
anticipating possible longer-term risks or specific side
effects in children and it might be part of the structuring of
the clinical trial at the time of its initiation through PREA
to put in place certain requirements and expectations about
ongoing monitoring. But there may be some additional activities
as well that I am not fully aware of.
Mrs. Christensen. Maybe we can follow up on some
discussions with your office around that and see if there is
something that needs to be done in terms of children and long-
term impacts.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and recognizes
the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I know we have
plowed through some of this territory but I think it is
interesting. As a member of the committee but not of this
subcommittee, it has been very educational and I do appreciate
you being here, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate you letting me
participate.
But you have heard from both sides of the aisle what I am
about to say, and that is, we have all been contacted by
constituents. That is why I am here today. I was contacted by a
constituent who feels that the strong risk aversion at the FDA
is creating at least the perception that it is slowing down or
stopping the approval of new, innovative treatments for cancer
and other life-threatening terminal diseases. And I like some
of the others who have spoken here today, and I am not going to
make you go through all the things you have already testified,
are very concerned that if you are facing a certain death, you
are willing to take more risk, and you are wondering why the
government is getting in the way. So I would ask you first, you
have already been over a number of things that the FDA is doing
to try to make that process better, but have you given
consideration to creating a waiver process where a consumer who
is facing one of these diseases can waive liability and any
concerns about a particular drug or biologic treatment or
whatever in order to get that treatment when they are facing
the consequences? Obviously, there has to be a disclaimer of
all the either known or unknown risks involved, but have you
all given consideration to doing something like that? Because
thank God, I have never had to face that and hope I never do,
but there are a lot of folks out there like the 41-year-old we
heard about, and you have heard from both sides of the aisle,
folks are willing to take those risks, particularly when they
are younger and particularly if they have young children, as I
do. You know, I would take those risks in a heartbeat if it was
going to give me extra time with my kids.
So I am just wondering, have you thought about creating
some kind of a waiver--ok, this hasn't been approved but I am
willing to take that risk? And if you haven't thought of that,
would you? And then let me follow up with, and what other
things is the FDA is doing that you have not already testified
to, because I don't want you to have to be like a broken record
and go over the things that you have already mentioned.
Ms. Hamburg. Well, you know, obviously this is such an
important point and it is something that goes to the very heart
of what we do because, you know, our mission really is to try
to get the best possible treatments to people who need them,
and, you know, as we have already talked about, we are putting
an increasing focus on how we think about benefits and risks
and weigh them. We already do accept, you know--have a much
higher tolerance for risk when you are talking about a disease
that is serious, life threatening, has no other treatment. I
don't believe that we have really explored the exact proposal
that you put forward, and I think it would certainly require
broader discussions than just within the FDA. And we do have
some other programs. Compassionate use was mentioned for trying
to get drugs to people that are in desperate, life-threatening
situations but perhaps, you know, in the interest of time and
completeness, you know, we could provide you with some
additional information about the programs that we are
undertaking, and we certainly can continue to think about other
strategies including the one that you mentioned.
Mr. Griffith. Well, and if you would, and, you know, this
is one of those things where sometimes folks just sitting
around the table brainstorming might come up with one of those
eureka moments and have an epiphany.
Let me shift a little bit to another question that has come
up in my district. I represent a rural district. There are many
recognized off-label uses for approved drugs but--I will pick
up Dr. Cassidy's point. But I am told that the FDA severely
restricts communications to doctors and patients about these
uses. Representing a rural district, I have heard about doctors
who find it difficult to get the information about off-label
uses that could benefit many of their patients. So what can we
do to better, both as the FDA and what can we do as Congress to
help you better inform doctors, especially in rural communities
so they know about potential effective off-label uses of
approved treatments?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, off-label use, as you know, you know, is
an important part of many medical practices and FDA doesn't
regulate the practice of medicine and off-label use is
something that we recognize is happening and frequently I have
talked with people within FDA about how can we really collect
better information to understand off-label use so that it could
inform the broader issues around the approved indications for
the use of a drug, but I think that the big concern is when
drug companies are actively marketing an unapproved drug for an
off-label use and that is where the controversies have been
really focused on.
Mr. Griffith. Yes, ma'am. Thank you for your time. I yield
back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentlelady from California, Ms. Eshoo, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing and also for extending both you and the ranking member
a legislative courtesy to me to join this hearing today. It has
always been a great source of pride to me to have served on
this subcommittee for some 15 years, most of the years that I
have been in the Congress, and I miss being here but I look
forward to coming back and I am glad I am here today.
I would like to ask unanimous consent that the lovely
statement that I have be added to the record.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Eshoo follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Commissioner Hamburg, it is wonderful to see
you. I think that you know that I was the original author of
both PREA and the BPCA, so I come here today with a great sense
of pride and I welcome the comments and the questions that
members have asked about both pieces of legislation that the
Congress is preparing to reauthorize.
As you know, PREA was created to ensure that drug companies
were doing important clinical trials in children, an area which
had been most frankly woefully underserved before the passage
of the legislation. And without adequate pediatric labeling,
doctors were left to guess what the appropriate dosages for
children would be. I think there was maybe this assumption that
was being made that children are little adults, and they are
not; they are children. So I think that this has--we took a
very important step with the passage of that legislation, and I
think it is why it is crucial for companies to develop their
pediatric plans as early in the drug development process as
possible.
Now, I understand that the FDA has draft guidance asking
companies to submit their pediatric plans at the end of phase
II but the PREA statute requires submission at the time of the
new drug application. I think the sooner that companies focus
on pediatric populations, the sooner kids will receive the
drugs that they need in some cases to survive. So can you say
with confidence that pediatric study discussions always start
as early as the FDA recommends?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, first, let me say thank you for your
leadership, and before you walked into the room, I had actually
made note of it in my opening remarks. But BPCA and PREA have
been very important pieces of legislation and have enabled
enormous progress in the pediatric therapeutics area. The
question you raise, you know, is an important one. I know it
has been under discussion within the agency and beyond, and I
think it is sort of an ongoing discussion in terms of what is
the most appropriate timing, and frankly, there probably is no
one cookie cutter approach. It probably really does depend on
the particular product in question and the types of trials
required. But I think in general, my sense is that early
engagement is always helpful and the ability----
Ms. Eshoo. I ask because of how the statute reads. Do you
have any idea what the percentage of pediatric plans are
actually completed at the end of phase II? I mean, if you don't
know, maybe you can get that to us.
Ms. Hamburg. We can get that to you.
Ms. Eshoo. Now, if a company does not submit its pediatric
plan by the end of phase II, as the draft guidance recommends,
does FDA have any enforcement mechanisms to address it?
Ms. Hamburg. Now, you know, I want to make sure that I
answer your question properly.
Ms. Eshoo. I ask this because I think it would be helpful
to have legislation to ensure that companies submit their
pediatric plans at the end of phase II. In fact, Congressman
Markey and I are working on this, and maybe I should just turn
the question around. Would it be helpful to you to have
legislation that addresses what I just stated?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, we do feel that at least as I understand
it currently, you know, we have the tool of misbranding as a
way of trying to respond to when the commitment is not met by
the company with respect to completion of the pediatric
studies, and that does seem like a bit--not quite the right
regulatory or----
Ms. Eshoo. I can sense it in your voice that there is----
Ms. Hamburg. Yes, it creates a situation----
Ms. Eshoo. So you think legislation would be helpful?
Ms. Hamburg. I think that looking at that and if there is
an approach that could be more targeted and flexible, that that
would be very useful in terms of pushing companies to complete
this important work and doing it in a constructive way that
ultimately benefits the patients.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you very much, and thank you for your
work, Mr. Chairman, and our ranking member, thank you again for
your legislative hospitality.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and recognizes
the gentleman from California, Mr. Bilbray, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Bilbray. Thank you very much for your courtesy, Mr.
Chairman, and I just realized that at least on the other side
of the aisle, there is a few that may remember the time I
served on the committee for 6 years. A whole lot of new faces
on this side.
Doctor, we talk a lot about safety and regulation to
protect it. We have an over-the-counter consumer product that
is connected to over 500 deaths a year, and we continue to
allow that to be sold over the counter. Do you want to explain
to this committee why aspirin in its existing form is not more
regulated or more restricted from consumer use even though
there is what some people would call a very high death rate
related to its use?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, you know, aspirin obviously is a widely
available product that we know has associated risks but also
benefits. I don't think that I am prepared in this setting to
discuss the whole context of the oversight and regulation of
aspirin but I think it is an important reminder that even drugs
that the average American would probably consider sort of safe
and routine do have consequent risks and they need to be
addressed in an ongoing way and that the FDA does in fact have
a responsibility for the lifecycle of products, not just for
approval but for monitoring safety, efficacy and benefit,
overall benefit to patients over the whole course of the
product's use.
Mr. Bilbray. Now, would it be fair to say, or if you can
refer to your experts around you or whatever, would it be fair
to say on the flip side of that issue that aspirin probably can
be documented as being one of the most lifesaving drugs that
have been readily available to the public in the last 30, 40,
50, 60 years?
Ms. Hamburg. Aspirin has many benefits on different levels.
That would be fair to say.
Mr. Bilbray. Do you have any idea if there was any other
drug out there that we could point to that probably has saved
as many lives as aspirin has?
Ms. Hamburg. You know, I am not really prepared to make
those comparisons or have that----
Mr. Bilbray. I would be very interested if you would take a
look at the reality we have with aspirin, and I ask you to
consider, and let us be very frank about it. If this product
with its fatality problems came before the FDA today, could our
existing system actually process it and get it out onto the
market, or is it just one of those products that became so
institutionalized before our regulatory oversight got where it
is today? And my question is, do you think aspirin could get
through the system today?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, I wondered if that might be the ultimate
question that you would be asking, and I guess that my answer
in the form of a true bureaucrat is that I wouldn't be prepared
to speculate without having really reviewed the information and
the data, but I understand the issue that you are raising.
Mr. Bilbray. I mean, my issue is the fact that if you only
look at the negatives and if you focus, even if you look at the
positives but if you focus on the negatives, in today's life,
which usually happens, there are huge opportunities that may be
denied, and my biggest concern is that I am looking at this and
I don't see any way aspirin would be approved in our system,
and how many people would die every year in this country and
around the world if it wasn't available to the consumer? And I
have to ask myself, do we know how many other drugs or
treatments may be out there that have come later that cannot be
accessible? So my big question is, has anybody ever challenged
themselves to say do we have any idea how many deaths may be
caused because we don't allow products like aspirin on the
market today?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, you know, as I was saying earlier in
discussions, you know, we look in a very clear-eyed way at
risks and benefits of the products that come before us, and I
think we are striving now to deepen our strategies for
addressing that and, you know, we do take a lot of risks. There
is a sense that we are very risk-adverse.
Mr. Bilbray. Doctor, I appreciate that and I am not blaming
you. I am blaming the fact that the political side, we would
raise holy hell, you would seeing us standing on the House
Floor giving big speeches damning you for allowing this on the
market, and I just want to sensitive that.
Let me just say one thing. One of the great breakthroughs
we did with AIDS in the 1990s when I was here was that we
changed a lot of regulations, and multi-triaging was one of
those things that we really moved the protocol for AIDS that
hadn't been done for other research in other treatments. When
it comes to cancer, it really appears that multi-triaging and a
combination of drugs and uses may be one of those things we
have learned from the AIDS success. Where we going now with FDA
improving the ability for researchers and for pharmaceuticals
to look at multiple drug use in the treatment of diseases such
as AIDS and do we have an expedited process to try to move that
process along?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, I began my career in public service
working on HIV/AIDS drug development and know exactly what you
mean in terms of the importance of the breakthroughs, and it
was really a combination of bringing the science together with
the resources and commitment of industry, academia and the
patient groups, and we were able to move very forward very
swiftly and we were able to introduce, you know, some new
regulatory approaches, etc. in the cancer arena and in other
areas as well, other infectious diseases and other disease
domains, we have a real opportunity as our science has deepened
to do some of the kinds of things that you were just
mentioning, and we actually just recently put out guidance to
help industry think in some new ways about testing drugs in
combination rather than doing one after another after another.
Mr. Bilbray. And taking 20 years to do it.
Ms. Hamburg. Yes.
Mr. Bilbray. Mr. Chairman, I know my time is expired. To my
colleagues, just to follow up on that, one of those other great
successes that my colleagues will remember is that in the AIDS
crisis, we could do blood tests and monitor virus levels to be
able to see what cocktails were working rather than what we
have now in cancer where you basically have to wait for the
cancer to show up again. You have clinical trials in process
right now on the East Coast for a blood test for lung and for
breast cancer that is being looked at. Has anybody in your
agency taken a look at the fact that this is not just a product
that may be able to detect cancer for treatment but maybe one
of those huge breakthroughs that cancer researchers are looking
at to be able to more efficient in their research, much like
they do with AIDS? Is anybody considering the connection
between this blood test may not only be a good treatment but
may be an essential part of research to address this issue?
Ms. Hamburg. Yes, and let me just clarify that actually
partly stemming from the work in HIV/AIDS, we do use surrogate
markers including the kind of markers identified through blood
tests in our approval process. That is really what accelerated
approval is all about, is identifying what can serve as
surrogate endpoints for an early approval followed by
additional clinical studies to confirm or not confirm the
initial promise as indicated in those studies. So we take that
very seriously. We use it in our decision making, and certainly
what you were describing would fit within that framework of
regulatory----
Mr. Bilbray. Thank you for your courtesy, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. I thank the gentleman and recognize the
gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Markey, for 5 minutes for
questioning.
Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Web site clinicaltrials.gov was transformed into a
mandatory registry that I created along with Representative
Waxman in the 2007 FDA amendments. This Web site publishes
information about the results of clinical trials designed to
evaluate medical treatments but several problematic loopholes
exist. For example, a drug company finds out from a clinical
trial that a diabetes drug is not only ineffective but also
causes severe side effects. As a result, the company abandons
the drug's development, never seeks approval with the FDA and
never publishes the results because there is no incentive to do
so. Commissioner Hamburg, will the results of this trial ever
have to be posted on the clinical trials database?
Ms. Hamburg. As I understand it, currently, no. That is an
important issue that you raise. I think it could be addressed
but it is not included in----
Mr. Markey. So if another researcher decided to pursue
clinical trials of this same drug, they would have no idea
about the dangers identified from the previous trial and would
put more people at risk of the same adverse health effects that
had already been identified so generally do you agree that it
would be a good public health measure to ensure that results of
all registered trials, regardless if the drug is approved or
not, are posted on the database?
Ms. Hamburg. I believe that NIH through its rulemaking
process is currently looking at this question in terms of
whether trials for drugs that aren't actually approved could be
posted. I think you also raise a broader issue that certainly
we are talking about with industry and others in terms of more
transparency and the benefits, the common good of making more
information about, you know, not just what works but what
doesn't as well.
Mr. Markey. Thank you. Now, some clinical trials that occur
entirely overseas can be used to support a drug application
with the FDA even though they are not subject to the disclosure
requirements of the clinical trials database. Do you agree that
any clinical trial regardless of where it takes place should be
subject to the same transparency requirements if the trial is
used as part of the company's approval application to the FDA?
Ms. Hamburg. You know, yes, you know, in general we
certainly agree that more transparency, more information is
beneficial and we think that this is a bit of a disconnect and,
you know, we would be interested in working with you further.
Mr. Markey. So this is something that Ms. Eshoo and I are
working on, this next subject, which is that the FDA data shows
that since 2007, 78 percent of PREA's pediatric study
requirements were not completed by their due dates, if at all.
These are products that could benefit children but the studies
needed to provide that information are not always being
completed. Pediatric studies are especially challenging and
companies may have a perfectly acceptable reason for asking FDA
to extend their deadlines, but if the company does not meet its
pediatric requirements and fails to provide a reasonable
justification, what enforcement options does the FDA have?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, we do, as I was discussing with
Congresswoman Eshoo earlier, have, you know, a limited arsenal
of tools and it really is an area where it is important, number
one, to understand the reasons for the delays, and as you note,
there are some reasons that are understandable, but these are
studies that are important to get done. We need to support
companies in getting them done and there should be expectations
and accountability on the completion of those studies.
Mr. Markey. Yes, it is my understanding that the FDA's only
option for enforcement is misbranding the product if there is
an enforcement action that you can take but that is an option
very rarely, if ever, taken by the FDA. If the FDA were to deem
a lifesaving treatment misbranded because the company failed to
complete its pediatric requirements, children who were being
prescribed the drug off-label would lose access to it. Adults
would also lose access. Is that correct?
Ms. Hamburg. That is correct, and that is why in some
ways--I have heard it internally referred to as the nuclear
option.
Mr. Markey. So either FDA triggers the nuclear option of
misbranding, costing everyone access to that drug, or they can
do nothing, and that is very different from the way many other
violations of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act are handled,
which can incur civil monetary penalties. Have civil monetary
penalties been effective in other areas to ensure compliance?
Ms. Hamburg. I think that they have been and they do give
more flexibility and the ability to target the action to what
needs to be done in a more effective way.
Mr. Markey. And I see no reason, Ms. Eshoo and I agree on
this, that companies failing to meet their obligations to
children should enjoy those special protections. So we would
like to work with you in giving you the flexibility to impose
those penalties.
And just finally, Ms. Schakowsky and Ms. Baldwin and I
introduced a cosmetics bill last Congress. We reintroduced the
same cosmetics bill in this Congress, and as you know, most
people believe that the government makes sure that personal
care products like shampoo and cosmetics are safe before they
are sold. Does the FDA have statutory authority to require
safety testing of cosmetic ingredients before they go on the
market?
Ms. Hamburg. We do not do premarket approval for cosmetics
except in a very limited domain of color additives.
Mr. Markey. And can you require a recall of any product in
cosmetics?
Ms. Hamburg. If there were serious safety issues raised
with public health consequences, we would work with the company
to get them to voluntarily----
Mr. Markey. But it is voluntary. You don't have a mandatory
power.
So Ms. Schakowsky and Ms. Baldwin and I are very interested
again in pursuing that legislation and working with Mr. Pallone
and working with the chairman towards the goal of finding a way
of giving you the authority that you need to work on these
issues. So if you would be willing to work with us, we are
willing to work with you and with Mr. Pallone and others to see
if we can do something legislatively in this area.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Hamburg. Terrific. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
round one, and we will go to one follow-up on each side for
round two. The chair recognizes Dr. Burgess for a follow-up
question.
Mr. Burgess. Dr. Hamburg, thank you for spending so much
time with us here this morning. I just wanted to follow up on
something that Mr. Ross from Arkansas brought up about the
over-the-counter asthma inhalers, and while I recognize the
problem actually originated in the EPA, not at the FDA, on the
removal of CFCs as a propellant, you know, the fact of the
matter remains, I spent New Year's Eve driving from pharmacy to
pharmacy to make sure I had an adequate supply of Primatene
because as he correctly points out, it is two vials for $32, so
it is a fairly reasonable price compared to the expensive price
of the albuterol, which is a prescription device.
My understanding is that the over-the-counter iteration
that is non-CFC is currently in process with the HFA as a
propellant and that FDA is evaluating that. I would just
encourage you to do so with all great dispatch. These are
things that have been around for a long time, and most people
with asthma, as I do, experience times when the disease is much
worse and times when it is not so bad, and those times when it
is not so bad, I may get quite far away from having anything
around the house that would be available to help me, and it was
always comforting to know at 2 o'clock in the morning I could
drive to a 24-hour pharmacy and purchase a Primatene inhaler.
Now the only option is--and I am a doctor, I can write my own
prescription, but for the vast majority of people, you have to
go to the emergency room, likely going to get a breathing
treatment and a pulse oximeter, maybe a blood gas, and you are
going to spend $1,500, $2,500 for what could have been fixed,
as Mr. Ross correctly points out, for a $20 charge at an all-
night pharmacy.
So it is important to get the over-the-counter option back
out there. Many people use these rescue inhalers not frequently
but from time to time, and that is the part of the population
that really would benefit from having these back and available
again. Can we look to you to help us get those?
Ms. Hamburg. We have indicated that, you know, we would
welcome an application and we will work to expedite the review.
Mr. Burgess. Because the active ingredient is not any
different than what it has been for the last 100 years, right?
And the difference is the propellant, and if it used in the
albuterol inhalers, it can't possibly be harmful. I think it is
as good as CFC. CFC gets you a much better dispersion. The HFA
always ends up in the oropharynx and you have to relearn how to
use it.
But this is important to people, and every member of this
committee, in fact, every Member of Congress is going to be
hearing about this at some time during the year when their
constituents run out of their existing supply of CFC inhalers
and find that they cannot replace them.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman, and Mr. Pallone
is recognized for 5 minutes for one follow-up.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Hamburg, some have suggested that FDA is insisting on
too much clinical trial prior to approval and that it is
resulting in an export of innovation and jobs abroad, and to
help address this situation, some of the members have suggested
that FDA's mission statement should be changed to include
things like job creation and innovation. In fact, there is a
bill, the Food and Drug Administration Mission Reform Act, that
would accomplish this.
Now, even assuming there is some truth to these reports,
and I think that there is important evidence to suggest that
there is not, revising FDA's mission statement seems like a
drastic measure to me, and I just wanted you to comment on the
implication of revising FDA's mission statement to include
things like job creation. How would FDA even begin to assess
whether certain agency actions would create jobs?
Ms. Hamburg. Well, I think that it is very, very important
that FDA as a science-based regulatory agency with a public
health mission really focus our efforts on determining the
safety, efficacy and quality of the products that come before
us and that we do our work in the context that clearly
understands that we need to make sure that we are bringing
products to people in a timely way that they need and count on
and that we do need to do everything we can to make sure we
have the most modern and streamlined approaches and that we
work closely with product sponsors in a way that is
transparent, consistent and predictable to achieve our common
goal of making important products available to people.
I think that our safety and efficacy standards are very
important to the success of industry as well as to improving
and protecting the health of the public.
Mr. Pallone. But what I am trying to find out is whether
you would want to revise the FDA's mission statement to include
things like job creation.
Ms. Hamburg. Well, I was going to get to that and I think
it would be very hard for us to factor in to this science-based
decision making the question of how would approving or not
approving this product impacts jobs and how would approving or
not approving a product impact jobs of a competitor, and it
would get very, very complicated, and frankly, I think it would
be quite inappropriate and would ultimately not serve the
American people well or serve industry well, and I think it is
something that would be extremely hard to quantify, and I think
that, you know, what is really important is that we make sure
that operating within the ecosystem of biomedical innovation
and product development that we ensure that we are doing our
job as well as we can, which is to apply science-based, data-
driven processes to our decision making, do it in as modern and
streamlined a way as possible, and work as effectively with
industry and other stakeholders to deliver the products that
people need.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
our questions for panel one. The chair thanks the panel,
specifically Dr. Hamburg, for your excellent testimony. It is
very important information you have shared with the committee.
We will now excuse panel one and call panel two to the
witness table, and while we change panels, we will take a 5-
minute recess and reconvene at 12:45.
[Recess.]
Mr. Pitts. We will ask all of guests and witnesses to
please take their seats, and would like to ask at this time
unanimous consent to enter into the record a statement by NCPA,
that is community pharmacists, and NACDS, National Association
of Chain Drug Stores, into the record. It has been shared with
the other side, so without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. I would like to now welcome panel two and thank
all of you for agreeing to testify before the subcommittee
today, and I would like to quickly introduce our expert panel.
Mr. Geno Germano, President and General Manager of
Specialty Care and Oncology at Pfizer, is our first guest. Dr.
David Gollaher, President and CEO of California Healthcare
Institute. Mr. Richard Pops, Chairman and CEO of Alkermes. Mr.
Pops is testifying on behalf of the Biotechnology Industry
Organization. Mr. Allan Coukell, Director of Medical Programs
for the Pew Health Group; Ms. Diane Dorman, Vice President of
Public Policy at the National Organization of Rare Disorders;
Dr. David Wheadon, the Senior Vice President for Scientific and
Regulatory Affairs at PhRMA; and Dr. Daniel Frattarelli, Chair
of the American Academy of Pediatrics' Committee on Drugs.
So we will go in that order. Again, thank you all for
coming. We have your prepared statements, and we will ask each
of you to summarize in 5 minutes your opening statements.
Mr. Germano, we will begin with you. You are recognized for
5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF GENO GERMANO, PRESIDENT AND GENERAL MANAGER,
SPECIALTY CARE AND ONCOLOGY, PFIZER, INC.; DAVID L. GOLLAHER,
PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, CALIFORNIA HEALTHCARE
INSTITUTE; RICHARD F. POPS, CHAIRMAN AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, ALKERMES, ON BEHALF OF BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY
ORGANIZATION; DAVID E. WHEADON, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
SCIENTIFIC AND REGULATORY AFFAIRS, PHARMACEUTICAL RESEARCH AND
MANUFACTURERS OF AMERICA; ALLAN COUKELL, DIRECTOR OF MEDICAL
PROGRAMS, PEW HEALTH GROUP, THE PEW CHARITABLE TRUSTS; DIANE
EDQUIST DORMAN, VICE PRESIDENT, PUBLIC POLICY, NATIONAL
ORGANIZATION FOR RARE DISORDERS; AND DANIEL A.C. FRATTARELLI,
CHAIR OF PEDIATRICS, OAKWOOD HOSPITAL AND MEDICAL CENTER, ON
BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS' COMMITTEE ON
DRUGS

STATEMENT OF GENO GERMANO

Mr. Germano. Thank you, Chairman Pitts and members of the
subcommittee. My name is Geno Germano. I am President and
General Manager of Specialty Care and Oncology at Pfizer.
Founded in 1849 in New York City, we have grown to become the
world's largest biopharmaceutical company, providing treatments
for a myriad of diseases that afflict people around the world.
I appreciate this opportunity to testify on behalf of Pfizer
and our 40,000 U.S. colleagues to unequivocally support the
reauthorization of the Prescription Drug User Fee Act.
Behind the acronym PDUFA is another acronym: R&D, research
and development. Research and development is the lifeblood of
Pfizer. It is the lifeblood of our industry and it is the
lifeblood of great American innovation. Today it takes on
average more than a billion dollars and 12 to 15 years to
research and develop a new medicine. Approximately one in
10,000 compounds that enter the drug discovery phrase is every
approved by the Food and Drug Administration and made available
to patients. Our R&D is ultimately codified in our patents.
Patents represent our license to move forward and are a
fundamental legal basis for our existence.
It is important to remember, we file our patents on
compounds in the very early stages of development, often a
decade or more before the review process begins at the FDA.
Therefore, by the time we had submitted an application to FDA,
the patent life is already eroded to a meaningful extent,
making an effective and efficient process with FDA imperative
for our firm.
Biopharmaceutical companies like Pfizer typically have at
most between 10 and 14 years to recoup our investment before
generic competition enters the market. However, the public
value, the public health value of our investment continues for
generations to come.
It is through this foundational work in R&D and
manufacturing that the biopharmaceutical industry supports more
than 3 million U.S. jobs and nearly $300 billion in total
output to GDP. PDUFA will help keep R&D and new medicine
introductions in the United States.
The financial commitment and significant time and resources
required to develop a drug reflect the uncertainties inherent
in our business. The scientific uncertainties are ultimately
reduced to the core question: does the benefit of the drug
outweigh the risk? And this is a question we and FDA seek to
answer, and it will vary depending upon the treatment and the
intended patient population. Regulatory uncertainties can
complicate this dynamic if the review process at FDA is
ambiguous and inefficient. This is why a strong partnership and
communication with the FDA are essential.
As the head of the specialty care business, I am intimately
engaged in the development of our medicines. My business focus
is on developing therapies for complex and rare diseases, many
forms of cancer, and vaccines for the prevention of life-
threatening infections.
Prevnar 13, a vaccine for the prevention of pneumococcal
disease, is a great example of an important medical
advancement. In December of last year, Prevnar 13 received
approval from FDA for adults 50 years of age and older under
the accelerated review process, a pathway specifically intended
to speed new medicines to market for significant unmet health
needs. Then last Friday, FDA approved our new cancer medicine,
Enlighta, that we developed for patients with advanced renal
cell cancer whose disease continues to progress after first-
lien therapy fails. The development pathway for critical
medicines and vaccines like these are not cookie cutter in
nature, and it is essential to have a strong, functional
regulatory agency for advancements like these to continue.
In my full statement, I discuss the major provisions of the
new PDUFA agreement. I would like to highlight one of these,
the review enhancements for new molecular entities, or NMEs,
which will have an immediate impact on Pfizer and medicines in
our pipeline. A good example of the benefit of an effective NME
review process is Xalkori, which was approved by FDA last
August. Xalkori is an NME and is the first lung cancer drug
approved by the FDA in more than 6 years. This scientific
innovation is also one of the first personalized medicines
targeting a genetic abnormality shared by only 3 to 5 percent
of the 200,000 lung cancer patients diagnosed in the United
States each year. Xalkori was a fast-track product that was
given priority review by FDA. The goal was to review in 6
months. FDA reviewed it in 4 months. While Xalkori's approval
is an example of getting it right, the challenge we have is
making sure that situations like Xalkori are the rule and not
the exception. The NME review process enhancements will help
achieve that goal. These enhancements embody what we consider
to be the foundation of a successful review: communication and
transparency.
The improved process will encourage better issue
identification and resolution at the fine stages of the review
cycle. Further, these enhancements will have a direct impact on
the dozens of NMEs at various stages of development in our
pipeline. These are potential new treatments and therapeutic
areas such as oncology, pain, cardiovascular disease and
vaccines.
The ability of Pfizer to do its job depends on the ability
of FDA to do its job, and PDUFA provides a framework and
resources for that to happen. PDUFA is must-pass legislation.
It is must-pass for Pfizer and the biopharmaceutical industry.
It is must-pass for FDA, but most importantly, it is must-pass
for patients and society as a whole.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify. I look forward
to answering any questions you may have and hearing your views.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Germano follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman, Dr. Gollaher, for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF DAVID L. GOLLAHER

Mr. Gollaher. Thank you, Chairman Pitts and Ranking Member
Pallone. My name is David Gollaher, and I am President and CEO
of the California Healthcare Institute. California has by far
the largest cluster of innovative research institutions and
biotechnology companies in the world. Today there are about
270,000 jobs directly connected to biomedical R&D in
California.
My purpose today is first to support the reauthorization of
PDUFA, then to explain why PDUFA is critical to drug
innovation, and then briefly to review work that CHI, our
institute, has been conducting with the Boston Consulting
Group, BCG, together and analyzed data that accurately reflect
FDA performance.
I know there has been a lot of criticism of the FDA, but
all of us agree that a strong, efficient FDA is important to
our industry and to patients, an agency that performs well,
encourages medical innovation and a regulatory system that has
clear rules, that operates transparently, builds confidence
among investors, and confidence is key because patients need to
be confident that their drugs meet the highest standards of
safety and effectiveness while industry needs to be confident
that the FDA is abreast of the latest science and is applying
it reasonably to innovative products.
The first point I would like to make is about the
relationship of advanced science to regulation. We live in an
unprecedented age of biological sciences. After the human
genome project was completed in 2003, our ability to understand
diseases at the level of genes and cells is racing ahead.
Still, though, if we compare the past several years to the
period during the 1980s and 1990s when there was so many
pioneering biotech drugs along with breakthrough drugs for HIV/
AIDS, we can see that today drug development has lagged. It
hasn't kept up with science.
The reasons for this are complicated. For one thing, our
bodies are the most complex organisms in nature, and developing
drugs that have powerful effects on disease without harming
healthy cells and tissue turns out to be extremely difficult.
So difficult, in fact, that developing a new medicine now costs
well over a billion dollars.
In trying to become more efficient and reduce development
costs, the drug industry is searching for the optimum model for
R&D but the most productive model and scale for biotech
research remains a quest in progress.
The problem is that we continue to see high failure rates
for drugs that enter the regulatory pipeline. Only 5 to 8
percent of new molecular entities that start out as drug
candidates make it all the way to the market. Commissioner
Hamburg has pointed out that we are investing between industry
and academia about $100 billion in research today and not
getting our fair share of new medicines. But this isn't true
across the board. In 2011, the FDA issued a report citing 35
innovative treatments for hepatitis C, prostate cancer, lupus,
pneumonia and other serious disorders. This report showed how
the FDA used expedited approval authority, flexible clinical
study requirements, and resources collected under PDUFA to
improve the rate of approvals. Oncology, for instance, emerged
as a particularly bright spot, and our recent work with BCG
found that cancer drugs experience rapid review on the order of
10 to 15 months. But there were other areas--cardiovascular,
central nervous system, gastrointestinal--that stretched almost
twice as long.
The point is, there are major differences in timelines
depending on a drug's therapeutic area, and in our view, this
suggests an opportunity, namely, for the FDA to learn from its
own best practices and then replicate those practices across
the agency. To accomplish this, though, will require more data
than we have had in the past but timely, accurate data would
prove equally valuable for internal FDA benchmarking and for
industry management.
It is hard to overstate the importance of good data. A
time-honored principle of management is that what gets measured
gets done. Our work with BCG over the past 2 years, mining the
agency phone data in order to gain a better understanding of
how it operates, suggests a few things to us. First, that we
meet regularly together and analyze the best possible data and
that there is an opportunity to provide longitudinal data over
the next PDUFA cycle so that 5 years from now FDA, industry and
Congress can share the understanding of real trends over time.
It is ironic that for an agency that regulates more than 20
percent of U.S. GDP and relies increasingly on industry user
fees that there has been so little in the way of consistent
tracking.
In addition, better data may help the agency, Congress and
industry to develop a better understanding of benefits versus
risks. Virtually all medicines carry some capacity for harm,
and a zero-risk mentality would shut down development of
beneficial drugs altogether. But more attention needs to be
devoted to how the FDA's policies and operations encourage or
discourage investment in different therapeutic areas. In other
words, how should we measure risk if the agency's demands for
data become so intense that investors avoid that therapeutic
area altogether. This is happening today in areas like diabetes
and obesity.
I would like to conclude by observing that PDUFA has been a
remarkable success. For this legislation to move science
forward, it needs to remain highly focused on enabling the
agency to promote innovation, on encouraging it to address
areas of inefficiency, on balancing its mission to protect
public health with the importance of attracting robust private
sector investment into new drugs and biologics. Ultimately,
public health and economic competitiveness are two sides of the
same coin. Without investment, the next generation of
breakthroughs will never materialize nor will the jobs to
manufacture them. Commissioner Hamburg wrote an op-ed last year
calling FDA America's innovation agency. I think this is more
an aspiration than a historical fact, but it is an aspiration
that we all share, and PDUFA V is an important step toward
accomplishing it.
Thank you, and I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gollaher follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
Mr. Pops for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD F. POPS

Mr. Pops. Thank you, Chairman Pitts and Ranking Member
Pallone. I appreciate the opportunity to be here today. I am
Richard Pops, Chairman and CEO of Alkermes, and I am here
testifying on behalf of the Biotechnology Industry
Organization, or BIO. I coordinated BIO's engagement on the
PDUFA V discussions with FDA, and I have got more than 20 years
of experience in managing biotechnology companies and
successfully developing new therapies for patients. So I know
firsthand the impact that PDUFA has had on patients and on
medical innovation.
BIO, in summary, supports a swift enactment of PDUFA V
recommendations that improve this regulatory process and
provide patients and doctors with earlier access to
breakthrough therapies that we focus our lives on developing.
So at Alkermes, our company, we are in a very exciting phase of
growth with a diversified portfolio of commercial products that
have already made it through the FDA process, so we have had
that experience, but also new medications in development where
we are in the midst of the regulatory process addressing
central nervous system disorders such as addiction,
schizophrenia and depression.
We began as a raw startup in labs next to MIT up in
Massachusetts, and today we employ over 1,200 individuals in
Massachusetts, Georgia, Ohio and worldwide, and we operate
large manufacturing facilities in both Ohio and in Georgia as
well.
The key to our success and I think the success of the
industry in general is a reliable and predictable FDA, and the
PDUFA program is an incredibly important part of that.
The PDUFA V recommendations are based on the principles
that a science-based transparent and well-managed review
process that appropriately balances benefit and risk can
enhance the public trust and increase patient access to new
medicines. Industry and FDA agreed upon a set of enhancements
under PDUFA V designed to reinforce FDA's review performance
and get back to basics for patients. These proposals have also
been informed by an unprecedented level of public input, which
has further strengthened the technical agreement. These
enhancement include a new molecular entity, or NME, review
program that we hope will lead to further review cycles and
earlier patient access to needed treatments, enhanced
communication during drug development, regulatory science
modernization and robust safety and postmarket surveillance
capacities.
While BIO, of course, supports the entirety of the
technology agreement, today I would like to focus primarily on
the enhanced communication in PDUFA V. This initiative is based
on the philosophy that timely interactive communication with
biotechnology and life science companies during drug Venezuela
should be a core agency activity. While many biotechnology
companies operate on the cutting edge of biomedical science and
develop new therapies, science is a collaborative process. It
doesn't occur in a vacuum. And it is critical to promote
interactive scientist-to-scientist communications between FDA
and sponsors.
In the course of drug development, we often have simple
clarifying questions, the responses of which could have a
significant impact on the development program but are not
extensive enough to warrant formal meetings with FDA. To obtain
timely responses to such questions, we currently often have to
engage in lengthy exchange of multiple formal letters with FDA,
which is an inefficient and cumbersome use of both FDA's and
sponsors' time. For small biotechnology companies reliant on
limited venture capital funding sources, these delays can
create significant impediments to development programs and
therefore innovation.
So as part of the enhanced communication program, FDA will
establish best practices for this type of interactive dialog
and train staff on communication. Independent reports
commissioned by FDA have demonstrated that enhanced
communication during drug development ultimately results in
higher quality applications which can improve efficiency for
FDA reviewers. This proposal was a top BIO priority and we are
pleased that it was included in the agreement.
In addition to the enhanced communication features, the
PDUFA V agreement makes new resources available to modernize
regulatory science in the areas of personalized medicine and
rare disease drug research. Modern approaches to drug
development and evaluation will introduce new efficiencies in
the drug development process and provide FDA with additional
tools to evaluate the benefits and the risks of pharmaceutical
products. These proposals will also integrate more structured
and systematic approaches to addressing benefits and risks and
allow FDA to conduct outreach to patients and hold workshops to
better understand patient perspectives on disease severity and
unmet medical need.
BIO looks forward to working with the committee and the FDA
to implement PDUFA V, and I want to thank you again for having
us here today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pops follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
Dr. Wheadon for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DAVID E. WHEADON

Mr. Wheadon. Thank you. Chairman Pitts Ranking Member
Pallone and members of the subcommittee, good afternoon. I am
David Wheadon, Senior Vice President of Scientific and
Regulatory Affairs at the Pharmaceutical Research and
Manufacturers of America, better known as PhRMA. PhRMA
appreciates this opportunity to testify today and share our
views on the fifth reauthorization of the Prescription Drug
User Fee Act, PDUFA, and the reauthorization of the Best
Pharmaceuticals for Children Act, BPCA, and the Pediatric
Research Equity Act, PREA.
PhRMA and its member companies, the country's leading
pharmaceutical research and biotechnology companies, strongly
support the original goals of PDUFA, namely to provide patients
with faster access to innovative medicines, to preserve and
strengthen FDA's high standards for safety, efficacy and
quality, and to advance the scientific basis for the agency's
regulatory oversight. PDUFA has advanced public health by
accelerating the availability of innovative medicines to
patients while helping to ensure patient safety.
Furthermore, PDUFA has helped to improve America's
competitiveness around the world. Since the passage of the
original Prescription Drug User Fee Act in 1992, the United
States has become the world leader in bringing new medicines to
patients first. Ensuring that the United States maintains a
policy and regulatory environment that encourages an efficient,
consistent and predictable drug review process is key to
keeping America competitive in today's global economy.
PhRMA strongly endorses the recommendation of PDUFA V
performance goals letter, which was created with unprecedented
transparency and input from diverse stakeholders. This
agreement will provide FDA with the resources and the tools
required to further enhance the timeliness, completeness and
efficiency of the drug review process including provisions to
advance regulatory science and modernize drug development, to
improve benefit-risk decision making, and to further strengthen
FDA's focus on patient safety.
I would like to focus for a moment on one specific
provision in the PDUFA V agreement. PDUFA V will improve the
review process for new molecular entity, NME, drug and biologic
applications which will be particularly significant for
patients because NMEs are novel compounds that have the
potential to address unmet medical needs and advance patient
care. Specifically, it is anticipated that earlier and more
comprehensive communication between the agency and drug
sponsors as required in this enhanced review program will
improve the rate of on-time first-cycle successes. The success
of the new review program and of the agency's ability to
achieve its drug review goals will be independently assessed
and reported in 2015 and 2017. PDUFA V will continue to provide
FDA with the resources and tools that are essential to support
patient safety and promote medical innovation through enhanced
timeliness, completeness and efficiency of the drug review
process.
PhRMA encourages Congress to reauthorize PDUFA in a timely
manner based on the negotiated PDUFA V performance goals and to
minimize the inclusion of additional provisions that may have
the unintended consequence of distracting from the act's
original intent.
The Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act and the Pediatric
Research Equity Act have been extraordinarily successful in
improving medical care for children by driving research to
create innovative medicines for use in pediatric patients.
According to the FDA, the current pediatric exclusivity program
has done more to spur research and generate critical
information about the use of medicines in pediatric patients
than any other government initiative. Ensuring that the
pediatric exclusivity incentive is preserved is key to
continued innovation and improvement in pediatric medical care
in the face of rising research costs. Since their initial
enactment and subsequent reauthorizations, BPCA and PREA have
been subject to a sunset clause under which their provisions
expire after 5 years unless reauthorized by Congress. To build
upon the tremendous success of BPCA and PREA in improving
medical care for children, Congress should permanently
reauthorize BPCA and PREA.
In closing, I would like to use this opportunity to briefly
discuss the issue of pharmaceutical supply chain integrity.
PhRMA supports granting FDA discretion to set routine
inspection intervals for foreign and domestic facilities
according to risk. We support providing FDA with the
flexibility to prioritize inspections of foreign establishments
based on the risk they present and believe relying on set
criteria such as compliance history, time since last
inspection, and volume of type of products produced will
enhance the FDA's ability to target its inspection resources
efficiently and effectively. A more detailed description of
additional recommendations on how to strengthen the integrity
of the supply chain can be found in PhRMA's written testimony.
We look forward to continuing to work with this committee, FDA
and other stakeholders on these important issues.
Chairman Pitts and members of the subcommittee, thank you
for the opportunity to testify. I am happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wheadon follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
Mr. Coukell for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ALLAN COUKELL

Mr. Coukell. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone and
committee members, thank you for the opportunity to be here
today.
My name is Allan Coukell. I am the Director of Medical
Programs with the Pew Health Group, which seeks to improve the
health and wellbeing of Americans by supporting policies that
foster innovation and reduce risks to consumers. I am here
today to talk about the safety of the U.S. drug supply. Pew has
focused on this for the last 4 years as has this committee.
In recent years, pharmaceutical manufacturing has been
transformed. What was once a domestic industry is now global.
Forty percent of our finished drugs and 80 percent of the
active ingredients now originate outside our borders. Much of
the supply is purchased in India and China. The number of non-
U.S. plants that supply the United States has doubled in just
the past decade. Yet the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act remains
overwhelmingly domestically focused. This puts consumers at
risk and American manufacturers on an uneven playing field.
While the leading companies are already doing thorough
assessments of their supply chains, we have to make sure that
there is no incentive for the weaker actors to gain a
competitive advantage by cutting corners.
Just 4 years ago, hundreds of American patients were
sickened and some died after they received a blood-thinning
drug, heparin, that had been adulterated during manufacture in
China. This was a U.S. company that was reliant on an upstream
network of suppliers that it didn't know and couldn't control.
Since that tragedy, this committee has held nine hearings and
heard from more than 60 witnesses. You have conducted a careful
and thorough investigation that has identified serious gaps in
the system. We don't know who adulterated that heparin from
China but we certainly know how to reduce the risk that someone
else will adulterate some other imported drug in the future.
Congress needs to act to protect Americans. We need a
system that reduces risks, that rewards companies that have
proper quality systems in place, promotes an even playing
field, and uses taxpayer dollars efficiently. Pew's ``After
Heparin'' report identifies the risks and suggests some
pragmatic solutions. Let me make three key points.
First, inspections. Not that far from here is one of the
U.S.'s largest pharmaceutical manufacturing facilities. It is a
Mylan facility in West Virginia that employs a lot of people,
and like any other domestic manufacturing facility, it can
expect an FDA inspection about every 2 years. That company's
competitors in India and China also making drugs for the U.S.
market face nowhere near that level of scrutiny. A plant
outside the United States knows that FDA may visit only once
before the product is first approved and then may never return,
and that reduces the incentive to make ongoing investments in
quality. The FDA should inspect plants both domestic and
overseas based on risk, and no company should go uninspected
for more than 4 years. We support the call by Mylan and others
in industry for a level playing field to ensure safety
regardless of where the drugs come from.
Inspections are one part of the solution. Let me talk for a
moment about supplier quality. Pfizer, represented here today
on this panel, has invested heavily in supply chain integrity
from production and ingredient sourcing to distribution
security. Let me quote from previous testimony by Pfizer. They
said ``Companies in emerging markets are operating in a
developing regulatory environment with a novice inspector. Many
have rudimentary quality systems, or none at all. Before a U.S.
pharmaceutical firm can considering sourcing from these
suppliers, it is imperative that the firm work with suppliers
to upgrade their quality systems and standards.''
The Pew report outlines well-documented cases of suppliers
concealing the actual sources of drug ingredients, in some
cases bringing in chemical materials that were not intended for
pharmaceutical use. We call for modernizing current regulations
to ensure that every company has appropriate measures in place
to ensure quality standards at their suppliers.
And finally, we need to make sure that the FDA has the
tools that are appropriate for today's global paradigm. For
example, companies with high quality systems and an established
track record shouldn't face delays at the border. Companies
that don't have those things should face heightened scrutiny.
We need to make sure that the FDA has the clear authority at
the border to refuse products when the plant that made them has
denied an FDA inspection.
The proposed generic user fee agreement will provide FDA
with new resources for increased inspections of overseas
generic manufacturing. It is an important step, and the PDUFA
reauthorization is the opportunity to bring the FDA into the
21st century to give Americans a greater assurance of safety.
Let me conclude with something that we heard often over the
course of our research. If there are feasible practical steps
that we don't take, it is not a question of if there is another
tragedy, it is a question of when.
Thank you, and I welcome any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Coukell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
Ms. Dorman for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DIANE EDQUIST DORMAN

Ms. Dorman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member Pallone. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before
you today. I am Diane Dorman, Vice President for Public Policy
for NORD, the National Organization for Rare Disorders.
Since 1983, NORD has served as a leading voice and advocate
for the approximately 30 million men, women and children with
rare diseases in the United States. NORD's mission is to foster
a social, political and financial culture of innovation that
supports the basic and translational research necessary to
develop new diagnostic tests and therapies for all rare
disorders. This requires a regulatory environment that
encourages the development and timely approval of new, safe and
effective treatments for rare disorders.
Reauthorizing PDUFA presents an opportunity for Congress to
achieve that goal. Greater clarity and predictability for the
review of novel therapies for rare disorders can be achieved by
allocating some of the PDUFA resources to support the
enhancement of regulatory science. Of special significance in
the draft agreement is the rare disease initiative that will
enhance development of drugs and biologics for the treatment of
rare conditions. We support these efforts and look forward to
the opportunity to work with the agency and with Congress to
guarantee the success of this initiative.
The rare disease community was heartened recently when the
drug approval summary for 2011 was announced. Of the 35
innovative drugs approved in 2011, ten were orphan drugs. We
hope and expect that further investment in orphan products will
lead to continued development of therapies that address the
unmet medical needs of patients. We are encouraged that the
Orphan Drug Act has brought about such successful innovation in
the market for rare disease therapies.
The reality is that we have barely started the journey.
There is still approximately 6,800 rare diseases that lack an
FDA-approved therapy. The reauthorization of PDUFA offers hope
that we may build on previous successes by strengthening the
review process still further and by creating an environment
that encourages innovation and investment. We believe that the
rare disease program will enhance the regulatory science needed
to accelerate development of new therapies. This initiative
allocates a small fraction of user fees to support the existing
rare disease program and CDER. The agreement completes the
current staffing and implementation plan and establishes a rare
disease liaison within the Center for Biologics.
Last October, NORD released a landmark study that looked at
all drugs for diseases other than cancer approved as orphans
since 1983 to identify whether and when FDA exercised
flexibility in the review process. Of the 135 drug approvals
studied, NORD concluded that the FDA demonstrated flexibility
in the review of effectiveness data on orphan drug therapies
for two out of every three orphan drugs approved. FDA clearly
has demonstrated in its actions on orphan products over the
past three decades that it recognizes the importance of
therapies for people with rare disorders. NORD believes it
would be helpful for such flexibility to be recognized in a
formal FDA policy and for officials to incorporate flexibility
in a systematic way in their evaluations of each new therapy.
While the statutory standard for safety and efficacy should
be the same for all medical products, enhancement of the rare
disease program will allow FDA to provide greater clarity in
how it applies the standards for safety and effectiveness to
orphan products. A formal policy setting forth the agency's
view of flexibility in conducting orphan product review is
likely to provide more certainty to innovators seeking to
develop rare disease therapies. Further, we would like to see
the proposed public meeting and staff training implementation
dates moved forward to occur no later than 2013.
PDUFA V will provide FDA with the resources needed to
maintain a strong professional staff that is necessary for the
development of clear guidelines and the expedited review of
innovative therapies.
In addition to the rare disease program, there are two
other policy considerations that we feel are worthy of your
consideration: current conflict-of-interest provisions and
patient participation in risk assessment. First, during FDAAA
negotiations, NORD argued that because patient populations are
very small and the number of researchers who study a particular
rare disease is limited, identifying experts not financially
conflicted to sit on an advisory committee would be difficult,
if not impossible. Those concerns were realized in 2008 when it
took the FDA nearly 6 months to identify an expert to review a
life-saving therapy to treat infantile spasms. While conflict-
of-interest considerations are clearly necessary, our view is
that the existing provisions in the Federal Advisory Committee
Act and the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 are adequate to
safeguard against conflicts of interest. A separate standard is
not needed.
Second, NORD, working with like-minded patient
organizations, has developed a proposal submitted to the FDA to
allow the patient community to communicate on a more frequent
and periodic basis with medical reviewers and other relevant
FDA staff to make risk tolerance and other decisions. We
advocate that more systematic processes be established at FDA
to enable contributions from the patient community at the time
that critical decisions on risk tolerance are being made. We do
not seek to create a burdensome or time-consuming process;
rather, we want to be sure that patients have the opportunity
to share their views.
In closing, I want to thank the committee again for giving
NORD the opportunity to testify today regarding the
reauthorization of PDUFA. The rare disease community believes
that engaging Congress and FDA officials in the process has and
will continue to lead to practical, detailed improvements to
the regulatory process that will accelerate the development of
orphan products from concept to access.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Dorman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and recognizes
Dr. Frattarelli for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL A.C. FRATTARELLI

Mr. Frattarelli. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, members of the
subcommittee, my name is Dr. Daniel Frattarelli. I am a
practicing pediatrician and Chair of Pediatrics at Oakwood
Hospital in beautiful Dearborn, Michigan. I am here today
representing the American Academy of Pediatrics in my official
capacity as Chair of the AAP's Committee on Drugs.
The testimony I give you today is supported and endorsed by
the Elizabeth Glazer Pediatric AIDS Foundation, and I am here
today to discuss the Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act and
the Pediatric Research Equity Act, and I would like to begin
just by amplifying something that Dr. Wheadon said. When we are
looking at BPCA and PREA, we can really say unequivocally that
these two laws have added more pediatric-specific information
to the labels of drugs and biologics than we have been able to
in the 70 years prior to their enactment, and it is vitally
important for infants, children and adolescents that these laws
be reauthorized.
I wish to extend the academy's sincerest thanks to
Representative Anna Eshoo for her longstanding support and for
championing these important laws for children, and although not
the subject of today's hearing, the academy also wishes to
acknowledge and thank Representatives Mike Rogers and Ed
Markey, who together authored the Pediatric Medical Device
Safety and Improvement Act of 2007.
Now, as a pediatrician, I see firsthand the need for all
children to have medicines that are studied for their use, and
thankfully, we have gone from a time back when I trained when
about 80 percent of the drugs that we used didn't have any
specific pediatric labeling, to today, where that number is
down to about 50 percent, and this success is a direct result
of BPCA and PREA. Since 1997, 426 labels have been updated with
new pediatric information, and in many cases, studies have
altered the dosages or formulation we give our patients, and in
others, drugs that were previously thought to be safe or
effective in children have proved not to be.
The 2007 reauthorization led to several improvements in the
function of these laws. All BPCA and PREA studies now result in
label changes, and the number of times companies have declined
BPCA studies has gone down tremendously while the number of
products studied under BPCA and PREA has gone up, and the
consistency and quality of pediatric studies has improved
significantly, largely through the hard work of the FDA's
internal pediatric review committee.
Based on what we have learned about these laws since 1997,
the academy offers five recommendations for improvements to
BPCA and PREA in 2012. The first of these is to do pediatric
study plans earlier. Now, PREA is a premarket requirement for
safety and effectiveness. However, the law does not require the
submission of a plan for pediatric studies until a company
submits its drug application to the FDA. Submission of this
plan so late in the process can lead to insufficient planning
and potentially avoidable delays in getting important pediatric
data. The AAP therefore recommends amending PREA to require the
submission of a pediatric study plan by the end of phase II.
The second recommendation is to improve accountability. We
heard this already also that 78 percent of PREA studies due
after September 27, 2007, are currently late or were completed
late. While many of these studies might be delayed for good
reason such as difficulty recruiting patients, FDA's publicly
available data do not distinguish between the reasonable and
the unreasonable delays. We feel the FDA should have the
authority to grant extensions when there is a good cause, but
in cases where there isn't a good cause, FDA should have added
enforcement tools comparable to those it has for postmarketing
commitments involving adults.
Third recommendation is to promote studies in younger age
groups. Now, the neonatologists, the people who take care of
babies from birth to age one month, report that almost 90
percent of the drugs that they use routinely have never been
labeled for this population, and neonatal drug research faces
some unique hurdles. The AAP believes that the FDA should be
required to ensure that BPCA and PREA written requests includes
neonates whenever possible, and if they are not, explain the
rationale why. PREA should be triggered when a company decides
to expand to a new age group so that pediatricians will have
data for an age group that is as young as the FDA determines
necessary. The GAO also identified a lack of neonatal expertise
at the FDA, and we feel that a dedicated neonatologists added
at FDA would assist in reviewing divisions in thinking through
these neonatal drug studies.
Fourth recommendation is to increase transparency. As we
learned in the 2007 amendments, increased transparency benefits
policymakers and researchers. Building on this, the AAP also
recommends that new written requests under BPCA be made public
at the time they are accepted or declined.
And our fifth recommendation is to make PREA permanent. We
call upon Congress to make PREA permanent in 2012. The FDA
currently has permanent authority to ensure the safety and
efficacy of drugs used in adults, and children deserve the
same. As part of this legislation, Congress should also
reauthorize the important program at the National Institutes of
Health to fund the study of older drugs no longer subject to
BPCA and PREA.
I would like to thank the committee again for allowing me
the opportunity to share with you the strong support of the
American Academy of Pediatrics for the reauthorization of BPCA
and PREA, and would be happy to answer any questions that you
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Frattarelli follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman, and I will now
begin questioning and recognize myself for 5 minutes for that
purpose.
Mr. Germano, will you explain how the PDUFA agreement will
help improve predictability and transparency of the drug review
process, why this is important to American patients and jobs?
Mr. Germano. I think that the measure that I spoke of in my
testimony was a measure that is particularly important. The
PDUFA provisions allow for a review process that has a number
of important enhancements. Most notably, as the number of
interactions that now would be mandatory for communication and
transparency between the agency and the sponsor companies, I
think very often issues that arise during the review process
are not clearly understood or not consistently understood
between the agency and the sponsor company, and I think that
this enhanced level of communication and transparency is likely
to result in a greater level of understanding and issue
resolution and consistency in the review process leading to,
you know, review times that likely could be shortened, and, you
know, a clarity on expectations between the two parties. If we
can get through the process more efficiently, we can bring new
products to the market more quickly and benefit patients, and
it is good all around for the FDA, for the company and for
physicians and patients who need our medicines.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
I will just down the line. Dr. Gollaher, in your testimony
you make a connection between differences in FDA review times
across therapeutic areas and how that affects development
decisions by investors and companies, and can you speak to that
issue a little further? You also mentioned the adage that you
can't manage what you don't measure, and PDUFA has long
required the agency to report on numerous performance
measurements. You suggest that performance would benefit from
some more granular reporting at the review division level. Can
you elaborate on that?
Mr. Gollaher. Sure. I think those two are related.
Investors in large companies like Pfizer but even more venture
capitalists who are looking at funding new ventures consider
the time to market for their inventions, for their investments,
and as we have seen, for example, in diabetes and in
cardiovascular, venture investment has almost completely dried
up because the time for review and the cost of clinical studies
is so great. So the FDA exists in an ecosystem. It exists in a
market in which it sends signals about its standards, about
times and so forth, and those signals are extraordinarily
important for the amount of investment that flows into new
inventions and innovative products.
On the data question, you know, we just heard the
Commissioner talking about moving to electronic submissions and
basically taking the FDA from the analog era that it has
inhabited to the digital age, and that is really important, but
at bottom, FDA is really a data management agency. I mean, it
collects data from industry, it analyzes the data and makes
decisions. The opportunity for a better assessment of some of
the metrics that people have been talking about, for example,
transparency, communication and so forth, and how the agency is
performing against those can be measured and I think should be
part of the ongoing assessment of agency performance.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Mr. Germano, you had mentioned in your testimony that one
of your vaccines got approved through the accelerated approval
pathway. Can you give us background on the importance of the
accelerated approval pathway, why it is important to get the
vaccine to patients as soon as possible?
Mr. Germano. Yes. Just last December, our vaccine Prevnar
13 was approved for prevention of pneumococcal disease in
individuals 50 years of age and older under this accelerated
review process, and the accelerated review process is a measure
that the FDA can use when they deem a medicine or, in this
case, a vaccine to be appropriate to satisfy a significant
unmet medical need for a serious disease or a serious
condition, and in this case, just to give you some
understanding of the seriousness of pneumococcal disease,
pneumococcal pneumonia accounts for over 300,000
hospitalizations a year in the United States and over 25,000
deaths, so it is a very significant disease state and a high
burden of both disease and high burden of cost for society. So
the FDA utilized the accelerated review process to review and
approve this medicine and now really that there is only one
other hurdle to get through to bring this vaccine to patients
or to society really and that is a CDC recommendation for
usage, and we are hopeful that we will get a CDC recommendation
later this month when their advisory council on immunization
practices meets, and then we will be able to bring the vaccine
to the American public.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
I think we are going to have to do a second round. My time
is up. I will recognize the ranking member, Mr. Pallone, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to ask this question, I guess of Mr. Germano and I
guess Mr. Pops and Dr. Wheadon, the three of you could answer.
We heard from Dr. Hamburg this morning that the FDA rarely, if
ever, meets the waiver caps related to the number of persons
with a conflict of interest that can serve on an FDA advisory
panel. At the same time, we know there are concerns from the
public about FDA panelists having conflicts of interest related
to the issues they are reviewing. About 3 weeks ago, the Wall
Street Journal published an article highlighting the conflict
of interest three panelists had one panel had in relation to a
product they were reviewing. You know, I know it is a concern,
I mean, we are concerned because we want to have the best
experts possible on the panels but we need to help the FDA get
such experts and get them in a timely manner.
But I am having difficulty seeing how removing the waiver
caps will solve anything when FDA is not meeting these caps,
and my question is, given that the waiver caps are not
routinely reached, can you explain how removing the caps would
improve the current situation, if you believe it would, and are
there any other fixes you would suggest in addition to or
instead of removing the waiver caps? Let us start with Mr.
Germano.
Mr. Germano. OK. I will start. And I think this is a
particularly important area for Pfizer. As I mentioned in my
testimony, we are focused on bringing new medicines in the rare
disease and orphan disease area, and this is an area where
oftentimes there are a small number of highly expert opinion
leaders and physicians.
Mr. Pallone. I don't have a lot of time, so what do you
think? I mean, should we be removing them?
Mr. Germano. Well, I think that we--you know, our view is
that there is a need to improve the process of the advisory
committees, particularly in areas where there is a paucity of
experts, and I don't know if it is additional waivers or better
utilization of the waivers that exist. I am not familiar enough
with the issues, but there is a need for improvement.
Mr. Pallone. Would either of the other two of you like to
answer?
Mr. Pops. Just being directly responsive to your question,
I don't think removal of the waivers does a whole lot for the
reasons you cited. I think FDA has different standards than
other agencies of the government with respect to conflict. My
own view is that I think they are too restrictive. And coming
at it from the innovators' point of view, the most important
thing for us when we convene a panel is that the people sitting
at the panel are expert in the disease because they are the
best suited to make the decision between risk and benefit that
are so critical for patients.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Dr. Wheadon?
Mr. Wheadon. Thank you, Representative Pallone. I think in
addition to what Mr. Pops just added----
Mr. Pitts. Is your mic on?
Mr. Wheadon. I think it is. Can you hear me?
Mr. Pallone. Yes, I can hear you. Maybe talk closer to it.
Mr. Wheadon. I think it is also important for us to
consider broadening the question and looking at it from perhaps
a different perspective from just waiver caps, and that might
be recognizing that both FDA and industry have a vested
interest in working with the best expertise. Should there be a
penalty for FDA because industry has engaged that expertise and
helping it develop its plan for investigation and research and
vice versa, should industry not be allowed to engage that
expertise because FDA may be planning to use that individual in
an advisory committee. And in the case of rare diseases, it is
even more of a particular issue because there could be so few
experts for both industry and FDA to engage.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thanks.
Let me get a second question in here. We talked about how
in today's world drug manufacturing is a global affair and
outsourcing is common, and robust supply chain management is
best practice for industry including supplier qualification and
assessment. So I wanted to ask Mr. Germano again, Pfizer has
underscored in previous testimony the importance of ensuring
the quality of suppliers, particularly those in emerging
economies. Can you tell me what Pfizer is doing to ensure
supplier quality? Do you believe that every company knows their
suppliers and knows the quality system in place?
Mr. Germano. Well, I mean, you know, product supply quality
is the highest interest to Pfizer and I think that we have put
a number of important measures in place to ensure the integrity
of our supply, and you know, some of those measures include
risk assessments of potential suppliers, you know, contractual
measures to ensure the effectiveness and quality of those
suppliers. We go into some of the suppliers and work with them
to upgrade their systems. We have audits on a routine basis. So
we employ quite an array of measures to ensure the quality and
integrity of our suppliers.
Mr. Pallone. I was going to ask Mr. Coukell but I guess I
am out of time, Mr. Chairman. Thanks.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
Dr. Burgess for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Dorman, let us stay on the issue of the conflicts
because you referenced that in your prepared testimony, and I
do believe it is extremely important. In fact, when this
reauthorization occurred in 2007, I was way down at the kids'
table on the minority side and wasn't really able to make the
point as effectively as it needed to be made, but we have got
vacancies on the advisory panels. Now, we have got waivers that
can be applied and there are caps on the waivers. Do you think
the system itself creates an environment where otherwise
qualified people say you know what, I don't need that, I'm not
going to go through that. So have we created a hostile
environment to the researchers and the people who might be
knowledgeable about these products because of the restrictions
placed on the advisory panels in the 2007 reauthorization?
Ms. Dorman. I don't know if I would say that there is a
hostile environment per se but some of the restrictions,
especially related to, you know, their finances and their
investments and things like that, could be a deterrent to some
people to expose themselves to that type of level of scrutiny.
I will say, there is something that really does need to be
done. A colleague of mine is president of the Friedrich's
Ataxia Research Association, and he was asked by the FDA to
apply to sit on an advisory committee, and he was turned down
because of perceived conflicts, and this is a man whose child
died of Friedrich's ataxia, so there are real concerns that
really need to be looked at, and we feel as if it should be--
FDA should not held to an even higher standard than all other
federal agencies.
Mr. Burgess. Well, as I recall, during the discussion, the
reference to the Institute of Medicine said no more than 40
percent of the advisory panel should be made up of people who
potentially had a conflict, and I thought that was an OK
number. That means you still have--as you correctly alluded to,
the universe of people who have an understanding of the
diseases and the treatments proposed is vanishingly small with
some of these, and if you exclude even one individual, that may
be a significant percentage of the population, the scientific
population that actually understands the studies at hand.
Ms. Dorman. That is correct. I mean, the patient
population--the rare disease community is very, very small.
Patient organizations work with researchers. They work with
companies to encourage the development of these orphan
products. So yes, in the rare disease community, basically
everyone is pretty conflicted.
Mr. Burgess. Well, are all conflicts equal? In the real
world, are all conflicts equal?
Ms. Dorman. No, I don't think so.
Mr. Burgess. Yes, I don't either.
Let me ask you this. Do you think we have actually--that
the advisory conflict policy has hindered bringing new products
to market?
Ms. Dorman. No. It may have delayed like in the case of
Savril but I don't think it has, in my opinion.
Mr. Burgess. In my opinion, hindered and delayed would be
identical, but I will accept your answer.
Well, would you support loosening some of these
restrictions?
Ms. Dorman. Excuse me?
Mr. Burgess. Would you support the loosening of some of
these restrictions that were placed in the 2007
reauthorization?
Ms. Dorman. Yes, we would.
Mr. Burgess. In the interest of full disclosure, I have a
bill out there, 3206, which attempts to undo some of these
restrictions. Have you had an opportunity to look at that
legislation?
Ms. Dorman. Yes, I have, and I have spoken with your staff.
Mr. Burgess. And Dr. Hamburg implied that she didn't need a
legislative fix, but in your estimation, would a legislative
fix expedite the solution to this problem in your world?
Ms. Dorman. That has been our position, yes.
Mr. Burgess. And no great surprise, my position too.
Dr. Wheadon, let me ask you a question. Dr. Hamburg
referenced coming into the electronic age for some of the
applications for the premarket approval process, and I guess I
am surprised that that is not farther along. Do you have a
sense as to what is the volume of new product applications, new
drug applications that are sitting on paper applications in
boxes in the basement of someone's warehouse?
Mr. Wheadon. Well, I think we may be talking about two
different things. Most sponsors, if not all, certainly the
member companies that we represent now submit what is called an
electronic document. So everything is electronic. It is no
longer boxes in U-Haul trucks as it used to be 20 years ago.
I think what Dr. Hamburg was referring to and what we
reference in the PDUFA agreement is an attempt to have more of
a common template such that that electronic data is collected
in a common format regardless of who the sponsor may be. The
ultimate benefit of that is, when the agency needs to look
across products, across sponsors, the data is collected in a
similar way. It is much easier to collate, much easier to do
analyses and come to some robust conclusions. Right now, it is
all over the place and it makes it much more difficult for the
agency to do that type of analysis. So I don't think Dr.
Hamburg was intending to imply that they are still collecting
data on a paper format. That is not the case. It is just doing
it more physically such that the agency can carry out its job
much more effectively.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back the time.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the ranking member emeritus, Mr. Dingell, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy.
First, welcome to Dr. Daniel Frattarelli. He is a
constituent of mine from Oakwood Hospital and from Dearborn
Medical Center in Dearborn, Michigan, my hometown. Doctor, it
is a pleasure to welcome you. Thank you for being here.
Mr. Frattarelli. Thank you.
Mr. Dingell. As members of the committee well know, I have
long believed that the FDA does not have the people, the
funding or the authorities it needs to properly oversee an
increasingly global drug supply chain. That has been supported
by testimony and evidence submitted in hearings before this
committee for a number of years. So in support of that posture,
I would like to direct my questions to you, Mr. Germano of
Pfizer, and please answer to the following questions yes or no.
Do you agree that both FDA and industry have a responsibility
to ensure the security of our drug supply chain? Yes or no.
Mr. Germano. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Do you agree that the knowledge of your
suppliers is important? Yes or no.
Mr. Germano. I am sorry. The knowledge about suppliers?
Mr. Dingell. Yes, your knowledge and experience with them
as to their behavior and the quality of the goods that they are
delivering you. Yes or no.
Mr. Germano. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you. There are no traps here.
Mr. Germano. I just want to make sure I understand the
question.
Mr. Dingell. Just give the answers and you will be
satisfied and so will I.
Mr. Germano. OK.
Mr. Dingell. Does Pfizer have systems in place so that they
can know and understand their suppliers and monitor the
manufacturing quality of these suppliers? Yes or no.
Mr. Germano. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Should all companies making drugs in the
United States know their suppliers and have quality systems in
place there to assure that they are getting safe supplies from
their suppliers? Yes or no.
Mr. Germano. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, I must assume, however, though, that
there would be some instances where additional help would be
needed by American suppliers, i.e., in the heparin case where
raw materials or components for the heparin were clearly not
safe and the result was American manufacturers were put at
risk. Should FDA have additional authorities to provide that
kind of support for American manufacturers? Yes or no.
Mr. Germano. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. No traps here. I want you to be comfortable.
Should the companies be using risk analysis to target
safety risks? Yes or no.
Mr. Germano. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. And that is not a standalone basis. Obviously
they would have to use other things.
Now, these are for Dr. Wheadon of PhRMA. Doctor, I want you
to be comfortable with these, and I am not trying to lay any
traps for anybody here. I want to focus on inspections. Do you
agree that requiring FDA to conduct comparable inspections of
domestic and foreign drug facilities is important to ensuring a
level playing field for our drug manufacturers? Yes or no.
Mr. Wheadon. Certainly, the answer is yes based on----
Mr. Dingell. Sorry?
Mr. Wheadon. I am sorry. Certainly, the answer is yes based
on the ability to assess risk.
Mr. Dingell. Good. I have very limited time, Doctor, and I
beg your cooperation here.
Mr. Wheadon. I understand.
Mr. Dingell. Do you agree that conducting comparable
inspections of domestic and foreign facilities is important to
public health? Yes or no.
Mr. Wheadon. That is a yes.
Mr. Dingell. And of course, it is important to the fairness
with which we treat our manufacturers. Is that not so?
Mr. Wheadon. I think it is important to be fair across the
board.
Mr. Dingell. Now, do you agree that FDA needs adequate
resources to conduct comparable inspections of domestic and
foreign drug manufacturers? Yes or no.
Mr. Wheadon. I believe the agency should have adequate
resources.
Mr. Dingell. Now, if FDA does not treat manufacturers
alike, it is very liable to be unfair to U.S. manufacturers
because of its inability to impose equal burdens upon both
domestic and foreign manufacturers who are outside of our
borders and outside the capabilities of FDA to reach them.
Isn't that so?
Mr. Wheadon. I think FDA has ability to impact foreign
manufacturers if they are importing drugs into the United
States.
Mr. Dingell. But you would advocate that FDA do have such
authority?
Mr. Wheadon. I think FDA has that ability to impact those
manufacturers----
Mr. Dingell. Please answer my question.
Mr. Wheadon. And they should, yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. OK. Does the prescription drug user fee
agreement currently provide resources for preapproval
inspection? Yes or no.
Mr. Wheadon. Yes, it does.
Mr. Dingell. Does the prescription drug user fee agreement
currently provide resources for any inspections beyond the
preapproval inspection? Yes or no.
Mr. Wheadon. That is a qualified yes, it does.
Mr. Dingell. Qualified? But it should be ``yes'', shouldn't
it? Because FDA should have that authority, should they not?
Mr. Wheadon. FDA has the ability to inspect facilities with
resources----
Mr. Dingell. That is one of the questions we are going to
be going into, Doctor.
The generic drug user fee agreement provides additional
resources for FDA to conduct GMP inspections of both domestic
and foreign drug facilities. Would you support providing
similar resources to FDA for inspections of facilities
manufacturing innovator drugs? Yes or no.
Mr. Wheadon. No.
Mr. Dingell. Do you agree that a risk-based inspection
schedule for domestic and foreign drugs facilities based, for
example, on compliance history, time since last inspection,
volume and type of product would allow the FDA to better target
the use of their resources? Yes or no.
Mr. Wheadon. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. One obstacle to ensuring comparable
inspections of domestic and foreign facilities is the lack of
complete and adequate information that FDA has on drug
manufacturing establishments. Do you support requiring domestic
and foreign drug manufacturing facilities to register with FDA
to provide a unique facility identifier and to list their
products? Yes or no.
Mr. Wheadon. I think that is one I would have to come back
to you with further comment on. I am not prepared to give a
specific yes or no on that one.
Mr. Dingell. Very good. One question then. Why is it that
PhRMA does not support additional resources for GMP
inspections?
Mr. Wheadon. Well, this is more than a yes or no, right?
Mr. Dingell. It is a fairly simple question. I know you
have a fairly easy to understand answer.
Mr. Wheadon. Right. So as you correctly point out,
Representative Dingell, the PDUFA fees that the innovative
industry presently pays goes towards preapproval inspections.
When an inspector goes into a facility, be it domestic or
foreign, they don't only look at the product that is under
consideration for approval, they look at the system of that
manufacturing establishment. So a GMP inspection is carried out
in the context of preapproval inspections.
Mr. Dingell. Am I somewhat dense in not understanding why
we would want to see to it that FDA has the authority that it
needs to carry out its responsibilities in the best way
possible?
Mr. Wheadon. We certainly agree that FDA should have the
resources to carry out their responsibilities very efficiently.
Mr. Dingell. I note, Mr. Chairman, I have exceeded my time
by 3 minutes and 5 seconds. You have my thanks and my
apologies.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and yields to the
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I apologize for
missing the first part. I have a lot of questions about nuclear
waste I could offer to you, but it is good to be here on the
health panel.
I would also like to go to Ms. Dorman, and can you just
elaborate on how the FDA's risk-based, current risk-based
analysis is affecting patients?
Ms. Dorman. Well, it is the feeling of many patient
organizations that the FDA has become far more risk averse than
it should be, and so we want some way that patients can
communicate directly with the reviewers. We have had
conversations with the FDA leadership but the reviewers
actually looking at the data don't normally hear from the
patients or their families.
Mr. Shimkus. And what would the patients and the families
tell them if they were listening?
Ms. Dorman. It depends on the disease, I suppose, or the
condition, but just let them know what their quality of life
is, to know more about the disease, what the risks of the
disease are, what the progression of the disease is. I think
those are some of the things that the reviewers would like to
hear, and I would like to point out to the committee that Mr.
Shimkus was the sponsor of the rare diseases back in 2002.
Thank you.
Mr. Shimkus. No, thank you, and that is not why I went to
you but I appreciate that.
So I think you kind of answered this. How would you improve
that risk-based system? What would you want us to do in a
public policy arena to try to fix that?
Ms. Dorman. What we have proposed directly with the FDA, we
are working internally with the officials there, what we have
proposed, which isn't really written in stone, would allow
patients in an unburdensome way, maybe through a portal there
on their Web site that would communicate some of those things.
We don't want it to be a burdensome process for the agency at
all. But to empower patients in some way, shape or form to feel
as if they have more control over approval of a product.
Mr. Shimkus. And technologically, that shouldn't be real
difficult, should it?
Ms. Dorman. I am a real techno dweeb but I would say it is
probably not all that difficult to do.
Mr. Shimkus. I would also agree with you.
Let me stay with you and ask about the FDA's vacancies on
their advisory committees. Do you know how many there are, and
what does that mean in this discussion that we are having?
Ms. Dorman. I really don't know what the numbers might be.
Mr. Shimkus. And what is the problem with vacancies?
Ms. Dorman. Well, the problem is that it can delay
consideration of products if they are unable to find someone
who is expert, especially in the rare disease world where, you
know, there are not of people expert in their conditions.
Usually the patients know more about their conditions than
their doctors do, so----
Mr. Shimkus. Say that again. I mean, just reiterate that
point.
Ms. Dorman. I am speaking just from NORD's perspective. I
mean, many patients have more knowledge about their condition,
about the progression of their disease than some of the
physicians do. So it is very important to have their input, and
they are anxious to do so.
Mr. Shimkus. And I would agree with you there. I mean, they
are anxious because either they are suffering themselves or
having the life experience. They are also very passionate to
try to make the system better for the future, and by being
involved in the process, helpful. That gives them a role in
this that they would like to be involved in.
Ms. Dorman. Yes, and it is helping our organizations
understand the regulatory process more. So many of them are
focused entirely on research at NIH and know very little about
the FDA process. But on March 1, they are having a one-day
advocacy meeting with patient organizations and over 180
organizations have signed on, so they will give them an
opportunity to learn about the FDA and the FDA to learn about
their conditions.
Mr. Shimkus. Great. Thank you.
And just briefly, Mr. Gollaher, I have been very concerned
about capital research fleeing the United States because of the
FDA's slowness. We have also heard a lot of testimony about
venture capitalism. Is that true, if we have research and
development, venture capital moving overseas? Where are they
going and what does this mean for U.S. jobs?
Mr. Gollaher. To some degree, and this is less true in the
drug industry than the medical device industry, there has been
a shift of first in human trials and of middle-stage and late-
stage research to Europe and the device field has a faster and
more user-friendly regulatory system. And we have certainly
seen in California, we have seen across the country that most
venture capitalists will not look at a business plan for a
device company that doesn't have a European strategy. That is a
tremendous change in the last 10 years.
Mr. Shimkus. And that would really affect jobs and the
economy. I mean, if they get the approval in Europe, they are
most likely going to start there.
Mr. Gollaher. Well, no, that is right, and there are also a
number of sequelae. So for example, if you introduce a product
in Germany before here, the doctors learn to use it. Some of
the factors that are involved in early-stage manufacturing may
go there as well. And you also teach your competition how to
make the product. So it is a real issue.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much. I yield back my time, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from California, Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Frattarelli, in your testimony you provide compelling
evidence of the benefits to children that the Best
Pharmaceuticals for Children Act provides. As you know, because
of studies conducted in response to BPCA and the Pediatric
Research Equity Act, we learned invaluable information about
the use of drugs in children. However, despite how well it has
worked, you point out that the AAP believes that Congress
should not remove the BPCA 5-year sunset provision because it
provides Congress the opportunity to assess whether the BPCA
continues to strike the right balance between achieving
critical pediatric information and providing an appropriate
incentive. Can you briefly expand on your testimony regarding
why Congress should retain that 5-year sunset provision?
Mr. Frattarelli. Sure. One of the big issues here is that
it is kind of a moving target that we are talking about. The
cost that this is going to incur by varying the period of
exclusivity these drugs obtain will change over time, and that
cost is going to be borne by a lot of groups, private insurance
companies and the government as well. So there is a financial
side to this, but the other part is, every 5 years having the
opportunity to look at these again, revise them, gives us some
real benefits. If we go through, you know, what happened last
time we went and reauthorized these, we had some changes made
so that, for example, now all the information that we get from
these studies results in a label change and the information is
more publicly available. Those are two real meaningful and
important things to have, and they came about because we had
this opportunity to reevaluate.
Mr. Waxman. That is a very good argument. The other, of
course, is that when we have a 6-month exclusivity, that is a
lot of money, and that cost, as you point out, is being carried
by the people who pay for these drugs, whether it is
government, insurance or private individuals. If you have a 6-
month exclusivity, especially if it is a drug like Lipitor
where the annual sales are over $5 billion, that just can be a
huge cost that is being passed on to others.
And so we need to maintain a balance between providing
adequate incentives for developing new indications for
pediatric populations and not unduly burdening patients and
payers with high drug costs for any longer than is necessary.
During the 2007 reauthorization, we put forward a proposal
to trim that 6 months of exclusivity for drugs with very high
profit margins, so-called blockbuster drugs. I thought that
made sense, but we didn't prevail in including it. I agree, it
is critical to retain that sunset provision so we have an
opportunity to evaluate these questions, both the balance and
the research questions as well.
Ms. Dorman, we have heard concerns from several parties
about the development of drugs for rare diseases. I talked in
my opening statement about a proposal under consideration that
would make changes to FDA's fast-track approval system for
orphan drug, the ULTRA Act. Specifically, it would require the
FDA to use whatever data was available to evaluate and approve
surrogate endpoints for review of these drugs and would prevent
FDA from requiring additional clinical data even when FDA
considers such additional data necessary to enable it to make
an approval decision based on that endpoint. That is a concern
to me. My understanding is that under current law, FDA has a
great deal of discretion to identify and require appropriate
scientific evidence.
NORD recently did a study looking at whether FDA is
flexible in its requirements for the approval of orphan drugs.
Can you describe the conclusions of this study in more detail?
What is NORD's view on the need for legislative changes to
FDA's fast-track approval program for orphan drugs,
specifically on the ULTRA Act?
Ms. Dorman. We feel as if ULTRA would require the FDA to
rely on surrogate endpoints based on little or no clinical
evidence, and it could expose patients to unnecessary risk and
in our opinion would lower the approval standards of the FDA,
and that is our concern. That study is really a landmark study.
Of the 130, you know, products that were reviewed by a former
chair, many of them, 90 of the 135, were approved based on
administrative flexibility or case-by-case flexibility, and I
think the example that Dr. Hamburg gave this morning in her
testimony regarding the new therapy for cystic fibrosis, it was
approved in 3 months, so they do use that flexibility when
something that important comes forward.
Mr. Waxman. Well, we all want these drugs on the market as
fast as possible but I would be concerned about any proposal to
remove FDA's ability to require clinical data when FDA thinks
it is essential to assure that these drugs are safe and
effective, so I certainly agree with the position NORD has been
taking.
Ms. Dorman. Thank you.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Lance, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To Mr. Germano, very nice to see you again. In your
testimony, you noted that Pfizer's enhanced focus on rare
diseases, specifically allocating the majority of your research
and development efforts to the areas that represent the
intersection between unmet medical needs and your strength in
biology and chemistry, given that, could you comment on how the
enhancements in regulatory science contained in the goals
letter will support the development of products for rare
diseases?
Mr. Germano. Yes, I think that there are a number of
elements of the proposed PDUFA V that will help in the
advancement and review and development of medicines for rare
diseases. I think the NME review process that I spoke of before
will help bring, you know, clarity to the review process, which
I think will be helpful. I think that some of the provisions in
the, you know, enhancements in regulatory science, you know,
specifically for rare diseases, biomarker identification and,
you know, other measures that are in the PDUFA V I think are
all intended to elevate the capability of the FDA and the
potential for better transparency and problem solving and
decision making between the company and the FDA.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. Are there any other changes that you
could see that would incentivize innovative biopharmaceutical
companies into developing more products for unmet needs?
Mr. Germano. Well, I think overall, you know, confidence in
the development pathway is a very big part of providing an
incentive for a company to take on a project in the development
of a new molecular entity in particular. So some of these
provisions relate directly to improving confidence in the
pathway and agreements that exist between the agency and the
sponsor company. Beyond that, I think, you know, intellectual
property and exclusivity assurance will give greater confidence
to the sponsor to make the investments necessary to bring these
kinds of medicines forward.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much.
To Mr. Pops, I think it is critical that we ensure a
consistent and transparent evaluation of benefit-risk during
FDA's review of new drugs. Unfortunately, from my perspective,
this evaluation has on occasion kept life-improving, life-
saving drugs from patients, and in your opinion, what do we
need to do in order to rebalance the analysis?
Mr. Pops. The was one of the real questions that was
brought up during the PDUFA V technical negotiations, and I
think that what we----
Mr. Lance. Which I know you were involved.
Mr. Pops. Is that in PDUFA V, and I think the Commissioner
mentioned earlier, there is this patient-centric and more
formalized risk-benefit evaluation that we are seeking to
implement through PDUFA V. I think we have a long way to go but
I think the agency has an interest in bringing more rigor and
formalization to the risk-benefit analysis.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
Is there anyone else on the panel who would like to comment
on that? Very good. Thank you very much.
I yield back the balance of my time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from New York, Mr. Towns, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me begin by thanking you, Ms. Dorman, for working with
my staff and Mr. Stearns on ULTRA. This bill is still a work in
progress, and we look forward to receiving NORD's
recommendations for changes to the text as your group has
promised my staff within the next few weeks. We look forward to
continued work with you on that.
Let me go to you, Mr. Germano. Last year, the FDA approved
a Pfizer drug under priority review in 4 months. In your
experience, is this common for orphan drug review, and what
made this one so exceptional?
Mr. Germano. This was--I think you are referring to our
drug crizotinib, and the brand name is Xalkori. It is a drug
for----
Mr. Towns. That is correct.
Mr. Germano [continuing]. A specific subset of patients
with non-small-cell lung cancer, and in this case, there is a
genetic marker to identify patients who are most likely to
respond to the medication. So we were able to--once the
identification of the genetic marker occurred, we were able to
work with our partners at Abbott Laboratories to develop a
companion diagnostic and complete a clinical trial that
demonstrated, you know, fairly clearly the benefit-risk profile
of this medicine for this particular patient population. So it
is a great example of the benefit of personalized medicine or
precision medicine approach to drug development. You know, the
more we are able to do this, you know, the more efficient the
development process is, the more efficient the review process
is and the more quickly we can get new medicines to patients.
So, you know, I can't say it is commonplace. I think we are
all working harder and harder to find, you know, genetic
markers and biomarkers of activity, whether it is efficacy or
safety signals that we are after to help bring more clarity to
the benefit-risk profile of our medicines and make it easier
for us to develop them and for the agency to review them.
Mr. Towns. Let me just say that I really appreciate
Pfizer's strong commitment to finding treatments for rare
diseases. To the best of your knowledge, have any of Pfizer's
recently offered drug approvals been approved under the
accelerated approval pathway at FDA?
Mr. Germano. Well, this one that we are speaking of,
crizotinib, was approved under the accelerated review process.
Mr. Towns. Any others?
Mr. Germano. We have another drug for a rare disease, a
rare polyneuropathy that we have recently filed with the FDA
and we are seeking accelerated review of that product as well.
Mr. Towns. Do you have any ideas or suggestions as to how
we might be able to improve the accelerated approval process?
Do you have any ideas or suggestions that you might want to
offer?
Mr. Germano. Well, I think that some of the provisions of
PDUFA V are likely to be helpful. Again, I think the greater
amount of required interaction between the agency and the
sponsor, the focus that the agency will put on, you know, risk-
benefit framework, biomarker understanding and, you know, rare
and orphan disease issues that are components of the PDUFA V
should be helpful in improving our ability to bring these kinds
of medicines to the market.
Mr. Towns. I want to go to a very quick yes or no question.
I am very committed to supporting the FDA in their timely
approval of safe, effective treatment options, particularly for
rare diseases. For this reason, I am proud to be working with
my colleague from Florida, Congressman Stearns, on an
initiative that I hope will encourage the development of
innovative, safe drugs in this space. The goal is to improve
access to the FDA's existing accelerated approval pathway for
drugs designed to treat patient with life-threatening rare
diseases, and this would be a yes or no. Let me ask you, Mr.
Germano, and of course Mr. Pops and Ms. Dorman, do you support
this goal?
Mr. Germano. To----
Mr. Towns. Do you support the goal?
Mr. Germano. I am sorry?
Mr. Towns. Congressman Stearns and I are working on this
initiative that I hope will encourage the development of
innovative, safe drugs in this space. The goal is to improve
access to FDA's existing accelerated approval pathways for
drugs designated to treat patients with life-threatening rare
diseases. Do you support that?
Mr. Germano. Yes, I would support that.
Mr. Towns. OK. Ms. Dorman?
Ms. Dorman. Yes.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, and I would note, Mr.
Chairman, I don't have anything to yield back, but I yield
back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
Mr. Guthrie for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Guthrie. I think the previous two kind of went down the
path I was going to go with Ms. Dorman. I think that we do need
to make sure that we have a good accelerated program for people
with risk, and I have a friend caught up in another situation,
and the argument, I always say this. I have bad allergies. I
don't want something put out to keep me from sniffling that is
going to have adverse effects to me. But when you have a friend
who has Lou Gehrig's disease, or ALS, and there is some
opportunities for them to go forward, as long as the patient
knows the risk and what could be there, I think that we should
have a process for them to go forward. So I agree with Mr.
Stearns and Mr. Towns and I would like to work with you on that
because I think that is important to do.
On the venture capital, which is more medical devices, I
gather, a lot of times they are encouraged to go to Europe just
because they get approved. If they get approved in the home
country where they manufacture, they also get--I think China
recognizes it. So the President talked about manufacturing,
which is my background, we are in a situation where we have
American manufacturers having to locate in Europe because of
our regulatory process, which we are not comparing to a country
that doesn't have substantial safety concerns. I mean, we are
talking about the European Union that we are not competitive
with in our approval process.
But I want to get to Mr. Coukell. On this panel, a lot of
people say ``as a doctor.'' I don't get to say that, but as a
quality control engineer--that was my background before in
manufacturing--Pew has done some research on drug pedigree, and
just if you can talk about that and particularly I would like
the safety of the supply chain, particularly foreign supply
chains dealing with third parties or foreign regulators. I
mean, if you could talk about what your research has been in
the drug pedigree world?
Mr. Coukell. Thank you for that question, sir. It is an
area that I didn't touch on my testimony, but we looked at as
drugs move from the manufacturer through distributors to the
pharmacy and ultimately to the patients, what is the pedigree
system or the absence of. So if I could share one short story.
A couple of years ago, there was a tractor-trailer load of
insulin that was stolen in North Carolina and disappeared for a
while. Insulin is a drug that should be refrigerated. And then
it showed up back in pharmacies of a major chain grocery store
in a couple of different States. And between there is passed
through a couple of different wholesalers. And so the question
is, is there a system by which the pharmacy at the end use
could have recognized that as stolen product, flagged it, do we
have a system that lets you track the product through the
system, do we have a unique serial number on the drugs, and the
answer is we don't have that. California has law which is
scheduled to come into effect in 2015. Our view is that a
national standard would be much more preferable.
Mr. Guthrie. What about your looking into ingredients,
foreign ingredients and the integrity and dealing with foreign
regulators or third parties? I think you looked into that in
your report as well. And what are solutions? I mean, you said
unique serial numbers. Are there other things like working with
foreign regulators or third-party groups?
Mr. Coukell. So let me make two points that I think are
important. One is, a manufacturer absolutely has to have
confidence that they know who is in their upstream supply chain
and that they know what quality standards are in place and that
there isn't a risk of sub standard product coming in through
the backdoor and making its way into the supply chain.
Mr. Guthrie. Did you find that manufacturers didn't know
that or didn't have systems in place for that?
Mr. Coukell. We absolutely found a whole spectrum, and
there are great manufacturers in every country, but there are
also risks. In our report, there is a photograph from a
manufacturing facility in China with a whole wall of 50-gallon
drums stacked up about one deep, and the inspectors went in
there and said, you know, what is behind those drums; well,
nothing. So they climbed over and found behind the drums a
whole warehouse full of uncertified active pharmaceutical
ingredient that was destined for, in that case, a European
supply chain. So it does occur.
On the question of foreign regulators, I think we
acknowledged that the FDA is moving in the right direction on
this, which is no one country can inspect the whole world, and
so we have to deploy limited resources in a rational way. We do
duplicate inspections and rely on other trusted regulators
wherever possible.
Mr. Guthrie. In automotive manufacturer, you actually hire
people to come in and certify and audit your plant, and Ford or
GM or Chrysler would accept that. Using third-party auditors
that are reputable, that you can--the trick to it was or the
issue was that you actually paid them to come to your plant to
certify you to Ford's standard, but they had a reputation to
uphold as well, and so----
Mr. Coukell. Absolutely, and I think Congress did some of
that for food in the Food Safety Modernization Act a couple of
years ago. You know, one of the real leaders in industry on
quality, a vice president of quality for one of the big
companies has said every supplier and sub-supplier should be
audited by somebody, but at the same time, if there is one
company that is making, you know, an inactive ingredient like
talc or something for tablets and they are supplying 30
companies, you don't need 30 audits.
Mr. Guthrie. Right. Common sense.
Thanks. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
That concludes the questioning, and I would like to thank
the witnesses and members for participating in today's hearing.
We have had a lot of very important information come before the
committee, and I remind members that they have 10 business days
to submit questions for the record. I will ask the witnesses to
please respond promptly to those questions. Members should
submit their questions by the close of business on Wednesday,
February 15th.
With that, without objection, the subcommittee is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:25 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


