- THE NEED TO MOVE BEYOND THE SGR

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE NEED TO MOVE BEYOND THE SGR

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 5, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-46

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
74-195                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MARY BONO MACK, California           FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ANNA G. ESHOO, California
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
Vice Chair                         GENE GREEN, Texas
JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma              DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California         JAY INSLEE, Washington
CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire       TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JIM MATHESON, Utah
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              Islands
PETE OLSON, Texas
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia

7_____

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina   LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MIKE ROSS, Arkansas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   ANTHONY D. WEINER, New York
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JIM MATHESON, Utah
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky                  officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Hon. John D. Dingell, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Michigan, opening statement.................................     6
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................    12
Hon. Phil Gingrey, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Georgia, opening statement.....................................    12
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    13
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, prepared statement.........................   167

Witnesses

Mark B. McClellan, Director, Engelberg Center, The Brookings
Institution....................................................    23
Prepared statement...........................................    26
Cecil B. Wilson, President, American Medical Association.........    33
Prepared statement...........................................    35
David B. Hoyt, Executive Director, American College of Surgeons..    53
Prepared statement...........................................    55
Harold D. Miller, Executive Director, Center for Healthcare
Quality and Payment Reforms....................................    69
Prepared statement...........................................    72
Michael E. Chernew, Professor of Health Policy, Harvard Medical
School.........................................................    90
Prepared statement...........................................    93
M. Todd Williamson, Coalition of State Medical and National
Specialty Societies............................................   101
Prepared statement...........................................   103
Roland A. Goertz, President, American Academy of Family
Physicians.....................................................   120
Prepared statement...........................................   122

Submitted Material

Letter, dated May 4, 2011, from Nancy LeaMond, Executive Vice
President, State and National Group, AARP, to subcommittee
leadership, submitted by Mr. Waxman............................    16
Letter, dated May 4, 2011, from Joe Baker, President, Medicare
Rights Center, to subcommittee leadership, submitted by Mr.
Waxman.........................................................    20
Statement, dated May 5, 2011, of Garrison Bliss, Chief Medical
Officer, Qliance Medical Group, submitted by Mr. Cassidy.......   152
Letter, dated April 28, 2011, from the Alliance for Integrity in
Medicare to subcommittee leadership, submitted by Mr. Pitts....   168
Letter, dated March 10, 2011, from AMDA, et al., to House
leadership, submitted by Mr. Pitts.............................   170
Letter, dated April 26, 2011, from Michael D. Maves, Executive
Vice President and Chief Executive Officer, American Medical
Association, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr. Pitts..............   174
Memo, dated April 14, 2011, American Medical Association staff,
to House Republican leadership, Majority Ways and Means and
Energy and Commerce Committees staff, submitted by Mr. Pitts...   183
Letter, dated April 26, from Michael D. Maves, Executive Vice
President and Chief Executive Officer, American Medical
Association, to Mr. Pitts......................................   190
Letter, dated April 29, 2011, from Ron Moy, President, American
Academy of Dermatology Association, to committee leadership,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................   199
Letter, dated April 27, from Bruce Sigsbee, President, American
Academy of Neurology, to committee leadership, submitted by Mr.
Pitts..........................................................   204
Letter, dated April 29, 2011, from American Academy of Nurse
Practitioners to subcommittee leadership, submitted by Mr.
Pitts..........................................................   207
Letter, dated May 2, 2011, from Michael Repka, Medical Director
for Governmental Affairs, American Academy of Ophthalmology, to
Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr. Pitts..............................   208
Letter, dated April 26, 2011, from Daniel J. Berry, President,
American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons, to Mr. Upton,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................   211
Letter, dated April 27, 2011, from David R. Nielsen, Executive
Vice President and Chief Executive Officer, American Academy of
Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, to John O'Shea,
committee Majority Professional Staff Member, submitted by Mr.
Pitts..........................................................   219
Letter, dated May 5, 2011, from O. Marion Burton, President,
American Academy of Pediatrics, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr.
Pitts..........................................................   221
Email, dated April 12, 2011, from Lawrence W. Jones, American
Association of Clinical Urologists, to John O'Shea, committee
Majority Professional Staff Member, submitted by Mr. Pitts.....   222
Letter, dated March 28, 2011, from committee and subcommittee
leadership to Ralph Brindis, President, American College of
Cardiology, submitted by Mr. Pitts.............................   223
Letter, dated April 6, 2011, from David R. Holmes, Jr.,
President, and Jack Lewin, Chief Executive Officer, American
College of Cardiology, to committee and subcommittee
leadership, submitted by Mr. Pitts.............................   225
Letter, dated April 28, 2011, from Susan Schneider, President,
American College of Emergency Physicians, to Mr. Upton,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................   227
Letter, dated April 26, 2011, from Virginia Hood, President,
American College of Physicians, to subcommittee leadership,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................   230
Letter, dated April 29, 2011, from David Borenstein, President,
American College of Rheumatology, to committee leadership,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................   232
Letter, dated April 28, 2011, from L.D. Britt, President,
American College of Surgeons, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr.
Pitts..........................................................   235
Letter, dated April 28, 2011, from Richard N. Waldman, President,
American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, to Mr.
Upton, submitted by Mr. Pitts..................................   238
Letter, dated April 25, 2011, from Sharon A. Brangman, President,
and Jennie Chin Hansen, Chief Executive Officer, American
Geriatrics Society, to subcommittee leadership, submitted by
Mr. Pitts......................................................   241
Letter, dated April 28, 2011, from Karen J. Nichols, President,
American Osteopathic Association, to subcommittee leadership,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................   246
Letter, dated April 30, 2011, from R. Scott Ward, on behalf of
American Physical Therapy Association, to committee leadership,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................   252
Letter, dated April 29, 2011, from John E. Tomaszewski,
President, American Society for Clinical Pathology, to Mr.
Upton, submitted by Mr. Pitts..................................   255
Letter, dated April 27, 2011, from M. Brian Fennerty, President,
American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, to committee
leadership, submitted by Mr. Pitts.............................   259
Letter, dated April 29, 2011, from Mark A. Warner, President,
American Society of Anesthesiologists, to Mr. Upton, submitted
by Mr. Pitts...................................................   262
Letter, dated April 29, 2011, from Edward J. Holland, President,
American Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgery, to
subcommitte leadership, submitted by Mr. Pitts.................   264
Letter, dated April 27, 2011, from George Sledge, President, and
Allen Lichter, CEO, American Society of Clinical Oncology, to
subcommittee leadership, submitted by Mr. Pitts................   268
Letter, dated April 28, 2011, from J. Evan Sadler, President,
American Society of Hematology, to committee leadership,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................   273
Letter, dated April 30, 2011, from Phil Haeck, President,
American Society of Plastic Surgeons, to Mr. Upton, submitted
by Mr. Pitts...................................................   275
Letter, dated April 28, 2011, from Datta G. Wagle, President,
American Urological Association, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr.
Pitts..........................................................   279
Letter, dated April 28, 2011, from Jordan J. Cohen, Chairman,
Board of Trustees, Arnold P. Gold Foundation for Humanism in
Medicine, to John O'Shea, committee Majority Professional Staff
Member, submitted by Mr. Pitts.................................   284
Letter, dated April 28, 2011, from Darrell G. Kirch, President
and Chief Executive Officer, Association of American Medical
Colleges, to committee leadership, submitted by Mr. Pitts......   286
Letter, dated May 12, 2011, from Charles N. Kahn III, President
and Chief Executive Officer, Federation of American Hospitals,
to committee leadership, submitted by Mr. Pitts................   288
Letter, dated May 10, 2011, from James Hughes, President,
Infectious Diseases Society of America, to committee
leadership, submitted by Mr. Pitts.............................   290
Letter, dated April 28, 2011, from William F. Jessee, President
and Chief Executive Officer, Medical Group Management
Association, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr. Pitts..............   292
Letter, dated April 30, 2011, from Greg Przybylski, President,
North American Spine Society, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr.
Pitts..........................................................   296
Letter, dated April 29, 2011, from Jeffrey Wiese, President,
Society of Hospital Medicine, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr.
Pitts..........................................................   303
Letter, dated April 29, 2011, from Dominique Delbeke, President,
Society of Nuclear Medicine, to committee leadership, submitted
by Mr. Pitts...................................................   305
Letter, dated May 2, 2011, from Michael J. Mack, President,
Society of Thoracic Surgeons, to Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr.
Pitts..........................................................   307
Letter, dated April 29, 2011, from Yehuda Handelsman, President,
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, to committee
leadership, submitted by Mr. Pitts.............................   313
Letter, dated May 5, 2011, from Michael Weinper, President and
Chief Executive Officer, PTPN, to subcommittee leadership,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................   315

THE NEED TO MOVE BEYOND THE SGR

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 5, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R.
Pitts (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Burgess, Murphy,
Gingrey, Lance, Cassidy, Guthrie, Barton, Upton (ex officio),
Pallone, Dingell, Capps, Baldwin, and Waxman (ex officio).
Also present: Representatives Harris and Christensen.
Staff present: Allison Busbee, Legislative Clerk; Paul
Edattel, Professional Staff Member, Health; Julie Goon, Health
Policy Advisor; Debbee Keller, Press Secretary; Ryan Long,
Chief Counsel, Health; John O'Shea, Professional Staff Member,
Health; Heidi Stirrup, Health Policy Coordinator; Stephen Cha,
Democratic Senior Professional Staff Member; Alli Corr,
Democratic Policy Analyst; Tim Gronniger, Democratic Senior
Professional Staff Member; Karen Lightfoot, Democratic
Communications Director and Senior Policy Advisor; Karen
Nelson, Democratic Deputy Committee Staff Director for Health,
and Mitch Smiley, Democratic Assistant Clerk.
Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The chair
recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

The system that is currently used to pay physicians for
providing services to beneficiaries in the Medicare System is
broken and has been for some time. The dilemma that currently
threatens doctors and Medicare beneficiaries alike is all too
familiar.
According to the most recent Congressional Budget Office
estimate if nothing is done physicians will see reimbursement
for services provided to Medicare patients cut by 29.4 percent
on January 1, 2012. This will have a disastrous effect on
access to care for Medicare beneficiaries. According to surveys
by the American Medical Association faced with cuts of this
magnitude as many as 82 percent of physicians say that they
will need to make significant changes in their practices that
will affect access to care.
We have been here before. In fact, we have been in this
situation for almost a decade. Since 2002, Congress has acted
repeatedly to avert scheduled fee cuts. In 2010 alone Congress
passed one--two 1-month overrides, two 2-month overrides, one
6-month override, and most recently for 2011, Congress passed a
1-year override. All this was done without resolving the
underlying problem.
Meanwhile, the cost of fixing the problem continues to
grow. In March the Congressional Budget Office estimated that
the price just to wipe out the accumulated debt and return to
the baseline would be $298 billion. This staggering price tag
is just one side of the physician payment reform problem. The
current payment system is fundamentally flawed, and keeping the
current system or making minor adjustments is no longer a
viable option. Even maintaining the current system with 0
percent updates through 2020, would cost $275.8 billion.
Too often the discussion around physician payment reform
has focused on the deficiencies of the current system and the
urgent need to move away from the sustainable growth rate
formula without a clear vision of the kind of system we want to
replace it with.
Essentially, all of us agree on the need for a new payment
system, and there are a lot of good ideas about what an ideal
payment system should look like. The witnesses that are
participating in today's hearing bring a wealth of knowledge on
this issue, and some of them have personal experience in design
and administration of innovative systems.
I want to thank the distinguished panel of experts that
have taken the time to testify today. I am encouraged that this
hearing will go beyond merely describing the deficiencies of
the current SGR System and will lead to a productive discussion
of how we move to a system that reduces the growth in
healthcare spending, preserves access to care for Medicare
beneficiaries, and pays providers fairly based on the value,
not the volume of their services.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.002

Mr. Pitts. And I yield the remaining time to the vice
chair, Dr. Burgess.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and actually I
really mean this. Thank you for holding this hearing. It has
been way too long. As I was telling one of our witnesses I was
20 pounds lighter and a lot less gray the last time we held a
hearing on Medicare physician payment.
I am also so relieved that we have five doctors on the
panel. It seems like every time we have done this in the past
all we have are economists and lawyers, so doctors, welcome,
and we know it is past time for action. I want to do my part to
ensure that Medicare beneficiaries can continue to see their
doctor, but it is just not going to happen if we don't fix this
problem.
Repeal is expensive, so stipulated, but it is also critical
to the future for America's patients. Let us all accept the
premise that it has--the SGR has to go, and this morning we are
here to hear our witnesses focus on their solutions.
I have always thought you start with a relatively simple
question, what does it cost to--for a doctor to provide the
service, and then you build in a reasonable profit for
participation and coordination. But today we send all the wrong
messages to our doctors. We say work harder and faster, deal
with weekly expansions of services and regulations of the CMS,
none-physician bureaucrats will tell you how to practice and
will do more so, in fact, under the President's new healthcare
law, we are going to hold your checks, but we need you to take
more patients. Practice costs are rising but don't expect us to
help you meet your costs, and oh, by the way, a 30 percent pay
cut in December.
Is it any wonder that the country's physicians are fed up?
We do need a true path forward. There may be three
congressional committees who have a say on this issue, but it
is this committee, the Committee on Energy And Commerce and the
Subcommittee of Health, where the solution needs to come to
life.
I am a fee-for-service doctor. I always practiced that way.
I will admit it has its problems but so does linking payment
rates to definitions of quality set by non-physicians. You need
only look at the ACO regulations that recently came out of CMS.
We have been testing models for years, and we have had multiple
demonstration projects, but, look. Here is the bottom line. If
we get to December, and we are doing an extension, that is a
failure on our part. We need a permanent solution that is
predictable, updatable, and reasonable for this year, and
nothing else will do.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I yield back my time can I
ask unanimous consent that Dr. Harris, who is not a committee
member, be allowed to sit at the----
Mr. Pitts. Without objection.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. So ordered. The chair thanks the gentleman and
recognizes the distinguished ranking Member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am pleased we are
having a hearing in the Health Subcommittee on something other
than repealing the Affordable Care Act, so I commend you for
that initially. I would also like to thank you for your
willingness to approach today's critical issue in a bipartisan
manner, and it is my hope that we move forward in a bipartisan
manner in the future on this issue.
Today's hearing is appropriate because we really must move
beyond the sustainable growth rate in Medicare's payment
policy. It is unstable, unreliable, and unfair, and we really
must move beyond legislating SGR policy in month-long
intervals. You know, I know last December when we passed the 1-
year fix it was the twelfth time we had passed a patchwork bill
in the last decade and the sixth time in 1 year alone.
So I am not saying whose fault that is, but the fact of the
matter is we need to stop kicking the can down the road. It is
not fair to our Nation's seniors, and it is not fair to our
Nation's doctors. It is a game of chicken that I think drives
physicians out of Medicare and makes it harder for seniors to
see a doctor.
So the question remains how do we fix it. The Democrats
made an attempt when the House of Representatives considered
and passed H.R. 3961, the only bill intended to permanently
eliminate the large cuts required under the SGR that was ever
passed by either body of Congress since the creation of the SGR
in 1997. That bill would have reset the spending targets of the
SGR and eliminated the accumulated deficit that generates the
large annual cuts. It also would have set more realistic growth
targets and promoted coordinated care by incentivizing
accountable care organizations to control costs, a concept that
was also embraced in the Affordable Care Act.
Now, I am not saying that that bill was the perfect
approach because nothing is perfect, but it certainly was a
solution. Unfortunately, we couldn't get it passed into law,
signed by the President. So I don't have a perfect answer, but
I know that getting a Medicare program with security and
reliability for our seniors is a high hurdle.
In that regard I would like to commend all the provider
groups for their thoughtful responses to the committee's
requests for comments. If this going to get done, we all need
to be engaged, committed, and open-minded, and I look forward
to today's hearing and finally tackling this problem, as I
said, on a bipartisan basis once and for all.
I would yield now the remainder of my time to the gentleman
from Michigan, our ranking Member emeritus, Mr. Dingell.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JOHN D. DINGELL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman, and I
commend you for holding today's hearing. We address an
intolerable situation that is only going to get worse as time
passes.
Each year since 2002, Congress has had to come in and at
the eleventh hour prevent cuts to provider services and fees
under Medicare. Due to our failure to fix this fatally-flawed
payment system, doctors and all other providers have been
unable to plan for the future, and the price tag has grown each
year, and it is going to continue to do so.
It is very clear to anyone who looks at it that we can no
longer kick the can down the road. Last Congress the House
passed legislation I introduced, H.R. 3961, which would have
repealed the SGR formula, ending the cycle of short-term
patches and permanently improving the way Medicare pays its
physicians and other providers. While I happen to think that my
bill that passed the House last year was a good piece of
legislation, I think we should explore all possible proposals,
but we should keep in mind we have to get this miserable
situation fixed.
I am committed to working with my colleagues on both sides
of the aisle, and I look forward to passing a solution to this
problem again this Congress. I hope that this time it will
become law, because the situation has become intolerable, and
we are going to lose both the advantages and the benefits of
Medicare as well as the cooperation, the goodwill, and the
services of the different providers who are adversely affected
by this miserable current situation.
And I yield back to the gentleman from New Jersey the 49
seconds I have.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't know if any
of my other colleagues would want the time.
If not, I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the full committee chairman, Mr. Upton, for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. The opening
paragraph of the original 65 Medicare legislation promised that
the Federal Government would not interfere in the practice of
medicine. This promise extended to government control over the
administration of and compensation for medical services.
Today we know the Federal Government through Medicare sets
irrational spending targets and administers the prices for more
than 7,000 physician services. That is a long way from the
original promise.
In spite of the government interference and micro-
management, spending in Medicare has continued to grow at a
rate that threatens to make the program financially insolvent.
In '09, fee-for-service Medicare spent about $64 billion on
physician and other health professional services, accounting
for 13 percent of total Medicare spending and 20 percent of
Medicare's fee-for-service spending.
Clearly something has got to change. Although we cannot
afford the current rate of spending on physician services, we
also know that if the pending 29.4 percent fee cuts are allowed
to go into effect, a large good number of doctors will be
forced out of Medicare, and a large number of Medicare
beneficiaries will lose their access to care. We are all well
aware of the inadequacies of the sustainable growth formula as
a payment policy, and we are also aware of the budgetary burden
that is failing to fix the problem it has caused.
Unfortunately, given the opportunity the President decided
that this issue, arguably the greatest threat facing Medicare,
if not the entire healthcare system, would be left out of his
health reform legislation. Today we begin the chance to correct
the omission.
I thank our witnesses for taking time out of their busy
schedule. We look forward to your testimony, and I yield my
time to Mr. Barton.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.005

Mr. Barton. Thank you, Chairman Upton, and we welcome
Congressman Harris to the committee. He looks good here and
maybe one day he will be here permanently.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Thank you, Chairman Pitts and Ranking Member Pallone for
holding this hearing today. I remember very well back in 2006,
when I had--we had lost the majority on the Republican side,
but we were in a lame duck session, and Congressman Dingell and
Senator Baucus came to me as the chairman at that time and
said, let us work right now in the lame duck to fix the SGR.
And knowing how difficult it was to do, I said no to that
because I wanted them to have the fun of having to fix it.
In retrospect, I should have taken them up on their offer
and gone to then-Speaker Hastert and said ``Let's get this done
while we can,'' because the problem has only grown worse in the
intervening 4-1/2 years. The current system is broke, and you
cannot fix it no matter how much we tinker with it.
As Chairman Upton just pointed out, we are going to see a
decrease in reimbursement of over 29 percent by next year if we
do nothing. The deficit now in the SGR is at approximately $300
billion. That is a big number, even in Washington where we have
$3.5 trillion budgets and $1.5 trillion annual deficits. But it
is a fixable problem if we really mean it when Mr. Dingell and
Mr. Pallone and Mr. Waxman say the same general things as Mr.
Upton and Mr. Pitts and people like myself.
So, Mr. Chairman, it is good that you are having this
hearing. The last time we had a hearing of this sort I was
chairman of the full committee. The problem was big then. It is
bigger now, but if we work together, we can fix it, and I hope
that in this Congress on a bipartisan basis we can do that.
With that I want to yield the balance of my time to Dr.
Gingrey. He has some comments he would like to make.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, I thank the former chairman of
the committee for yielding to me.

OPENING STATEMENT OF PHIL GINGREY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF GEORGIA

On the first day of 2012, physicians face a 30 percent cut
if we don't fix the current Medicare Physician Payment System.
This is a problem that Congress created, and this is a problem
that I expect Congress, not Republicans, not Democrats, but
Congress to fix.
Dr. McClellan, in the past you have been gracious enough to
offer your insight on this issue to the GOP Doctors' Caucus.
Several of us on this panel are members. Dr. Murphy is and I
am, and we co-chair this caucus. We want to thank you for those
efforts.
As you know, the GOP Doctors' Caucus has been discussing
potential SGR reform since the last Congress. We continue to
explore ideas that might help solve the problem, including
private contracting, allowing more flexibility in physician
payment models, and encouraging greater quality measurements so
that we might lead to a greater outcome for patients.
We look forward to continuing that work and working
relationship with you and all of our witnesses today.
I also want to thank personally my good friend, Dr. Todd
Williamson from the great State of Georgia, in fact, former
president of the Medical Association of Georgia. Todd, it is
great to see you as a witness before the committee again today,
and with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the ranking member of the full committee,
Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to start
by acknowledging and welcoming the bipartisan interest in
addressing the ongoing problem Medicare has in providing
stability to support patient access to doctors. Too often we
have been forced to the edge of the brink only to scramble at
the last minute to avoid drastic cuts that would jeopardize
access for Medicare beneficiaries and the military families
under TRICARE. This is unacceptable to our physicians, to their
patients, and to Medicare, and we have to find a better way.
Whatever virtues the SGR had when it was created 14 years
ago, and even then I didn't see much in it, I voted against it,
it is clear that they have vanished. Six times in the last 2
years the Congress has had to pass legislation blocking fee
cuts of up to 21 percent or more, and cuts of that magnitude go
to the very core of the program and would threaten the ability
of seniors and persons with disabilities to see their doctors.
Democrats in the last Congress, in the House, passed the
only bill ever by either body that would permanently solve the
SGR problem. It did not become law. That is why we repeatedly
worked to pass short-term patches to block the SGR. But that is
not the way to solve the problem. It is essential that we find
another way to get this done.
But it is not enough to fill in the budgetary gap created
by the SGR. We must work towards a new way of paying for care
for physicians and all providers that encourages integrated
care. We want patients to trust that their physicians are
talking to each other, they are talking to their pharmacy,
hospitals, and other providers about how to take care of the
problems that exist and to prevent problems before they even
arise.
We want to achieve all three of the goals Dr. Berwick talks
about; improving care for individuals, improving care for
populations, and reducing costs. Right now the way we pay for
care doesn't always support these goals.
The Affordable Care Act makes major strides to improve the
way Medicare deals with physicians and other providers. New
care models are supported by the ACA, including accountable
care organizations and medical homes. Value-based purchasing is
pursued across the continuing providers in Medicare, and
because we don't know what the payment system of the future
will look like, the ACA opens an arena to innovative
experimentation and cooperation with the private sector to
identify the best path forward.
Many of the physicians associations responded to our
request for comments, noted that the Affordable Care Act's
opportunities for innovation and expressed a desire to pursue
those opportunities in our effort to move beyond Medicare's
current fee-for-service system. And I would like to thank them
as did Ranking Member Pallone in suggesting different
alternatives for us to look at.
I hope that this hearing will not focus narrowly on options
that would shift our problems paying for the SGR onto
beneficiaries. I know that we do not have any beneficiaries on
this panel. I don't know if we have any lawyers. I am pleased
we have some doctors, but the beneficiaries have some concerns
as well, and I would like to ask unanimous consent to submit
for the record a letter from the AARP and the Medicare Rights
Center commending the committee's work on the SGR but opposing
proposals that would increase cost sharing under the guise of
``private contracting.''
I hope this hearing will be the beginning of a process that
will lead to a permanent solution to provide both stability and
better care for Medicare beneficiaries. I earnestly hope we can
work together on a bipartisan basis to solve this issue this
year.
And, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for this opportunity to make
this statement, and I would like that that unanimous consent to
put those letters in the record.
Mr. Pitts. Let me see the letters. Do you have a copy of
the letters? Let's just take a look at them. The chair thanks
the gentleman and would like to thank the witnesses for
agreeing to appear before the committee this morning. Your
willingness to take time out of your busy schedules underscores
just how important this is to all of you as it is to all of us.
On March 28, 2011, the Energy and Commerce Committee sent a
bipartisan letter to 51 physician organizations asking for
input on reforming the Medicare Physician Payment System. The
chair will introduce the responses from the following
organizations as part of the permanent record: The American
Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, The American Academy
of Dermatology Association, the Association of American Medical
Colleges, the American Academy of Otolaryngology, AARP, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the
American College of Rheumatology, the Alliance for Integrity in
Medicine, the American Medical Association, the American
Academy of Ophthalmology, the American Geriatrics Society, the
American Physical Therapy Association, the American Society of
Clinical Oncology, the American Society for Clinical Pathology,
the American Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgery, the
American Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, the American
Society of Hematology, the American Society of Plastic
Surgeons, the American Urologic Association, the American
Academy of Neurology, the American College of Surgeons, the
Medical Group Management Association, the American College of
Cardiology, the Society of Hospital Medicine, the Society of
Nuclear Medicine, and the Society of Thoracic Surgery.
Now, we received a lot of letters the last couple of days.
As they are received they will be entered into the record. Have
you finished looking at that?
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Without objection your two letters will also be entered
into the record.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.012

Mr. Pitts. Let me introduce our panel at this time. The
first witness is Dr. Mark McClellan. Dr. McClellan is former
Administrator for CMS, currently the Director of the Engelberg
Center for Health Policy Studies at the Brookings Institution
in Washington, DC. The next witness is Dr. Cecil Wilson. Dr.
Wilson is the current President of the American Medical
Association. Next, Dr. David Hoyt is the Executive Director of
the American College of Surgeons. Harold Miller is the
Executive Director for the Center for Healthcare Quality and
Payment Reform in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Professor Michael
Chernew is a Professor of Health Policy at Harvard Medical
School, Dr. Todd Williamson is a practicing neurologist and
representative of the Coalition of State Medical and National
Specialty Societies, and our final witness is Dr. Roland
Goertz. He is the current President of the American Academy of
Family Physicians.
Your testimony will be entered, written testimony will be
entered into the record. We ask that you summarize your
statements in 5 minutes, and Dr. McClellan, you may begin.

STATEMENTS OF MARK B. MCCLELLAN, M.D., PH.D., DIRECTOR,
ENGELBERG CENTER, BROOKINGS INSTITUTION SENIOR FELLOW; CECIL B.
WILSON, M.D., PRESIDENT, AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION; DAVID B.
HOYT, M.D., EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, AMERICAN COLLEGE OF SURGEONS;
HAROLD D. MILLER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR HEALTHCARE
QUALITY AND PAYMENT REFORM; MICHAEL E. CHERNEW, PH.D.,
PROFESSOR OF HEALTH POLICY, HARVARD MEDICAL SCHOOL; M. TODD
WILLIAMSON, M.D., COALITION OF STATE MEDICAL AND NATIONAL
SPECIALTY SOCIETIES; AND ROLAND A. GOERTZ, M.D., MBA,
PRESIDENT, AMERICAN ACADEMY OF FAMILY PHYSICIANS

STATEMENT OF MARK B. MCCLELLAN

Mr. McClellan. Thank you, Chairman Pitts, Representative
Pallone, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. I very
much appreciate this opportunity to speak with you on the
critical issue of Medicare physician payment. Physicians and
the health professionals who work with them are the linchpin of
our healthcare system.
Unfortunately----
Mr. Pitts. Is your microphone on?
Mr. McClellan. It is on. Maybe I am not speaking quite----
Mr. Pitts. Pull it a little closer.
Mr. McClellan. Is that better?
Mr. Pitts. Yes. That is better.
Mr. McClellan. I will get right up to it.
Unfortunately, finding a better way to both pay physicians
adequately and address Medicare's worsening financial outlook
has been very difficult. Frequent fixes to the sustainable
growth rate formula for physician payment have meant that
theoretical savings have not materialized and that physicians
can't reliably plan ahead or fully cover their rising practice
cost, let alone make needed investments in better ways to
provide care that could also save money.
The result is a frustrating gap for physicians between the
care they are able to deliver while making ends meet in their
practice and the care that should be possible in a more-
effective payment system. This is not a new problem. I
testified before many of you on this distinguished subcommittee
5 years ago about the same issues, but it has become a more
ordinate problem, as many of you noted, from the standpoint of
both quality of care for beneficiaries and the physical
challenges facing Medicare.
As Congress considers how to address this problem, I urge
the subcommittee to look beyond approaches that remain tied to
the existing formula simply by delaying it again or by
resetting baselines to higher spending levels. This is an
opportunity to provide better support for physicians who lead
in improving care, and the best starting point for doing so are
the many practical ideas to improve quality and lower costs
already being developed and implemented by physicians and other
health professionals around the country, often in spite of
Medicare payment rules.
Payment reforms in the Medicare Modernization Act and the
Affordable Care Act provide a foundation for this as do many
payment reforms being implemented now in States and in the
private sector. But success in Medicare will require more than
good ideas about payment reform. It will require real physician
leadership. No one knows better where the best opportunities
are to improve care and avoid unnecessary costs for their
Medicare patients, and no one else will be trusted by Medicare
beneficiaries.
For example, oncologists have noted how much Medicare
payments are tied to the volume and intensity of chemotherapy
they provide. As Medicare reimbursement rates have been
squeezed, the margin between what it costs to obtain
chemotherapy drugs and what Medicare pays to administer them
has become more important in covering their practice costs. At
the same time, oncology practices get relatively little support
for time spent working out a treatment plan that meets these
individual patients' needs, for managing patients' symptoms,
for coordinating care with other providers.
Some oncologists have partnered with private insurance to
change this so they can get more support for the care that
reflects the needs of their patients. They still get paid for
cost-related chemotherapy, but instead of having to support
their practice off chemotherapy margins, they receive a bundled
payment that is no longer tied to giving more intensive
chemotherapy. Instead the bundled payment provides support for
the treatment protocols that the physicians determine are most
appropriate.
In this example the physicians were willing to take on more
accountability for the quality of their care and for avoiding
preventable complications and costs since it would allow them
to focus more on what they are trained and professionally
determined to do to get their patients the care they most need.
There are many other examples of this, including in surgery
and primary care and in many other areas of the delivery of
care to Medicare beneficiaries. They all have some things in
common that should be part of any payment reform legislation.
They require a foundation of better data and meaningful, valid
quality and cost measures. Most important is providing timely
information on Medicare beneficiaries to providers.
It is also important to take more steps to align Medicare's
existing incentive programs with these clinical improvement
efforts, like Medicare's Meaningful Use Payments for Health
Information Technology and Medicare's Quality Reporting
Payments, as well as reforms affecting hospitals and
crosscutting reforms like Accountable Care Organization
payments. If they are aligned, these payments could add up to
much more support for the investments of money and time needed
to improve care.
Medicare should also support promising payment reforms
already being implemented successfully by private plans and
States. In all of these efforts more physician leadership is
critical. These reforms will succeed not because we got the
actuarial analysis right or we came up with the right names for
all these complicated payment reforms but because Medicare
beneficiaries are seeing that their healthcare providers are
getting more support to provide them with better care at a
lower cost.
Thank you, again, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to
testify today, and I look forward to assisting the subcommittee
in addressing the difficult but critically-important challenges
of reforming Medicare physician payment.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McClellan follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.019

Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Dr. McClellan.
Dr. Wilson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CECIL B. WILSON

Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My name is Cecil
Wilson. I am the President of the American Medical Association
and an internist in Winter Park, Florida. The AMA thanks the
members of the subcommittee for your leadership in addressing
the needs to move beyond the SGR, and we look forward to
collaborating with the subcommittee and Congress to develop
Medicare physician payment reforms that strengthen Medicare.
The SGR is a failed formula. The longer we wait to cast it
aside the deeper the hole we dig. It is past time to replace
the SGR with a policy that preserves access, promotes quality,
and increases efficiency.
The AMA recommends a three-pronged approach to reforming
the Physician Payment System. First, repeal the SGR. Second,
implement a 5-year period of stable Medicare physician
payments, and third, during this 5-year period test an array of
new payment models designed to enhance care coordination,
quality, and appropriateness and reduce cost.
In addition, Congress should enact H.R. 1700, the Medicare
Patient Empowerment Act. This bill would establish an
additional Medicare payment option to allow patients and
physicians to freely contract without penalty while allowing
patients to use their Medicare benefits.
The first prong of the AMA's approach repealing the SGR is
critical. Since 2002, and you have alluded to this, Congress
has had to intervene on 12 separate occasions to prevent steep
cuts. But more than repeal is needed. Because of the
uncertainty wreaked by the SGR over the past decade, a time of
fiscal stability is imperative. So the AMA recommends 5 years
of positive payment updates from 2012, through 2016, and I want
to be clear. This would not be a 5-year temporary delay of SGR
cuts but 5 years of statutory updates should be in conjunction
with repeal of the SGR.
This would allow time to carry out demonstration and pilot
projects that would form the basis of a new Medicare Physician
Payment System, and a replacement for the SGR should not be a
one-size-fits-all formula. Instead, a new system should allow
physicians to choose from a menu of new payment models
including shared savings, gain sharing, payment bundling
programs across providers, and episodes of care.
Additional models are needed to embrace a wide spectrum of
physician practices, including models focusing on conditions
for specific capitation, warranties for inpatient care, and
mentoring programs. While these models are being tested we also
need evidence on how to properly structure and implement models
which show the most promise while addressing complex issues
such as effective risk adjustment and attribution.
To assist with this process the AMA is working with
specialty and State medical societies to form a new physician
payment and delivery reform leadership group. This group will
include physicians who are participating in payment and
delivery innovations and by sharing expertise and resources
physicians can then assess the models that will improve patient
care, and they can be implemented across specialties and
practice settings. They can also learn how to get the programs
off the ground, address challenges, and assess the impact of
these reforms on patient care and practice economics. And the
lessons learned can be widely disseminated to physician
practices across the country as we move toward reform.
The AMA recognizes that reforming the Medicare Physician
Payment System is a daunting task. We are eager, however, to
work with the subcommittee and all members of Congress to lay
the groundwork for reform so that we can achieve the mutual and
fundamental goal of strengthening the Medicare program for this
generation and many generations to come.
So thank you for the opportunity to be here today, and I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilson follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.037

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
Just a quick announcement. We are in our first series of
votes for the day. We will take one more witness and then
briefly recess at that time, reconvene immediately following
those two votes.
Dr. Hoyt, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID B. HOYT

Mr. Hoyt. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone, and
Members of the subcommittee, I am David Hoyt, a trauma surgeon
and the Executive Director of the American College of Surgeons.
On behalf of the more than 75,000 members of the College, I
want to thank you for inviting the American College of Surgeons
to testify today.
The College recognizes that developing a long-term solution
to the failing Sustainable Growth Rate formula for Medicare
payment is an enormous undertaking, particularly in light of
the need to limit the growth in healthcare spending.
The College understands that the current fee-for-service
model is unsustainable and maintains that any new payment
should be part of an evolutionary process that achieves the
ultimate goals of increasing the quality of patient care,
reducing the growth of healthcare spending. We assert that
these two are directly related objectives.
The first to reforming, the step toward reforming Medicare
payment formula is to immediately eliminate the SGR and set a
realistic budget baseline for future Medicare payment updates.
The new baseline should fairly reflect the costs of providing
quality healthcare, preserve the patient-physician
relationship, and ensure that patients have continued access to
the physician of their choice. Following the elimination of the
SGR, we believe it is essential to provide a transition period
of up to 5 years to allow for testing, development, and future
implementation of a wide range of alternative payment models
aimed at improving quality and increasing the integration of
care.
To that end the College is currently analyzing the role of
creating bundled payments around surgical episodes of care. The
primary goal of the bundled payment model is to improve the
quality and coordination of patient care through the alignment
of financial incentives for surgeons and hospitals. One
approach to bundled payments combines payments to surgeons and
hospitals for an episode of inpatient surgery into a single
fee.
The ideal surgical procedures to bundle include elective,
high volume, and/or high expenditure operations that can be
risk-adjusted and for which relevant evidence-based or
appropriateness criteria exists. In order for a bundled payment
to be successful, certain safeguards must be included, such as
ensuring quality patient care and physician-led decision-making
about how and whom--to whom the bundled payments are
distributed.
With the right approaches we can improve both quality of
patient care and at the same time reduce healthcare costs. The
American College of Surgeons has been able to significantly
improve surgical quality for more than 100 years in the
specific fields of trauma, bariatric surgery, cancer, and
surgery as a whole. These initiatives reduce complications and
save lives, which translates into lower costs, better outcomes,
and greater access.
Based on the results of our own quality programs such as
the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program or ACS NSQIP,
we have learned that four key principles are required to
measurably improve the quality of care and increase value. They
are setting the appropriate standards, building the right
infrastructure, using the right data to measure performance,
and verifying the processes with external peer review.
The first, the core process that must be followed in any
quality improvement program is to establish, follow, and
continually reassess and improve best practice. Standards must
be set based on scientific evidence so that surgeons and other
healthcare providers can choose the right care at the right
time given the patient's condition. It could be as fundamental
as ensuring that surgeons and nurses wash their hands before an
operation, as urgent as assessing and triaging a critically-
injured patient in the field, or as complex as guiding a cancer
patient through treatment and rehabilitation.
Secondly, to provide the highest quality care surgical
facilities must have in place appropriate and adequate
infrastructures, such as staffing, specialists, and equipment.
For example, in emergency care we know that hospitals have to
have proper staff, equipment such as CT scanners, and infection
prevention measures. If the appropriate structures are not in
place, patients' risks increases.
Third, we all want to improve the quality of care we
provide for our patients, but hospitals cannot improve quality
if they cannot measure quality, and they cannot measure quality
without valid, robust data which allow them to compare their
results to other similar hospitals or amongst similar patients.
It is critical that quality programs collect risk-adjusted
information about patients before, during, and after their
hospital visit. Patient clinical charts, not insurance or
Medicare claims are the best sources of this type of data.
And then finally the final principle is to verify quality.
Hospitals and providers must allow an external authority to
periodically verify that the right processes and facilities are
in place, that outcomes are being measured and benchmarked, and
that the hospitals and providers are doing something to address
the problems they identify. The best quality programs have long
required that processes, structures, and outcomes of care be
verified by an outside body. Emphasis on external audits will
accompany efforts to tie payment to performance and rank the
quality of care provided.
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act is
intensifying the focus on quality. We believe that
complications and costs can be reduced and care and outcomes
improved on a continuous basis using these principles that I
have outlined and should be the basis for payment reform.
The College welcomes the heightened focus on quality. The
evidence is strong. We can improve quality, prevent
complications, and reduce costs. Most of all this is good news
for patients.
Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to
share our College comments.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hoyt follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.051

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks you, Dr. Hoyt, for your
recommendations, testimony.
The committee will stand in recess until 10 minutes after
the second vote.
[Recess.]
Mr. Pitts. The recess having expired we will reconvene with
the testimony, and we are up to Mr. Miller. You are recognized
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HAROLD D. MILLER

Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of the
committee. It is nice to be here with you today.
I think the fundamental challenge that you as a committee
and Congress are facing is the issue of how to control
healthcare costs, and there is three fundamental ways that you
can do that.
One is you can cut benefits or increase costs for the
beneficiaries, which obviously you don't want to do. Second is
to cut fees for physicians and hospitals, which is obviously
inappropriate and hasn't worked, and the third way is to change
the way care is delivered, and that is really what I think we
need to be focusing on is how to change care in a way that will
reduce costs without rationing, and there is three basic ways
that you can do that.
One is by helping to keep people well so that they don't
have healthcare costs at all. Second is that if they do have
something like a chronic disease, to help them manage that in a
way that avoids them having to be hospitalized, and if they do
have to be hospitalized, to make sure that they don't get
infections, complications, and readmissions. And all of those
things save money, but they also are improvements for patients,
and I think the patients would find desirable.
The problem that we have today and the reason why we are
talking about payment reform is that the current payment system
goes in exactly the opposite direction. Doctors and hospitals
lose money whenever they prevent infections. We don't pay for
many of the things that will help patients stay out of the
hospital, and in healthcare nobody gets paid at all when the
patients stay well. So the incentives go in exactly the
opposite direction.
So there are ways to fix that. You don't fix it by changing
the fee levels, you don't change it by adding more and more
regulations. You do it by putting in fundamentally different
payment models, and the two fundamental changes that are needed
is, first of all, to be able to pay for care on an episode
basis rather than on a service-by-service basis, having a
single price for all the care associated with an episode of a
patient's treatment, and also including a warranty against not
charging more for when infections or complications occur. This
is the same way that every other industry in America charges
for its products and services, a single price with a warranty,
and it would be appropriate for healthcare, too.
The other approach is to have what I like to call
comprehensive care payment, which is to have a single payment
for a physician practice for all of the care that a patient
needs to manage their--the particular conditions that they
have. Paying in that way provides the flexibility for
physicians to decide exactly what the right way is for care to
be delivered to that patient as well as the accountability for
overall costs, and where these programs have been tried they
have worked.
Now, the myth that has developed is that only large
integrated health systems can do this, and because of the
visibility of a number of large systems that have tried these
things, I think that is where the myth has come from, but the
truth is that there are small physician practices around the
country that are also operating under these kinds of programs
very successfully, and I think like, again, like in every other
industry where small business have been the innovators, I think
that there is also a very important opportunity here for small
physician practices to be the innovators in this if we provide
the right kind of support.
Now, I have talked to physicians all over the country, and
whenever they have the time to be able to understand them, I
have found that they actually embrace these models. But they
need the time to be able to transition, and they need support
to be able to get there, and there is really four kinds of
support that they need.
First of all, they need data and analysis of that data.
Physicians today generally don't even know whether their
patients are being hospitalized, whether they are going to the
ER, or how many duplicate tests they are getting. So in order
to manage that they have to have that kind of support.
Second, they need training and coaching to be able to
change the way they deliver care. That kind of reengineering is
not taught in medical school, and it is very challenging to do
it while you are still trying to deliver care.
Third, physicians need transitional payment reforms so that
they can start taking accountability for the things that they
can take accountability for without risking bankruptcy in the
short run as they evolve towards these broader payment models.
And forth, physicians need to have all payers, Medicare,
Medicaid, and commercial payers, paying them the same way.
Otherwise they are spending more time trying to administer
different payment systems.
Now, the best way to organize this, I don't think, is
through a one-size-fits-all federal program. I think it needs
to be done at the community level because care is structured
and delivered differently in every community. And in a growing
number of communities around the country there are now entities
called Regional Health Improvement Collaboratives. These are
non-profit, multi-stakeholder entities. They don't deliver
care, they don't pay for care, but they help to provide the
kind of data and analysis and technical assistance to physician
practices to be able to evolve in this direction.
And I think that Congress can help these regional
collaberatives in three key ways. One is by providing them
data. Today it is impossible to get data from Medicare to know
how you are doing for Medicare patients if you want to change
that. Second, you can give them some modest federal funding to
support what they are doing, and when I say modest, I am
talking millions, not billions, and third, you can encourage or
require Medicare to participate in the cases where they have
developed multi-payer payment reforms already at the local
level. The big thing that they are missing is having Medicare
at the table, and I think that is going to be a very important
strategy to support that.
So I appreciate the opportunity to be here today, and I
would be happy to answer any questions or provide any help.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.069

Mr. Pitts. Thank you for those excellent recommendations.
Dr. Chernew, 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL E. CHERNEW

Mr. Chernew. Thank you, Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member
Pallone, and Mr. Miller for putting my mike on, and members of
the Subcommittee on Health for inviting me to testify on
innovative Physician Payment Systems that might be useful
alternatives to the Sustainable Growth Rate System that
ironically has proven not to be sustainable. Before I commence
with my substantive remarks, I would like to emphasize that my
comments reflect solely my beliefs and do not reflect the
opinions of any organization I am affiliated with, including
MedPAC.
Critiquing the SGR is easy, yet identifying a viable
alternative to the SGR is difficult. There is unlikely to be a
perfect solution, and any path to a solution will take time.
That said, I think that increasingly the private sector has
developed promising alternatives. I will discuss one option I
consider particularly promising today, the alternative quality
contract implemented by Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts
known commonly as the AQC.
But before launching into a description of the AQC I would
like to speak broadly about payment reform. First, it is
important to distinguish between the form of payment, fee-for-
service versus bundled, and the level of payment. The form of
payment creates incentives that influence behavior, but even
the best payment system can function poorly if payment rates
are set too low or even too high.
Second, while I recognize that I have been asked to discuss
physician payment, the question presupposes a fragmentation of
payment that I think is detrimental. Specifically, the existing
Medicare System, including the SGR, structures payment by
provider type. This creates numerous inequities and paradoxes
that makes managing the system and improving coordination of
care across settings difficult.
A more bundled system that pays for an episode of care or
provides a global budget can allow more flexibility for
providers and limit the need for purchasers such as Medicare or
private insurers to micromanage payment systems. In a bundled
payment model the relevant question is not how do we pay
physicians, but instead how do we pay for care.
Implementing a bundled system is not easy but innovative
systems do exist, and at a minimum our experience demonstrates
their feasibility, and I believe promise. The AQC is one such
system.
Briefly, the AQC is integrated into the Blue Cross Blue
Shield HMO product and rests on three fundamental pillars.
First, a global payment in which providers' systems receive a
budget to cover the cost of providing all of an enrollee's
care. Second, the AQC incorporates a comprehensive pay-for-
performance system that rewards provider groups for performance
on 64 quality measures ranging from process measures to outcome
measures, from clinical measures to patient experience
measures, and third, the AQC includes a significant data and
analytic support for participating physician groups which helps
them identify areas to target for improvement and training and
other things as well.
The AQC differs from the capitation plans of the 1990s
because the contract extends for 5 years and because of the
robust quality program and data support.
The model has several strengths. Most importantly it
creates a business case for improving quality and efficiency.
In contrast, the fee-for-service systems innovative programs
that reduce the use of unnecessary or inefficient care are
profitable under the AQC. The global budget also provides
stability and predictability of spending growth, and the 5-year
contract duration and the requirement that patients designate a
physician greater facilitates management and accountability.
Global payment systems in the past have raised several
concerns. For example, many have worried that they would lead
to a lower quality of care. The AQC is designed to prevent this
by setting the global budget at least equal to the prior year
payment so no provider group will be forced to reduce access to
care and by incorporating the quality bonus system. Early
evidence suggests that these features have led to an increase,
not decrease in the quality of care delivered.
Further, many observers have noted that not all physician
groups are capable of functioning in a global budget
environment. Certainly this is true, but just because all
groups are not ready for bundled payment does not mean we
should abandon it, and I would support a multiplicity of
approaches.
Moreover, I tend to have a free market orientation that
suggests providers will adapt. In fact, if we do not believe
such transformation is possible, no amounts of payment reform
or other policy changes will solve our problems, and we are
doomed to a system that operates far below our aspirations.
Moreover, many solo and small practices participate in the
AQC as part of the larger independent practice associations,
which demonstrate that the model can succeed outside of large
integrated group practices.
The AQC is not without its weaknesses. For example, the AQC
is not tied to benefit design, and I believe a greater
integration with value-based insurance design would be an
improvement. Second, while I am a big believer in markets, any
private sector model must contend with issues of provider
market power. Because of its size Blue Cross Blue Shield may be
better positioned to do this than other smaller plans.
So far the agency has passed the test of the market with
enrollment growing from 26 percent to 44 percent of Blue Cross
Blue Shield HMO membership as more provider groups have chosen
to join. Some AQC principles are already evident in the
recently-proposed Accountable Care Organization regulations and
in several other bundled payment demonstrations.
Broad application of such models would be facilitated in
Medicare if beneficiaries were incented or required to
designate a physician without giving up existing benefits or
rights regarding choice of provider.
In summary, a fee-for-service physician system for
Medicare, SGR or not, generates inherent problems. Bundled
payment systems such as the AQC offer considerable promise as a
way forward. These systems are comprehensive and give autonomy
to providers which ultimately will be preferable to other
strategies to control spending.
Thus I urge you to support ongoing bundled payment
demonstrations and others like them which will create a more
rational and effective payment system that allows our
expectations and aspirations to be met in a fiscally-
sustainable manner.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Chernew follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.077

Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Doctor.
Dr. Williamson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF M. TODD WILLIAMSON

Mr. Williamson. Good morning. My name is Todd Williamson. I
am a Board-certified neurologist, and I treat patients every
day in my office in Lawrenceville, Georgia, just northeast of
Atlanta. I would like to express my sincere thanks to Chairman
Pitts and Ranking Member Pallone and the members of this
committee for the opportunity to address the critical issue of
Medicare's broken Physician Payment System.
As background, I had the honor of serving as the President
of the Medical Association of Georgia in 2008, and 2009. I
currently serve as the spokesman for the Coalition of State
Medical and National Specialty Societies, which includes 16
associations representing nearly 90,000 physicians from across
the country. The full membership list is in our written
statement.
Medicare is the Nation's largest government-run healthcare
program, and it represents the most glaring example of the need
for change. As everyone in this room knows the current SGR
System is failing to serve our Nation's seniors and physicians.
As the gap between government-controlled payment rates and the
cost of running a practice grows wider, physicians are finding
it increasingly difficult to accept Medicare patients. Our
coalition is, therefore, convinced that the key to preserving
our Medicare patients' access to quality medical care is
overhauling the flawed Medicare payment system.
To address this problem our coalition supports the Medicare
Patient Empowerment Act as an essential part of any Medicare
reform. This legislation would establish a new Medicare payment
option whereby patients and physician would be free to contract
for medical care without penalty. It would allow these patients
to apply their Medicare benefits to the physician of their
choice and to contract for any amount not covered by Medicare.
Physicians would be free to opt out or in of Medicare on a per-
patient basis, while patients could pay for their care as they
see fit and be reimbursed for an equal amount to that pay to
participating Medicare physicians.
Patients and physicians should be free to enter into
private payment arrangements without legal interference or
penalty. Private contracting is a key principle of American
freedom and liberty. It serves as the foundation for the
patient, physician relationship, and it has given rise to the
best medical care in the world. It should, therefore, be a
viable option within the Medicare payment system.
Private contracting will help the Federal Government
achieve fiscal stability while fulfilling its promise to
Medicare beneficiaries. A patient who chooses to see a
physician outside the Medicare System should not be treated as
if they don't have insurance. Medicare should pay its fair
share of the charge and allow the patient to pay any remaining
balance.
Private contracting is also the only way to ensure that our
patients can maintain control over their medical decisions. The
government has the right to determine what it will pay towards
medical care, but it does not have the right to determine the
value of that medical care. This value determination should be
ultimately made by the individual patient.
While private contracting would allow physicians to collect
their usual fee in some instances, it would also allow them to
collect less in others. It is reprehensible for a physician to
be subject to civil and criminal penalties if he or she doesn't
collect a patient's co-payment as is now the case. It is
irrational for a senior who wants to see a doctor outside the
usual Medicare System to be forced to forfeit their Medicare
benefits. This simply isn't fair to someone who has paid into
the Medicare System their entire working life.
The day the Medicare Patient Empowerment Act becomes law
every physician will become accessible to every Medicare
patient. Private contracting is a sustainable patient-centered
solution for the Medicare Payment System that will ensure our
patients have access to the medical care they need.
In summary, Medicare patients should be free to privately
contract with the doctor of their choice without bureaucratic
interference or penalty. This will empower individual patients
to make their medical care decisions while providing the
Federal Government with more fiscal certainty.
Thank you for the opportunity to comment today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Williamson follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.094

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
Dr. Goertz for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROLAND A. GOERTZ

Mr. Goertz. Chairman Pitts, Mr. Pallone, and members of the
subcommittee, I am Dr. Roland Goertz from Waco, Texas,
President of the American Academy of Family Physicians. Thank
you for the opportunity to testify today on behalf of over
100,000 members of the AAFP. I commend your bipartisan
commitment to finding a solution to this critical problem.
Congress understandably is most concerned with controlling
federal expenditures for healthcare, especially the rising cost
of Medicare. There is growing and compelling evidence that a
healthcare system based on primary care will help control these
costs, as well as increase patient satisfaction and improve
patient health.
We recommend reforms that eventually include a blended
payment model that consists of the following three elements.
One, some retention of fee-for-service payment, two, a care
coordination fee that compensates for expertise and time
requirement for primary care activities that are not now paid
for, and three, performance bonuses based on quality.
Simply reforming the fee-for-service system which
undervalues primary care preventative health and team-based
care coordination cannot produce the results that Congress and
patients require. The solution to our dilemma of rising
healthcare costs and stagnating quality will be complex, but it
must include greater use of transformed team-based primary
care.
The evidence for the value of primary care and restraining
costs and improving quality is very clear when that care is
delivered in a team-based, patient-centered medical home.
Growing evidence with PCMH and coordinated systems,
particularly those that emphasize improved access to primary
care teams, shows that they can reduce total costs, total
overall costs by 7 to 10 percent, largely by reducing avoidable
hospitalizations and emergency room visits.
We believe that as a policy goal Congress should invest in
Medicare reforms that increase primary care payments so they
represent approximately 10 to 12 percent of total healthcare
spending, particularly if done in ways that improve access to a
broader array of services.
Currently primary care is just 6 to 7 percent of overall
total Medicare spending, so medical home projects went
implemented recoup the entire cost of that implementation. To
produce the savings Congress requires primary care cannot
remain unchanged. AAFP has already taken the lead in urging its
members practices to change but such transformation will take
time. That is why we recommend a 5-year transition period. This
will provide an opportunity to examine what works and to allow
physicians to adopt those best practices that use a blended
payment. When this transition is complete, fee-for-service
should be a much less significant portion of physician payment.
Meanwhile, it is important to increase the primary care
incentive payment to 20 percent and maintain the support for
making Medicaid payments for primary care at least equal to
Medicare's payments for the same services. Both of these
programs, along with the mandated payment updates that are 2
percent higher for primary care, will help stabilize current
practices that have been--seen so much financial turmoil in the
past few years and will allow them to begin the process of
redesign to the patient-centered medical home model.
During the 5-year period of stability, it will be crucial
to encourage as much innovation as possible. The new CMS Center
for Innovation needs to be a key focus of this effort. We
believe that this center can help CMS cerate market-based,
private sector like programs that can significantly bend the
healthcare cost curve. We recommend that CMS Innovation Center
coordinate the various healthcare delivery models to ensure
comparability and completeness of data.
The physician community has always believed strongly in the
value of evidence, and it is the responsibility of the
Innovation Center to provide credible, reliable, and usable
evidence for health system change. When implementation data
becomes available, we would encourage Congress to engage in
another discussion with the physician community with public and
private payers, with consumers to determine not just what works
but what is preferred.
In the final analysis healthcare is such an important part
of the economy and everyone's lives that we should try to find
general agreement in what becomes the final replacement for the
current physician payment model.
Mr. Chairman and members of this subcommittee, thank you
for the opportunity to share the view of family medicine with
you today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goertz follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.106

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the panel for their opening
statements, and I will now begin the questioning and recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Dr. Williamson, you advocate allowing physicians to
privately contract with beneficiaries above Medicare payments.
One concern with this arrangement is that sick patients may be
at a disadvantage entering into a contract without sufficient
knowledge about what they need or about the quality of care
they are contracting for.
Is there a way to structure this so that patients have more
information about what they are contracting for? For example,
could you combine private contracting with quality measurement
and reporting or other tools such as shared decision making?
Would you respond to that, please?
Mr. Williamson. Thank you for the question, and that is a
great question. I understand those concerns, and I would point
out several items about that Medicare Patient Empowerment Act.
Number one, there is a lot of openness in this act.
Patients have to agree upfront what they are agreeing to before
any care is delivered.
Number two, this is merely an option within the current
existing Medicare System, so this would not change any of the
current ways that Medicare is financed otherwise. There are
sufficient protections we believe already existing in the
current Medicare Patient Empowerment Act as written so that
urgencies or emergencies as currently defined under Medicare
would be exempt from private contracting and also dual eligible
patients, those patients that are most impoverished that are
eligible for Medicaid, would not be eligible for private
contracting.
In terms of linking private contracting with quality
measures and the other items that you outlined, this is
something that physicians are trained to do, and I would say
with respectful disagreement to some of the things that were
said today, physicians are taught in medical school how to
control costs. They are taught how to communicate with their
peers. They are taught how to analyze data. This is something
that we are taught from the very first day of medical school. I
took a course called analytical medicine, and these things are
already integral. Could we do more to emphasize these things?
Absolutely, but I think within the Medicare Patient Empowerment
Act there are sufficient protections to address your concerns.
Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. Dr. Hoyt, your organization has done
a lot of very good work on quality measures. Can you give us an
assessment of where we are today in terms of measuring quality?
Are we just measuring processes, or can we also measure
outcomes? How close are we to being able to come up with a
metric that will help us decide how to pay for quality?
Mr. Hoyt. Thank you. Yes. I think the way to characterize
quality programs today is that probably the best example would
be the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program or NSQIP,
where outcomes in addition to processes of care can be
measured.
A very specific example. The implementation of that program
in 112 hospitals over a 3-year period reduced complications,
major surgical complications by about one complication per day
per hospital. If you ascribe about $10,000 to an average
complication, which is probably a low figure, and multiply that
out that turns out to be a savings of about $2.5 million per
hospital. If you roll that kind of program across all 4,000
hospitals, you are talking potentially billions of dollars each
year save one program. You add to that comparative
effectiveness, you add to that other cost reduction strategies,
and I think that physicians can bring a lot.
But the quality program tool, if you will, is proven.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. Dr. McClellan, there are several
moving parts to this puzzle. On the one hand there are a number
of forces pushing providers away from traditional fee-for-
service towards the newer payment and delivery system such as
ACOs and bundling payment agreements and medical homes, even
capitation models.
Yet on the other hand it seems that fee-for-service will
continue to have a role at least for the foreseeable future. As
we put the effort into developing these newer payment and
delivery systems, what can we do to fee-for-service to make it
less inflationary and more value based?
Mr. McClellan. Mr. Chairman, I agree with you. I think fee-
for-service and Medicare is going to continue to play a
significant role for some time. I think what you have heard
from the panel today, there are a lot of ways, including proven
ways, to help make fee-for-service work more effectively with
these other kinds of reforms, and, you know, if you--some of
the reforms that you mentioned that are taking place in
hospital payments and other parts of the Medicare Program, the
episode payments involving hospitals, the accountable care
payments, it would be very helpful if physicians could get
better financial support in their own payment system to enable
them to lead all of those efforts. And right now with fee-for-
service staying the way it is, they are staying behind.
So I think there are some real opportunities for alignment.
We are not talking about, you know, radically changing the
system, discarding all fee-for-service payments now, but,
again, especially if these efforts can start with physician
identified and physician-led efforts like you just heard about
from Dr. Hoyt, they have the performance measures. These are
things that Medicare could be paying to report on as part of
its quality reporting payments instead of some of the other
approaches that are being used now. It would be much more in
line with where physicians are telling us we can improve care
and save money, ideas that they already know how to do.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. My time has expired.
Recognize the ranking member for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have three
questions to three different people, so I am going to try to
rush through them, and I hope you will bear with me.
Some of the ideas that were mentioned today by the panel
reminded me of the bill which I mentioned in my opening that
the House passed I guess last year or the year before, which
addressed the SGR problem in a larger sense. That was the
Medicare Physician Payment Reform Act of 2009, H.R. 3961.
Now, I am not suggesting we simply go back to that now
because the Affordable Care Act creates a lot of new
opportunities for fixing the SGR that we should build off
today. But that bill, H.R. 3961, would have fixed the problem,
and so I would like to get Mr. Goertz's thoughts on, you know,
on it.
As you may recall, it provided a guaranteed update during a
transition to a new payment system, it would have created
fairer growth targets by eliminating items not paid under the
physician fee schedule, it would have provided an extra growth
allowance for primary care services, and allowed ACOs to opt
out of the spending targets. So I just wanted to ask Mr. Goertz
about your thoughts on this legislation, what you like about
it, and what maybe we could do better now that we are post
Affordable Care Act?
In about 1 minute.
Mr. Goertz. I might be able to give you a 1-minute
response, but it won't cover all those topics.
Mr. Pallone. I know. I know.
Mr. Goertz. Our organization, I don't remember the exact
position on that legislation that we took, but if it satisfies
the three elements that I mentioned because fee-for-service has
inerrant positives and negatives. The positive is that it
incents you work harder. The negatives is that it is inherently
inflationary.
So there has got to be some control on that. So we believe
that if you put a patient coordination fee element into that
that allows us to increase the things that we don't get paid
for in communication with patients and the rest of the other
physicians and team members that are needed, it will work. It
will work.
Now, the way the current model works it just simply puts
everybody in one pool and treats them all the same way. The
quality measures are mainly process right now, but we are
making big strides in getting to the outcome decisions that are
necessary for that, and what mix of those three things
eventually evolve I think are going to be very interesting to
watch. I don't know what the answers are, but all three work
synergistically to have a better system than any one of them by
themselves.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you. Now, you mentioned fee-for-
service. Let me ask Dr. McClellan the second question.
Are there examples where physicians or provider-led
organizations have stepped up to do the right thing, you know,
under fee-for-service and the payment system has hurt them from
doing that? You suggested that there might be cases, but, you
know, give me an example of maybe where physicians were
actually financially punished for doing the right thing, and,
you know, I mean, that is the last thing I would like to see
happen.
Mr. McClellan. Lots of examples. One of the first meetings
I had as CMS Administrator was with the leaders of a number of
group practices that were doing things like working with nurse
practitioners and pharmacists to do support for adherence
medication, forming transition teams to help prevent
readmissions. Point out that Medicare pays for none of that,
and to the extent that it works they could bill less for the
things that Medicare does pay for.
Another good example is Virginia Mason Medical Center in
Seattle that implemented some steps to lower costs and improve
outcomes for patients with common problems like back pain. They
were penalized financially and has made it very difficult for
them to sustain their programs.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Well, thanks.
Now, last, Dr. Wilson, you, you know, I want to commend
your proposal. It is clear that the AMA and the two other
societies seated with you today took our request seriously and
put some time into the response.
But I am wondering if you could just attempt to give us
your view of the consensus amongst the physician community, if
any, and what we should do about the problems with the
Physician Payment System? Is there a consensus at this point
would you say?
Mr. Wilson. In a general sense----
Mr. Pallone. I don't know that that mike is on.
Mr. Wilson [continuing]. I would say yes, and I think you
heard that this morning that around certain principles, and
that is we have a payment system that does not work. We need to
get rid of it. We need to have a period of stability as we move
to a different way of delivering care and paying for care, and
you have heard a variety of options about models that might be
effective. I think there is a great deal of consensus around
there.
Now, when we get down to the fine ink, fine print, clearly
we will all have differences about what will work, but I think
we should also have a realization that what will work in one
part of the country will not work in another part of the
country, and that is why we have continued to talk about a
variety of options, not picking a one size that we expect will
fit all. I can take you to my home State of Florida where what
works in the Pan Handle doesn't work in Central Florida where I
live and doesn't work in South Florida. So I think we need to
keep that in mind.
There is a temptation to feel like we ought to figure out
one rule, and that solve it all. This system is so complex that
we need to preserve that, and as a matter of fact, the
Affordable Care Act in talking about accountable care
organizations, I think, recognize that. It talked about a
variety of models for those structures that would work. I think
we need to keep that in mind, but I am impressed also as I go
around the country talking to physicians. They understand there
are ways that this can be done better, and they want to be
involved in the process.
Thank you.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair now recognizes the distinguished
chairman of the full committee, the gentleman from Michigan,
Mr. Upton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Pitts, and again, I just
want to reiterate from this committee's viewpoint that I very
much appreciate all of the input, not only from you today but
the dozens of organizations that responded to the letter that
was bipartisan that Mr. Waxman and I and others signed looking
for information. This is on our short list of getting things
done really this summer. Got a number of different things that
are there, but this is an issue that we need to grapple with.
It is time. We are way too late, and I appreciate the
expertise, the questions of particularly Dr. Burgess, the vice
chair of this subcommittee in addition to Mr. Pitts, Mr.
Pallone, Mr. Waxman, and others.
Personally I like the idea of taking the time, a number of
different years, to look at a whole number of different models
and see what might work best. I know from my district's
perspective I have got some pretty urban areas in terms of
Kalamazoo with two great hospital facilities with lots of
physicians, Borgess and Bronson, as well as Lakeland Hospital
in the county that I live in, and I have got some counties that
frankly are very rural, some that don't even have a four-lane
road practically. And so it is--we are a diverse Nation and
different healthcare, and we need to look at those different
priorities that are there for sure, and I just want to--again
appreciate your time today.
The question that I have and I want to focus this first to
Professor Chernew but others might want to comment, you know,
the IPAB was created by the Affordable Care Act as we all know.
A number of folks on both sides of the aisle have expressed
concern about the board and how it functions. For one thing as
we know that the board sets expenditure targets, imposes
spending cuts based on those targets, and we know that
beginning 2018, the target will be based on GDP.
Sounds a lot like SGR which we are trying to get rid of,
and since hospitals are exempt from IPAB cuts through the rest
of the decade, it seems that the IPAB has the potential to
undermine any serious efforts a physician payment reform.
And I would like to get your comments as it relates to
that. So we will start with Professor Chernew and anyone else
that would like to comment would be great.
Mr. Chernew. First let me say, Go Blue.
Mr. Upton. Yes. Absolutely.
Mr. Chernew. Having been in Michigan for 15 years but----
Mr. Upton. We lost a basketball guy this week. I don't know
if you heard.
Mr. Chernew. I think the IPAB is yet an unknown quantity. I
think in its best it could be supportive of all the things that
one does here and at its worst it could create problems that
you discussed, and I think the challenge like much of aspects
of the ACA is how to implement the proposals. What you have
heard here around the table about payment reform I think is a
stunning consensus about both the problems of the SGR. I heard
from the chairman and the others who spoke and the notion that
reforming payment is going to have some basic principles, and
you mentioned some. The others mentioned the transition and
stuff, and I would like to think that the IPAB can be used as a
tool to backstop if problems arise in those, but I certainly
think that if one isn't careful in various ways there would be
concerns.
And so like most things the devil is going to be in the
details and how to make it work is a bigger question than one
can address in the time that we have here.
Mr. Upton. Anybody else like to comment?
Mr. Williamson. Our coalition has opposed the IPAB for a
number of reasons, some have been stated. We have concerns
about the fact that it is comprised of non-elected officials
with minimal accountability and the fact that its
recommendations would automatically become law if the Congress
didn't act within a fairly short period of months. So our
coalition has opposed that entity.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chair. The AMA from the start
has said that this--the Affordable Care Act is a big step
forward to health system reform, but it is just a step, and
there is some challenges associated with it. There are things
that were left out, and that is medical liability reform as
well as a fix for the Medicare physician payment. And there is
some things in the bill that we have problems with, and one of
them is the Independent Payment Advisory Board, the IPAB. As it
is presently structured. We do not support it.
Our concern is and maybe this would be a good place to
float this, and that is 20 years from now we might be sitting
here, some of us, talking about how to correct the problems
associated with it. So it is not impossible that it could serve
a function, but as presently constituted we could--we see it
basically another target for physicians to meet, potential
double jeopardy with an SGR as well as the pronouncements from
this body.
So we believe significant changes need to be made.
Mr. Upton. Great. I know my time has expired. I just want
to add the Tort Reform is also on our short list of getting
things done.
So thank you very much.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognizes the distinguished gentleman from Michigan, the
ranking Member emeritus, Mr. Dingell, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy,
and I would like to direct my attentions to Dr. Wilson, Dr.
Goertz, and Dr. Hoyt, and I would like to do this against the
background of getting their helpful and necessary advice on how
we will proceed to solve a problem that is going to cost more
every year.
Now, gentlemen, like all of you I believe we have to change
or repeal the seriously flawed SGR formula. Each of you seems
to be in agreement that a 5-year stability period is needed for
Medicare physician payments to allow providers to plan ahead as
well as to allow demonstration projects of different payment
models.
Is a 5-year stability period an adequate amount of time to
phase out SGR and for physicians to prepare for a new payment
system? Yes or no? In other words, is 5 years enough time to do
the job?
Mr. Wilson. Well, Mr. Chair----
Mr. Dingell. If you want to qualify that I will be glad to
receive that for the record.
Mr. Wilson. I will qualify it. We think the 5 years because
we do think we are going down a different road. This is going
to be a challenge. It will not be easy.
On the other hand, we don't want an indefinite period of
time. We think there is an urgency about moving forward, and we
also believe that as things come----
Mr. Dingell. Doctor, I hate to be discourteous, but I have
got a lot of questions. If I get yes or no, I will get through
them.
Mr. Goertz, Dr. Hoyt?
Mr. Goertz. We would commit to a 5-year period to do
everything possible to make the transition.
Mr. Dingell. Dr. Hoyt.
Mr. Hoyt. I would agree.
Mr. Dingell. All right. Now, we have heard from many of you
about the need for demonstration projects. How many
demonstration projects would be necessary to determine the
effectiveness of a new system? Starting with Dr. Wilson. Just
horseback answer.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chair--Congressman. The--it
depends on how they work out.
Mr. Dingell. True.
Mr. Wilson. And if we are fortunate that the first project
works out, then we are there, and that is why we are doing
demonstration projects. We don't know how it is going to turn
out.
Mr. Dingell. The other two panelists, please.
Mr. Goertz. Well, I would posit to you that at least for
the elements that I am talking, have referred to, the patients
in a medical home, I think there are more than enough
demonstration projects that already show the benefit of that.
Now, if you are talking about overall change, I think you are
going to have to have enough demonstration projects that
represent all the regions of the country, all the demographic
variations that are appropriate, but I don't think that has to
be an onerous number.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you. Doctor.
Mr. Hoyt. And I don't know the number, but particularly in
surgery we would need demonstration projects to fulfill the
needs of surgeons practicing in already integrated health
systems like Geisinger or Kaiser. Then we have 55 percent of
our members that are still practicing in solo or small group
practice, and solutions for them are needed as well.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you. Now, the same panelists, if you
please. I introduced in the prior Congress H.R. 3961. That
included reforms that may offer some solutions to the current
payment problems. As you are well aware, next January Medicare
physicians are facing a 29.5 percent cut if the SGR problem is
not addressed.
Do you have any that H.R. 3961 would have prevented the
29.5 percent cut we are expecting in January? Yes or no?
Mr. Wilson. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Doctor?
Mr. Goertz. Yes, it would have definitely helped.
Mr. Dingell. Doctor?
Mr. Hoyt. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. One of the proposed reforms included in H.R.
3691 or rather 3961 was creating two categories of physician
services; one for evaluation management and preventative
services and the second to cover all other services. Primary
and preventative services would be permitted to grow at GDP
plus 2 percent while other services would be allowed to grow at
the rate of GDP plus 1 percent.
Do you think this is a good idea? Yes or no?
Mr. Wilson. That is one of the challenges of prescriptive
formulas and that is to know that you got it right, and I think
the answer would be I do not know.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you, Doctor.
Doctor?
Mr. Goertz. We certainly ascribe to the rebalancing that
the primary care elements would have done. The overall I don't
know also.
Mr. Dingell. Now, we have a whole series of problems here,
one of which is we are putting target limits on all kinds of
services being paid for by Medicare. Should we limit spending
targets to physician services, or should we cover all other
kinds of services? Starting with Dr. Wilson, if you please.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you. I think if we are going to have
targets, then they should include everyone.
Voice. Microphone.
Mr. Wilson. I am sorry. I think if we are going to have
targets, they should include the health system in general. I
think what we are understanding dealing with the SGR that
targets are not a very effective way to do what we want to do.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you. Dr. Goertz.
Mr. Goertz. Unless you consider the overall healthcare
system, you can't make it efficient.
Mr. Dingell. I note, Mr. Chairman, I am over my time. Thank
you for your courtesy.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the distinguished vice chairman of the subcommittee, the
gentleman from Texas, Dr. Burgess, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So much to ask. We
always do reserve the right to submit questions in writing. I
will not get through the list of things in front of me, and I
know that these are not yes or no questions.
Dr. Wilson, Dr. McClellan, whoever feels most comfortable
answering this or both of you, actually, Dr. McClellan, your
old boss at Department of Health and Human Services, Mike
Leavitt, had a demonstration project that the physician group
practice demonstration project that now has moved into the ACO
realm, and many of us were somewhat excited about the concept
of ACOs, and a lot of the Medicare payment reform perhaps could
have been tied to the ACO. But then a couple of weeks ago we
got the rule out of the Center for Medicare and Medicaid
Services, with which you are intimately familiar, and it was
almost unreadable and certainly unworkable, so now that
everyone knows what a unicorn is, I don't think any exist in
practice, do they?
Mr. McClellan. Well, as you know, the regulatory process
involves stats and especially in new areas like this one there
are going to be lots of comments on whatever the agency puts
out first, and I have heard some statements recently from some
of the leadership at CMS that they are definitely listening
closely to the comments, and they want to address on the issues
that have been raised about the proposed regulation.
I don't think that like many of the other ideas that we
have talked about here today, though, that we are just talking
about unicorns in terms of doing reforms and payment that
support physician leadership and improving care and lowering
costs. There are a number of ACO-like programs in existence
now. Dr. Chernew talked about the Massachusetts Blue Cross
Alternative Quality Contract. That has a lot of new kinds of
support for physicians for the kinds of delivery reforms that
we have talked about. Dr. Hoyt talked about a lot of experience
with Episode and statements that have helped surgeons.
Mr. Burgess. Let me interrupt you for a moment because I
know you know so much about this, and I am going to ask you to
respond to part of this in writing, but under the rule that
came out I don't know that they could exist, and perhaps they
could respond to me in writing about whether or not their
programs could continue to exist.
Dr. Wilson, you talk a little bit about physician
leadership, and this is going to be so critical. Whatever
evolves as the answer to this conundrum it is going to take
physician leadership, and what are you doing now as the head,
the consummate insider of organized medicine in the free world?
What are you doing to recruit that physician leadership?
We all know whatever it is doctors don't like anything
moving in their cage, we don't like change, but when it
happens, it is going to take champions within the profession to
lead that change.
How are you preparing for that?
Mr. Wilson. Well, thank you, Congressman. I assume that
means in addition to praying. The AMA is actually devoting a
great deal of its resources to trying to provide information to
physicians through papers on this subject, through webinars,
through information on our Web site, through seminars around
the country to help physicians understand what an ACO might
look like and understanding that the definition is fluid and
that what is in the private sector may look different than that
in the Medicare sector.
So we are committed to that. Just the week before last I
did a webinar just looking at the proposed rules. So we think
that is an important part of what the AMA needs to do, and I
would just state----
Mr. Burgess. Let me just interrupt you for a second. That
would include other payment models other than just the ACO?
Mr. Wilson. Absolutely. Absolutely, and I would just say
that as I have gone around the country and looking at physician
organizations, they are onboard and trying to do that as well.
So they are--this is a big job, there are a lot of people who
are involved, and we think it is important, and we agree with
that.
Mr. Burgess. Well, and I would just point out, I mean, I
have already gotten some criticism, the twitter verse, for
acknowledging that there were so many doctors on the panel. We
had never had doctors on the panel when we were doing
healthcare reform. I just do need to point that out, and I
thought we needed you when we were doing healthcare reform, but
there is not a day that goes by that I don't hear from some
doctor or some group who has some idea about--I dare say you
can't go into a surgery lounge anywhere in the country where
this problem wouldn't be solved within 15 minutes with time for
coffee.
Now, Dr. or Mr. Miller and Dr. Chernew, I need to ask you
in what limited time I have left, both of what I heard you
describe what you were proposing, I will admit getting a very
cold sensation because it sounded so much like capitation under
the HMO model of the 1990s.
How are each of you different from capitation?
Mr. Miller. Well, it is different from capitation in a
number of critical ways. First of all it is risk adjusted so
that you don't get penalized for having sicker patients. There
are limits on the amount of risk that you would take. So if you
get a usually expensive patient, you don't end up having to pay
for that all out of the same amount of money. That gets
covered, and there are quality bonuses attached to it so that
you don't end up being rewarded for delivering low-quality
care.
And I think that when we talk to physicians about this, I
was just in Colorado this past weekend, had 100 doctors, we
actually had them sort of be inside the payment model, and to
talk about how they would change care because of the greater
flexibility that they would have, and at the end we said, so,
which would you rather be in? These new payment models or the
existing payment model, and it was about 99 to one people said
I would like to be in the new payment model because of the
opportunities it gives me to be able to deliver better quality
care.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Chernew, just very briefly.
Mr. Chernew. I would just add----
Mr. Burgess. All right. Are you finished your answer? All
right.
Mr. Chernew. Apparently.
Mr. Pitts. Did you have something----
Mr. Burgess. I was just wanting Dr. Chernew to respond to
the issue of capitation.
Mr. Chernew. A 5-year--I agree with everything Dr. Miller
said and the 5-year duration of the contract makes a big
difference, because if you are effective in lowering costs,
they can't come in the next year and just lower and lower your
capitation rate. The rates always go up, the capitation. I
think that is an important fact.
Mr. Pitts. OK. Thank the gentleman and now recognize the
distinguished ranking member of the full committee, the
gentleman from California, Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I know we
try to be liberal on time, and I will try to stay within the 5
minutes, but knowing the President I am sure I could go over.
I have always been a supporter of allowing managed care
choice for Medicare beneficiaries. My district, Kaiser
Permanente, Kaiser Health Plan and Permanente Medical Group,
have been leaders in providing high-quality care at a
reasonable cost.
In many cases, however, managed care gets out of control,
loses its bearings, patients have been denied necessary
treatments and care, has been rationed by some private plans.
Dr. Chernew, I want to address this question to you because
your testimony describes the alternative quality contract of
Blue Cross Blue Shield Massachusetts is pursuing. Can you tell
whether and how that model guards against the incentives for
doctors that deny needed treatment to their patients?
Mr. Chernew. Very briefly there is--the rates are set so
that they don't go down so no organization is forced to reduce
access to care. The rates go up at a slower rate than they
otherwise might have. There is the quality bonus system that
protects against care which includes outcome measures as well
as process measures, includes patient experience measures, as
well as just process measures, and our preliminary evidence
suggests, in fact, the quality has risen under the AQC, and
again, it tends to be a more doctor-oriented system where the
doctors have autonomy to do what they were trained and want to
do as opposed to insurer micro-managing the care. The doctors
have much more flexibility as Mr. Miller emphasized than you
might have in other systems. So I think it is a very doctor-
leadership friendly design.
Mr. Waxman. In Medicare, of course, we are pursuing some
similar projects in the form of accountable care organizations
and other shared savings arrangements. Can you draw any lessons
for Medicare from the Blue Cross Blue Shield Massachusetts
experience to date?
Mr. Chernew. I do think there is a lot of similarities. I
think some of the advantages that Blue Cross has had is, for
example, you have to choose a physician, designate a physician.
I think that is similar to the contracting that Dr. Williamson
mentioned. You have to pick a physician that helps--it works.
There is an up side and down side risk as some of the ACL
regulation gets out, so I do think there are broader lessons in
the AQC, the performance measures, but we would have to have a
longer conversation to go into all the things. But there are
parallels, and I do think it speaks well of where some of the
innovations are going.
Mr. Waxman. Many of the physician groups that responded to
our letter, bipartisan letter, seeking comment asked that
Medicare allow physicians to choose from a menu of options for
different payment models in the future. Do you agree that
Medicare needs to be able to deal with physicians and hospitals
in a more personalized, specific way, less of a one-size-fit-
all approach?
Mr. Chernew. I do think that multiple approaches will be
useful. I think they have to be structured in a way to avoid
aspects of selection across the different programs, but subject
to those caveats I think there is unlikely to be a one-size-
fits-all solution.
Mr. Waxman. As we look at the ways to change the incentives
in order to truly fix the payment system, we have to be sure we
do no harm the quality of care in the process and hopefully
rebuild incentives that actually improve the quality of care.
So Dr. Miller, I was very interested in your ideas on
regional health collaberatives. During my time as chairman of
the Oversight Committee, separate committee from this one, one
of the most striking things we learned was about--was a project
in Michigan that was implementing a checklist to reduce
healthcare-associated infections. Many people took away from
that the idea that we ought to have checklists, but what we
also heard and maybe more importantly at this hearing was the
importance of people coming together to improve care. The
checklist was only a tool to allow for collaboration at the
local level.
MedPAC has recently begun a discussion about ways to
improve quality of care. They are contemplating changes to the
Medicare Quality Improvement Organizations and heard testimony
from a regional health collaborative.
Dr. Miller, do you think that the QIOs should be
significantly modified to allow for more entities to
participate, and can these collaboratives play a more direct
role in payment reform aside from the critical role of
improving quality?
Mr. Miller. Well, I think the collaboratives are already
doing around the country things that we want to see happen.
They are measuring and reporting on quality long before
Medicare was doing that. They have been working to work with
both hospitals and physicians to help them be able to
restructure the way they deliver care. Pittsburgh Regional
Health Initiative in Pittsburgh was doing those infection
reduction projects back in the 1990s.
What everybody kept running into was the problem that the
way the payment system was structured actually either didn't
support the care changes that they had found would work or
would penalize them for doing that, and so that is why we now
see a number of the collaboratives around the country that are
working on payment reform efforts and have brought together the
commercial health plans and Medicaid plans to agree on
different approaches to payment. The biggest thing that is
missing is Medicare being at the table.
I think the QIOs in a number of communities, some of the
QIOs are operating as regional health collaboratives, and I
think that in other cases they are working together. I think
there is plenty to be done to be able to improve the way the
healthcare system works and rolls for everybody. I think the
issue is to have that local focus and to be able to have the
kinds of improvement customized to what are the specific
problems and the specific needs in that particular community,
and that is what we don't have right now is a good system for
being able to support that local customization.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I guess,
Dr. McClellan, I will ask you this since you were at CMS in the
2000s. I have been looking at the Sustainable Growth Rate. I
got elected 2 years ago, so I am new at this, and I don't like
to go back and say, well, there is a problem in the past. We
have to fix it, but it would be kind of nice to know since we
are trying to come up with a new system, were you there when
the Sustainable Growth Rate was designed? Because looking at
the map of it, it ties, essentially ties it to the gross
domestic product, which even the gross domestic product drops.
People don't quite go into the positions, so it seemed like a
bad model to begin with, and I don't know if--did people come
together and say, you may not have been here, but just history
of it, this was the right thing to do and now we are here 10,
12 years later going, we have to do something different?
Because my question gets to whatever we do is going to have
to save costs in the system, and so whatever system we have it
going to save the costs of at least the growth. Right now it is
cut, it is not trying to slow growth, it is cutting, which is
wrong, but I just want to know the history of the SGR and why
you think it was supposed to work and didn't.
Mr. McClellan. Well, I will try to give you a brief
history. I wasn't there back in the days of the Balanced Budget
Amendment or Balanced Budget Act that established the SGR more
than a decade ago. It was driven exactly as you said, by
concerns about rising costs in the Medicare Program and the
need to find a way to take costs out, and you know,
unfortunately, the traditional thing that we do when we can't
figure out the direct way to save money while improving care is
when all else fails, just cut the payment rates, and that is
what was built into the formula.
So I wasn't here when that started. I was here 5 years ago
at CMS as you mentioned when this subcommittee was also having
hearings about the challenges of reforming the SGR, and I think
what has happened in the 5 years since is a couple of things.
One is the concerns about rising costs and the
sustainability of the Medicare Program have increased a lot,
along with the cost about the affordability of our healthcare
system overall, and the second is we have a lot more evidence
and a lot more leadership from physicians as has come up
repeatedly today on ways to do it better so that you don't
depend on crossing your fingers that some statutory formula is
actually going to be implemented, and you do depend on the
people who are in the best position to do something about this
problem, and that is physicians.
So the steps that we have talked about today, I think it is
time to begin implementing them to move away from the SGR and
save money at the same time.
Mr. Guthrie. I agree, agree completely. I just wanted to
kind of figure--we were sitting here a dozen years ago saying
this is going to fix the problem, but I guess people must have
thought even when they did it, this really isn't going to fix
the problem. So when you do--things come as gimmicks, and this
is not going to work. You have got to have sustainable changes
into that.
The thing on quality of care, a lot of times we talk about
teachers, and they say, we want to be paid for the quality of
instruction and how do you measure it. I mean, the measurables
come into play because the teacher says, well, if I am in a
school with a certain demographic, then I may--and I am with a
school of a different demographic, I am being compared to each
teacher. And so, I mean, how do you--because if you have a
less-healthy population you are treating, you are going to have
less outcome just by nature than if you have a healthy group.
So how do you determine--anybody want to talk? How about
Dr. Hoyt?
Mr. Hoyt. Yes. I think that is a great question, and the
way you do that is, first of all, through statistical risk
adjustment of patient population so you are comparing apples to
apples, physician to physician, practice to practice.
Mr. Guthrie. Another formula?
Mr. Hoyt. And then secondly, you really need to pick matrix
that are going to be relevant to improving the patient care
process, and I think by having leadership models like people
have talked about we are actually training leaders to become
qualitologists or quality leaders in organizations by having
these inter-State collaboratives so that we share best
practice. And then what you individually do with the database
is you array against a particular complication, let's say
surgical infection, all of the providers. That can be hospitals
or that could be an individual physician, and what you then get
is the performance of all those providers across that
complication. You are going to have some outliers that are
doing well, some outliers that are doing poorly.
What happens is those people get together, and they
improve, and that is the affect we are trying to get to.
Mr. Guthrie. I only have 30 seconds, but the surgical
infections is what the hospital is doing there. What about some
of the behaviors that--what the patient brings to it like
someone who is pregnant. So----
Mr. Hoyt. That needs an additional----
Mr. Guthrie. And I know you want to incentivize having
better prenatal care, but are there doctors that that is what
you want to do is say you kind of really manage that. A lot of
times it will be different for different physicians based on
the way their patient populations react. And how do you account
for that?
Mr. Hoyt. Well, I think that is an additional strategy. You
know, in my field, trauma, the way we do that is you work on
road traffic safety initiatives, you work on gun control or
whatever because you are trying to go upstream from the
problem, and every aspect of medicine has preventative areas
that are essential.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentlelady from California, Ms. Capps, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you all for being here. I have long been
a supporter of fixing the SGR problem. It is an issue that
causes difficulty for providers and consumers alike. In
addition, providers who are able to keep their patients
healthier and lower overall costs are often penalized even
more.
But the conversation often stops at the crisis point--how
do we make it to the next fix?--and rarely moves onto one where
we can discuss our vision for healthcare system in the future
and how to get there. That is why I thank Chairman Pitts and
Ranking Member Pallone for engaging in this important topic
today, and I have two--an idea to bring before Dr. McClellan
and Mr. Miller.
There has been so much talk about the role of doctors in
the healthcare system, but if we are really going to move to a
more comprehensive, prevention-focused system of care, I
believe it is important to acknowledge the role that other
healthcare providers bring to the table in keeping our Nation
healthy, including nurses, nurse practitioners, physicians'
assistants, and many new kinds of models of delivering care.
This hearing and many before it have drawn our attention to
the needs to move away from volume-based medicine and toward a
more holistic model where the rewards are for providing great
care for a patient rather than a lot of tests and procedures.
As a nurse, I can tell you that nurses and nurse practitioners
get that. In previous hearings we have heard about how many
successful programs--we have heard about some successful
programs, for examples, the Guided Care Program at Johns
Hopkins and how they rely on nurse managers or nurse
practitioners to provide the complex services that frail
Medicare and Medicaid patients often need. In addition, nurses
have patient education skills that can help to manage chronic
diseases for many people.
So, Dr. McClellan, will you talk briefly about the
possibilities for nurse practitioners, physicians' assistants,
and other non-physician practitioners in some of these new care
models like medical homes or accountable care organizations,
please? Then I will turn to you----
Mr. McClellan. Every single one of these reforms has
involved more reliance on other health professionals. I can't
think of any, not medical homes, not these episode-based
programs, improve surgical outcomes and reduce complications,
not programs for palliative and supportive care for patients
with complex illnesses. They don't rely much more than we have
in the past on nurse practitioners, nurses, pharmacists, and
other allied health professionals in delivering care. And that
gets back to the core problem we have been talking about today,
which is that Medicare's traditional fee-for-service program
doesn't do much to pay for these other forms of care in order
to target these services to the right patients, though, you
need physicians working with these other health professionals
making decisions. You need more flexibility for them to lead,
and that is hopefully where these payment reforms will take us.
Mrs. Capps. And so that is one of the areas where you want
to see us go forward.
Mr. McClellan. Absolutely.
Mrs. Capps. OK, and of course, underlying all of this is
the shortage of primary docs, and everyone is fixated on that.
There are--we need more incentives for people to rise to those
kinds of primary care services from these other professions as
well. I am seeing you nod so I think you agree.
Mr. McClellan. I think so, and just to go back to the
example in Massachusetts that Dr. Chernew was talking about,
one of the features of that alternative quality contract is a
lot more resources for primary care doctors to coordinate care,
and some of them who I have talked to said they feel this is
more like concierge's medicine almost. They are able to really
spend the time managing the patients' problems and aren't being
reimbursed just on a short, you know, 5-minute visit basis.
Mrs. Capps. Good. OK. Maybe Mr. Miller, and if there is
time, Dr. Chernew, you may want to chime in, too.
Mr. Miller. I organized and ran a project in Pittsburgh
over the past 3 years focused on reducing hospital readmissions
for patients with chronic disease. We made a lot of changes in
various procedures, but the most important single thing that we
did was that we hired two nurses to work with those chronic
disease patients to help them, educate them to go into their
homes to figure out what they needed to be able to manage their
care better. We had to use a foundation grant locally to pay
for them because they could not be paid for by----
Mrs. Capps. There is no funding stream right now.
Mr. Miller. My instructions to the nurses when we hired
them was your job is to keep 13 people out of the hospital in
the next year because that will actually pay for your salary,
and they beat that target by a significant amount. We reduced
readmissions by 44 percent in the course of 1 year, and we
ended up having to lay off one of those nurses at the end
because there was no way to continue her under the current
healthcare payment system. In the other case, fortunately, the
hospital was willing to pick her up to put her on salary to
continue to do that work to help the patients stay out of the
hospital.
Mrs. Capps. Great example. So the results are pretty short-
term.
Mr. Miller. The results at quick, they are dramatic, and
the intervention is very simple. It is simply--it is a perfect
example of something where the current payment system does not
pay for that. Now, whenever you do pay for it, you want to have
them focusing on a specific target----
Mrs. Capps. Right.
Mr. Miller [continuing]. that will actually save you some
money and not have that nurse diverted into doing all kinds of
other things that might be desirable but will not save the
program money. That is why whenever we did the program we said
the focus is specifically on keeping, reducing readmissions of
patients, and they were able to do that, and it was actually a
very empowering thing for the nurses and for the physicians to
be able to have that resource that they could use for their
patients and be able to use it for the patients that they knew
needed help but that they didn't have the time to be able to
provide for them.
Mrs. Capps. And I have run out of time, but I will look for
your written testimony, Dr. Chernew. If you would like to
submit--if you want to zero in or boar in on the way that this
impacts in the Massachusetts Program as well, I would
appreciate that.
I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognizes the gentleman from Louisiana, Dr. Cassidy, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Cassidy. Dr. Wilson, I am also a member of the AMA, and
I like all your suggestions except that I don't see how we pay
for them. In fact, one of the--I was disappointed as many
members of the AMA were in the AMA support of PPACA because
frankly the low-hanging fruit of savings in Medicare didn't go
to shore up Medicare or to fix the SGR. It went to create
another entitlement, which arguably is going to make our
situation worse.
So do you have any--I don't see inherent in your testimony
now that the savings for Medicare have been used outside of
Medicare how we pay for this.
Mr. Wilson. Well, one of the challenges of the whole
healthcare system is that the costs are multi-factorial, and we
have not in this hearing because it is not a part of this
hearing talked about the biggest driver for cost in this
country in healthcare, we spend 78 percent of what we spend on
healthcare on chronic disease. And so--and most of that
preventable. So that is another area we need to be involved
with.
The area of tort reform CBO has suggested that a cap of
$250,000 on non-economic damages would reduce the federal
budget by $54 billion over the coming years. So we think they
have a variety of things in this legislation that will start to
address that, and that is where we need to look, but it is a
variety of things. There are parts of this legislation that
look at the whole area of simplification, administrative
simplification, insurance forms, things that don't contribute
to health----
Mr. Cassidy. Let me interrupt just because I have such
limited time. I always say, though, anything that creates
according to the CBO enumerable boards, bureaucracies, and
commissions does not decrease administrative costs.
But Dr. Chernew, now, I am very interested in what you
described Blue Cross doing in Massachusetts. But on the other
hand, Massachusetts, which is kind of a forerunner of PPACA,
has the highest, I mean, literally, the highest private
insurance premiums in the Nation, and so my concern is that,
again, the forerunner of PPACA has resulted in the highest
private insurance premiums in the Nation. So how has the
program you described, which is incredibly intriguing, thwarted
that, contributed to that? I mean, it seems kind of a
discordance where you have high premiums and yet you have what
is on paper seems like an effective intervention.
Mr. Chernew. Right. I am not prepared to defend all of
Massachusetts and the differences of Massachusetts healthcare.
We could discuss it at greater length, but I think the easy
answer to your question is the AQC wasn't designed initially to
save money in the first years. As I mentioned in response to an
earlier question, it doesn't lower the amount of money that any
physician group gets paid, and in fact, the physician groups
are more efficient. A lot of that is captured by the
physicians. It is not captured by the plan.
The goal of the AQC has been to give physicians the power
to control that trend through say, for example, a very primary
care center the way Dr. Goertz described, and so the
evaluations of what it is going to do are ongoing but
ultimately its impact on spending and trends are specified in
the 5-year trajectory and relative to what had been projected
in Massachusetts, which had been growing at about the same
rate, it was designed to save money off of trend, not to lower
fees.
And so in the end what matters is how much you allow the--
--
Mr. Cassidy. Is there an initial indication that it is
saving money on the trend?
Mr. Chernew. There has only been 1 year of experience so--
--
Mr. Cassidy. And then let me ask you another because I have
such limited time. Now, the medical loss ratio, is that 15
percent in Massachusetts?
Mr. Chernew. I am not aware of what the medical loss ratio
is in Massachusetts.
Mr. Cassidy. And the only reason I ask that is because
clearly there is an informational infrastructure required of
the insurance companies.
Mr. Chernew. Yes.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, on the other hand if you have high
premiums, again, if you have the highest in the Nation, 15
percent of something high gives you something pretty high.
Fifteen percent in a lower State which doesn't have this sort
of precursor PPACA which may be lower, that absolute dollar is
less.
Can you incorporate this with an artificial medical loss
ratio of 15 percent?
Mr. Chernew. I agree with the premise of your question that
there is going to be some spending that is not countered in the
medical loss ratio that is very important to control spending,
and you want to make sure that medical loss ratios don't impede
your ability to innovate, and if that is the gist of your
question, I agree with you.
Mr. Cassidy. OK. Fantastic. Dr. McClellan, now, I got to
tell you, I see my New England Journal of Medicine article
which shows that ACOs and these demonstration projects which
are picked to succeed, that they typically don't succeed in
terms of saving money, and when everybody says we are going to
save money with ACOs and yet the best analysis from the best
demonstration project show that they don't, how can we hang our
hat on this, particularly after that incomprehensible rule put
out by CMS?
Mr. McClellan. Well, setting aside the rule I think the New
England Journal you are referring to summarized the experience
under a demonstration program that we started while I was
there, and what it found was that out of the ten groups that
participated every single one of those physician groups
significantly improved the care for their beneficiaries. They
led to significant overall savings in Medicare costs, and five
out of the ten got to levels of savings of 2 percentage points
per year, which is in the kind of realm that would make
Medicare----
Mr. Cassidy. Now, if I may quote, ``It seems highly
unlikely that the newly-established, independent practices
would be able to average the necessary 20 percent of return on
their investment.'' I am quoting from the article. ``The main
investment of''--I could go on, but it actually disputes a
little bit your assertations.
Mr. McClellan. Well, I think what the article is pointing
out is that for physicians to change their practices in ways
that improve care takes an investment upfront, and if all they
are getting is this shared savings on the backend, that by
itself may not be enough, and that is essentially one of the
core concerns that people have raised about the proposed
regulation, and I agree.
We need to be looking at reforms that give enough support
upfront to enable the kinds of backend savings to bend the cost
curve. What we are seeing in a lot of the private insurers who
have implemented ACOs is a combination of approaches. They
don't just like pick one and do that for 5 years and then wait
and do something else. They are trying to comprehensively work
with providers to solve this problem.
So they do something like medical home payments upfront as
we talked about before, more resources for primary care.
Mr. Cassidy. Let me interrupt. The chairman has been very
generous, but we are already a minute, 20 over. I appreciate
that. I would appreciate your complete response----
Mr. McClellan. I would be delighted to follow up with you.
Mr. Cassidy [continuing]. And I would like to submit for
the record something that Dr. Goertz would agree with from
Qliance regarding the direct medical home, for the record.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.110

Mr. Pitts. Thank--the chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentlelady from Wisconsin, Ms. Baldwin, for 5
minutes for questions.
Ms. Baldwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I also want to
extend my gratitude to the panel for being here and also to add
my comments to those who mentioned earlier that it is great to
see the bipartisan leadership of this subcommittee and full
committee working together on this critical issue.
As we talk today about the importance of repealing the
Sustainable Growth Rate, we also have to focus on replacing the
Medicare Fee-For-Service Payment System with a model that has
some better incentives aligned rewarding quality, controlling
costs, and I would like to sort of add the new layer of
incenting us to involve patients as partners in their
healthcare, something I haven't heard a lot about, but of
course, we have a panel of physicians, and I am sure later in
this session as we dig down in this issue that we will hear
from patient groups and that role, too.
We are all representatives, we all represent certain
geographical areas of this country, and as such we tend to
follow closely what is happening in our home turf. I happen to
represent South Central Wisconsin in the U.S. Congress, and I
think based on what I have learned from some of my home State
practitioners, there is a lot we can learn from what is going
on in the State of Wisconsin.
Providers there have been at the forefront of adopting
innovative models that have demonstrated high quality and
value. They have proved that implementing a system where there
is a high level of integration and where doctors are
responsible for managing patient populations can produce high
quality and low cost care.
I guess I want to focus a little bit on one such delivery
model that has produced successful outcomes in Wisconsin, and
Dr. Goertz has talked about it extensively in his testimony,
the patient-centered medical home. That model focuses on the
productive roll a primary care physician can play in providing
and coordinating care, and we know how important the primary
care field is in improving healthcare outcomes. They recommend
preventative measures, help patients manage chronic conditions,
and keep patients out of high-cost emergency room settings.
I know all of you know that in a medical home model the
practice-based care team takes collective responsibility for a
patient's ongoing care, and this team coordinates the patient's
care across care settings and fields and maintains a personal
relationship, the patient, with their personal care physician.
One system in my district, Dean Health System, has tested
the patient-centered medical home model, and when establishing
this model, they hit an initial roadblock which was basically
finding that the fee-for-service model and Medicare, i.e.,
rewarding volume, is inherently contradictory to the patient-
centered medical home model. This model relies on primary care
providers carrying out and providing a significant number of
tasks that improve quality and enhance efficiency, but these
tasks are not reimbursable through the relative value unit-
based compensation model.
What Dean did instead was to establish its own
reimbursement model to ensure sufficient reimbursement for this
primary care model. Their innovative approach has really paid
off. The quality of care in the systems medical homes has
improved notably, and these models have achieved considerable
improvements in efficiency measures.
Today all of Dean's pilots have been certified by the
National Committee for Quality Assurance. But, furthermore,
there has been great patient feedback in terms of their
happiness and satisfaction with this model. Their perception of
access and satisfaction are higher for these patients who
receive care through their medical home model.
But perhaps the most notable achievement is that by
embracing these innovative models Dean has achieved significant
cost savings. Overall the system saw medical costs increase by
only 2 percent in 2010, compared to the national average of
10.5 percent. Also, their pharmacy costs did not increase at
all in 2010, while pharmacy costs across the Nation increased 9
percent last year.
The successes that they had and other providers in
Wisconsin have achieved would not have been possible in this
sort of fee-for-service construct. For this reason up to this
point the medical home model has really been limited to the
private sector to the greatest extent.
So, Dr. Goertz, could you elaborate a little bit on how
moving away from the fee-for-service model and expanding the
patient-centered medical home to public payers like Medicare
could help realize the goal of providing this high quality care
for lower costs but also this increased potential of involving
patients in managing and in partnership with their physicians
and nurses in managing their own care?
Mr. Goertz. Thank you for that question. One of the
interesting things about the patients in the medical home is
when we evolved that in the early 2000s, we took in a lot of
information from patients themselves about what they wanted and
designed it, and to the chagrin of our members we designed it
without caring about how it was going to be paid for. And then
we turned around and said, how are we going to pay for this
model that we designed to give the care for patients the way we
know it can be done and still have the resources to run the
practices.
So my response is the commercial payers and the models that
they have already put in place show it works, but it takes
looking at the entire spectrum where costs are laid in the
system, and until you allow us to look at the entire panorama
of where costs are, you are never going to fix it. You just
can't, and that--the patient-centered medical home seeks to
have the patient get the care where they need it by the right
people in the team without regard to those other pieces, and it
seeks to involve the patient in how care is given.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and recognizes
the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Dr. Murphy, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Murphy. Thank the panel. It is good to see some of you
here again.
Back in the 1990s when I was a State Senator I authored and
we passed into law, actually got bipartisan support, a Patient
Bill of Rights Law, and much of that was dealing with at that
time the problems of managed care, where we found out it was
more about managing money from people outside the doctor's
office and with insurance companies than it really was about
managing care.
So I am wondering, Mr. Miller, if you could elaborate a
little bit more on this. You and I have had conversations in
the past, but if you could give, and I apologize I couldn't do
some of this before. I had run into other things. Give me an
example or two of how this actually works and we make sure the
incentive is not to not provide services because the breakdown
before of managed care was if somebody had a pool of money in
their account, they kept that money by not providing care.
Could you tell us how it actually works to make sure they
are providing better care?
Mr. Miller. Well, in several ways. First of all, I think
that it is important that this be controlled by physicians, not
by health plans, and I think that is really the promise of
whatever the unicorn ultimately looks like when you talk about
accountable care organizations is that those really need to be
controlled by the healthcare providers, the physicians, the
nurses, et cetera, not by outside health plans. So that is
number one because I think they will be very reluctant to
deliver poor quality care.
The second thing is to actually have good measurement of
the quality of care so that they know how they are doing and
the public knows how they are doing, and that is happening in a
number of communities around the country that are reporting on
the quality of care so that patients can make good choices.
I think the second thing, third thing is that there needs
to be choices about where patients can go which is why it is
very important to not have requirements and regulations that
only limit this to being very large organizations or that
encourage consolidation of entities into one large monopoly but
to be able to let small practices be able to participate in
this particular fashion.
And I think that is what we--there are models like that
around the country where physician practices are taking
capitation payments, risk adjusted or otherwise, and are
delivering very high-quality care to their patients, and they
are in control.
Mr. Murphy. As this becomes an issue, I know one of the
battles we had was the issue of any willing, qualified
provider, and I always felt that if you eliminated people from
being able to--providers from being able to compete by quality
for service, they were out of the loop, and those--once they
had locked in a contract, it was actually a disincentive for
them because they didn't have the competition anymore. Is that
what you are referring to by allowing patients actually to have
some choices?
Mr. Miller. Yes. That is right, and patients having choices
based on both what the cost and the quality of the care is
rather than either being locked into a particular provider
because of what an insurance company determines or essentially
having no choice because of the nature of the organization and
the community. So to have a maximum number of opportunities to
choose their provider I think helps to support that.
Mr. Murphy. I mean, this is an area that dealing with
actual disease management is such a huge issue in healthcare in
America, and yet I am still amazed that the way that Medicare
and Medicaid work, designed in 1965, and I would venture to
guess that none of us as healthcare providers would want to
brag to our patients, by the way, I bought no equipment since
1965, haven't read a single medical journal, or been to
continuing education credits from 1965, and proud of it, but
that is how our system works. You only get paid if you poke,
prod, push, pull, or pinch someone but not if you make them
better.
A secondary I just want--this whole panel can help. I think
it is the absurdity, so I am correct in understanding that if
someone is on Medicare, and a physician is taking, you know,
balanced billing, and they say to the patient, you know, look.
I understand you are low income. I will just take whatever
Medicare pays me, and I will leave it at that. They are not
allowed to do that? Is that correct, panel?
Mr. Williamson. That is correct. That is correct.
Mr. Murphy. So as a doctor I am saying, you know, I am just
going to waive this. ``Here. You baked a pie for me, good
enough, thank you, Mrs. Smith. You can walk away.'' Then that
doctor is committing a crime?
Mr. Williamson. Civil and criminal penalties. Yes, sir.
Mr. Murphy. And how big is the penalty?
Mr. Williamson. I don't have that number. I am sorry.
Mr. Murphy. But it is big. Civil and criminal penalty.
Mr. Williamson. It gets the attention of doctors.
Mr. Murphy. And if a doctor also says, you know, I think I
can do this better by managing, by making calls to you, making
sure you are taking your medication. It is like 75 percent of
prescriptions aren't taken correctly from beginning to end. If
a doctor decides to have a nurse in the office manage that call
and take care of those things and actually keep that person out
of the hospital but doesn't even bill for that providing a
service, does this also go under the category of they are doing
something illegal? They are providing a service and care
without billing for it?
Mr. Goertz. That is not illegal. You just don't get any
compensation for helping the patient.
Mr. Murphy. Oh, well, that is--OK. But it still comes down
to so if--it is absolutely amazing, and Mr. Chairman, I hope we
get more into this, because the Medicare and Medicaid systems
in my mind are so hopelessly outmoded that the old tool, when
everything looks like a hammer, everything--when the only tool
is a hammer, everything looks like a nail, and all Congress
knows how to do is giveth and taketh away. We spend a dollar,
we take away a dollar.
But on this issue to have spent nearly almost half a
century of time using the same system without fixing this is
preposterous, and I believe it is imperative to the physicians'
abilities to work on these things to change the system.
So I hope we can get back to this in the future. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and recognizes
the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Lance, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon to this
distinguished panel. Following up on Congresswoman Baldwin's
questioning which I found very interesting, Mr. Miller, in your
testimony to do mention the accountable medical homes as being
a type of transition payment system, and in your comments you
discuss developing specific targets for reducing utilization of
healthcare services outside the physician practice.
How would these targets be developed, and are they ready to
be employed in the near term?
Mr. Miller. Yes. In fact, the State of Washington and the
Puget Sound Health Alliance have been working on this and are
implementing that program this month where a group of small
primary care practices around the State have done that.
Now, getting there was a challenge because, first of all,
you have to have the data to be able to determine what your
current rates of ER visits and hospitalizations are, and that
was a real challenge to primary care practices to even think
about it because they don't have that data right now.
Surprising enough it was even difficult for some of the health
plans to deliver that data to them, but once we were able to
get it, it made clear that there were fairly high rates of
emergency room utilization for non-urgent reasons.
And so the idea was to give the primary care practices some
flexible resources that they could use to hire a nurse, to have
longer office hours, et cetera, and to--and we calculated that
with the kinds of reductions, just to take ER visits, the kinds
of reductions in ER visits that many of the medical home
programs that Dr. Goertz talked about have achieved, that they
would be able to save more money for the health plans and the
amount of flexible resources that they were getting upfront.
So a number of practices have signed up to do that this
year through the payment, and the challenge locally was to get
eight different health plans and Medicaid to agree, and
Medicare is not at the table.
Mr. Lance. And in your judgment why is that the case? Why
is Medicare not at the table?
Mr. Miller. Because Medicare does not have a payment model
now that would support that. In fact, Washington applied to be
in the multi-payer advanced primary care demonstration and was
not selected. And so they will be actually, they will be saving
Medicare money because they will do it for all of their
patients, not just their Medicaid and commercial patients, but
they won't get the money to be able to support that at the
level that they really need.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. In your remarks, Dr. Chernew, in your
prepared remarks you state, and I am quoting now, ``Just to
give one example, a colonoscopy performed in a physician's
office costs Medicare on average about half of the cost if it
is performed in a hospital outpatient setting. This largely
reflects different treatment of the technical fee for providing
the service, which may be justified, but it is difficult to
assess the appropriate fee differential, if any because case
mix and other factors are hard to observe.''
Could you elaborate for me a little bit on that?
Mr. Chernew. Sure. So fee-for-service systems are
incredibly unwieldy, and ours is particularly unwieldy, and the
amount you get paid for something depends on where it is done,
because, remember, there is payments to the physician, but
there is also payments to a facility. And so if you move the
service from one setting to another setting, in some cases the
physician is getting both the professional and the technical
fee, and in other cases the physician is just getting the
professional part. The technical part is going somewhere else,
but those technical fees aren't fixed. It differs based on what
is in the physician fee and what is in say the hospital
setting. And so there is differences, and that is just one
example of where the difference is.
It is easy to say that, well, we should set them the same,
technical should be the same, and what people in the hospital
would tell you is, yes, but the patients that we are seeing in
the hospital have a whole series of other comorbidities, it is
more difficult to treat them for one reason or another. Our
technical fee, albeit higher, is justified because of some
aspect of the patient or the care we deliver that is different
than the care that is delivered if you are doing the same
procedure in a physician's office.
If you knew what that cost difference was, if someone came
down from on high and told you this was what the cost
difference was, you might be able to manage that reasonably
well.
Mr. Lance. So we have a responsibility working together on
a bipartisan capacity with experts such as the distinguished
panel here to try to overcome that to make it less expensive.
Mr. Chernew. So my view is we will be hopelessly mired in
the morass of fee management if we stay for too long in a
basically fee-for-service system.
Mr. Lance. Yes.
Mr. Chernew. And so moving away from the system in my view
is a long-run solution. We have to mitigate the problems in the
short run no doubt, but I am not a believer in the government's
ability or anyone's ability to micromanage these crazy fee
schedules all that well.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, and I hope we not hopelessly mired in
the system. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
the first round of questions, and we will go now to follow up.
I will yield first to Dr. Burgess for questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Goertz, if I could ask you because this has come up
several times on, I think Dr. Wilson mentioned the 78 percent
of the people in Medicare who suffer from chronic disease. So
the universe of people that are dual eligibles and I think Dr.
Williamson said he would exclude those from the direct
contracting, but honestly, that may be the group where you want
to focus the direct contracting.
If you provided each of the dual eligibles with a
concierged physician, a navigator, a facilitator that could be
with them through all this, maybe a doctor, maybe a nurse
practitioner, we could argue about that, but it seems like that
is, you know, Willie Sutton used to rob banks because that is
where the money was. I mean, Dr. Berwick has told us this is
where the money is. Dr. Wilson reaffirmed today that this is
where the money is. Eighty percent of Medicare, which is a lot,
is spent by 20 percent of the patients.
What do you think about that?
Mr. Goertz. Our organization is in favor of any innovative
model that addresses coordination and information sharing among
all the team members who need to take care of that patient.
Mr. Burgess. But here is the problem. Mr. Miller told us
that Medicare has no payment model for that type of activity.
Is that--did I understand that correctly?
Mr. Goertz. In our opinion it does not.
Mr. Burgess. So really all the smart people at the table if
you will tell us how to construct that demonstration project
where we can demonstrate that level of savings, I mean, I will
be happy to take that to Dr. Berwick and spend some time with
him and see if we cannot either administratively or
legislatively make that change happen because, I mean, truly
that is the low-hanging fruit that we should be talking about.
Is that not correct? Does anybody disagree with that?
So, again, we have offered a challenge to the panel
assembled here today. Help us craft that as a, whatever you
want to call it, demonstration project or whatever, and let's
see if we can do so in a way. We have got to be careful because
Dr. McClellan worked very hard on the physician group practice
demonstration project with Secretary Leavitt, and now, of
course, we have got a series of rules that are unworkable.
So it is, there is a problem in our system, and we have all
identified it, but this is one that I would be anxious to work
with you all on this and even, you know, Dr. Williamson, I
thank you for bringing the idea forward that, oK, we would
separate this group of patients out of direct contracting, but
really if we are going to save the money, we won't call it
direct contracting because that upsets too many people, but
let's help that group of patients navigate the system and spend
dollars more efficiently. That is where we could perhaps do the
most good, not on the margins of the people who might, in fact,
be in a direct contracting type of world.
Yes, sir.
Mr. Miller. I just say quickly, the models that we talked
about can help with that, but it is also an example of how you
can't have one size fits all, because some of those patients
who need much more intensive help need to have a payment model
that supports that, and it may be a lot of money for different
things than they are getting now with the opportunity to save a
lot of money on the other side.
And there has been a lot of attention recently, for
example, the Boeing model on the West Coast has focused on some
of those highly-complex patients, project in New Jersey is
focused on those kind of patients and showing very significant
savings.
But you also have to have some very significant reach
change in the way care is delivered and a payment model to
support that.
Mr. Burgess. Yes, and I would not quarrel with that. You
know, one of the things that I have heard over and over again
today when Ms. Capps was in here talking about nurse
practitioners, very frustrating. I mean, again, Dr. McClellan
and Secretary Leavitt working on the Medicare Advantage Program
in the mid 2000s, which we, of course, robbed in the Patient
Protection Affordable Care Act and now given a waiver, but this
was the whole idea if I remember correctly. It was a disease-
management care coordination, electronic health records, you do
all these things in return for perhaps a little bit more
reimbursement in the Medicare Advantage System.
Dr. McClellan, do I recall that system correctly?
Mr. McClellan. Yes. There have been a number of steps to
try to get even specialized Medicare Advantage Plans or dual
eligibles and people with complex illnesses, and those programs
can work, but you are right. This is the population that could
benefit the most from well-coordinated care and has the most
fragmented payments. So it is a lot of obstacles to overcome.
Mr. Burgess. Well, could we use that leverage and pivot,
you know, perhaps our discussion of SGR reform to actually get
to a more sensible system for those patients that are involved
with spending the most money in the Medicare System? I mean,
would that not be a correct approach to take?
Mr. McClellan. I agree, and I think it, again, highlights
the importance of this effort focusing on clear opportunities
to improve care for particular kinds of patients, particular
types of medical care and recognizing that the physician
payment system can make a big difference in that, but there are
other changes that are going on and other opportunities in
Medicare today to reinforce and support those changes through
steps like the measures used in the Medicare Advantage Program
and the way the Medicare Advantage Program is set up.
So those are all feasible.
Mr. Burgess. Well, let me just say just as a wrap-up, Dr.
Wilson, I really want you to concentrate on the maintenance of
professionalism within our profession. As we see more of these
things develop, ACOs, whatever the system is, there is an
inherent danger for the doctor not to be the advocate for the
patient, and historically we know that is correct relationship
for the doctor to have with the patient. The health plan can't
advocate for the--adequate advocate for the patient, the
hospital can't be an adequate advocate. It has to be the
physician. There has to be the maintenance of the
professionalism within the profession, and I thank you for
taking on that task.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. We are voting on
the floor. We are going to try to wrap this up.
I will recognize Mr. Pallone for follow up and then Dr.
Gingrey.
Mr. Pallone. I just wanted to ask either Dr. Chernew or Dr.
Miller, you can both respond if you want, the idea that
Medicare should abdicate its responsibilities to protect
seniors from exorbitant cost sharing in the name of private
contracting, the idea that Medicare shouldn't place limits on
the cost of care has been floated in a bill that was introduced
by Representative Price and supported by some physician
witnesses before the committee.
The idea of unlimited balanced billing, of course, is not
new, but it is one of the oldest requests of providers in
Medicare to be able to charge whatever you want. But I want
talk about the beneficiary impact. We don't have any
beneficiary representatives on the panel here today, which is a
shame, but I note that ARP in a letter strongly opposes efforts
to increase beneficiary costs through private contracting. As I
understand it this idea of balanced billing is not something
that is very common in private sector networks.
So maybe I will ask Dr. Chernew, in your work observing
private health plans have you noticed a trend towards allowing
physicians to bill enrollees in network, whatever they like,
and if Mr. Miller wants to respond, too.
Mr. Chernew. I have not noticed that trend, and I will save
longer responses if you want.
Mr. Miller. I think that the key thing is that there is no
one change that is either desirable or necessary that will fix
the system, that multiple things have to be done
simultaneously, and that keeping the current fee-for-service
structure and simply trying to fix it with one change may not
do the kind of thing that you want and may lead to other kinds
of problems.
I do think that it makes sense, though, that patients have
more sensitivity to the cost of services and that physicians
and providers not be constrained as to whether they can deliver
care based on what Medicare decides to pay them.
So mechanisms that would enable them to set the right price
as Dr. Chernew said earlier, as well as what the payment
structure is, are going to be very important. But I think that
you have to have a comprehensive set of reforms that changes
the way the payment is made as well as what the patients'
responsibility is.
Mr. Pallone. I mean, I just wanted to mention, you know,
choices beneficiaries would be forced to make in this situation
because they are just overwhelming. I asked my staff to look at
what a patient would need to consider by way of prices and in
negotiation with a physician over a course of several treatment
options for prostate cancer, for instance, and just to read a
few, and maybe I will enter it into the record, extensive
prostate surgery which there are five variations listed for
Medicare with prices ranging from $1,100 to $1,700, removal of
prostate, three variations ranging from $900 to $1,100,
intensity modulated radiation therapy, seven--$567 per dose,
but the number of doses required varies significantly from
person to person. The dose plan for that therapy, $400 to
$2,100. I mean, just to give you some examples.
Dr. Chernew.
Mr. Chernew. I guess what I would say broadly is the
concern that I would have with these types of programs for
starters--actually, let me say for starters, I believe in
markets. I am an economist. I like markets as much as the next
guy, in fact, probably more so. I am concerned in this case
about market power. I am concerned that while I believe
consumers can drive down prices for iPads, I am not so sure
they can do that in healthcare for some of the reasons that you
say.
In Ann Arbor there was a situation where the faculty, I
have been told anecdotally lobbied to get dental coverage for
routine care. It was $60. They got the coverage for $60 per
visit. The prices went up to $120.
So I think if there is competition, you can solve these
problems. I am not so sure there always is, and you have to be
worried about. I think it is particularly hard in the Medicare
population because you have a lot of people, at least like my
grandparents, that are cognitively impaired, and so there is a
concern about their ability to do some of these things, and
obviously there is issues of disparities.
My biggest concern would be that it would give you all
frankly a path to keep Medicare rates lower than they otherwise
would be, and I think that you shouldn't have an excuse for
under-funding Medicare, and I worry that this might give you
that excuse.
But on the other hand I haven't studies this particular
issue, and I don't have a particular position on it, but I do
have the concerns that I outlined going forward in such a way.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman, and we are
running out of time. Dr. Gingrey, you are recognized for
questioning.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much, and I will
try to get right to it.
Dr. McClellan, I have got a letter in my hand that was
actually sent to the House GOP Doctors' Caucus, April 15, 2011,
subject: Reforming the Medicare Physician Payment System. The
letter advocates new payment model options, including pay for
performance, bundle payments to groups of physicians, or even
blending elements of multiple models. The letter states that
allowing Medicare to create multiple care models is important
because there is no one-size-fits-all payment model that will
achieve physicians and policymakers objectives for improved
care and affordability. I am kind of quoting from the letter.
What are your thoughts on the value of multiple care models
as a solution to the SGR problem?
Mr. McClellan. Well, Dr. Gingrey, you heard today there are
a lot of models that can help support better care. I think what
unifies them is not the jargon but the fact that they all can
be linked to specific, meaningful steps to give patients better
care that the surgeons have identified, the primary care
physicians have identified, that all of these leaders from
Madison have identified. And by focusing the reforms that this
committee undertakes on actually achieving those improvements
in care, I think we can target them more effectively.
I would emphasize that that not only means leadership for
physicians on identifying specific kinds of payment reforms but
especially leadership on identifying how they can make care
better by changing the payments because Medicare doesn't
support all this now, and then accountability for doing that.
You know, the quality impact, we have talked a lot about
measures, and the cost impact, too, and that is a challenge,
but we know so much more than we did a few years ago about
this. There is so much more physician leadership now on these
questions and especially with so many physicians in the House
hopefully we can have----
Mr. Gingrey. Yes. We got 21 now.
Mr. McClellan. Right.
Mr. Gingrey. Yes. I saw--I will stick with you just for a
second, in your opinion does the solution to the SGR,
Sustainable Growth Rate, lie simply in reforming how providers
are paid, or do you believe a review of how Medicare benefits
are structured, whether--we have talked about concierge care,
even the private contracting I know has come up a number of
times this morning might help bring about meaningful reform in
physician payments.
Mr. McClellan. Benefit reforms would really help and would
emphasize that a lot of these private sector implementations of
payment reforms go along with benefit reforms to actually save
beneficiaries money by giving it more financial support to stay
with their meds, to take their meds, to stay out of the
hospital.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, I know Dr. Williamson also talked about
that in his testimony, and, Todd, I will go to you on this. You
cite the benefits of private contracting within Medicare
including the ability for the physicians to charge seniors less
than they pay today in their out-of-pocket costs. As a medical
provider of neurology why can't you charge a poor senior less
than the Medicare-required rate?
Mr. Williamson. We would subsequently be subsequent to
penalties, criminal and civil as I said, and you know, I can
tell you doctors want to do that a lot, but they can't. That is
one thing that we frequently hear from our practice managers is
you can't do this.
And, you know, our premise is that doctors and patients
should be free to define the value of their interaction. You
know, the government has the responsibility to fulfill its
promise to Medicare recipients. It was suggested earlier that
private contracting might get the government a pass to not
fulfill that promise. That is not what the Medicare Payment
Empowerment Act is about. It wouldn't change any of the
existing benefits that patients now have under Medicare. What
it would allow is patients to have the option, if they could
afford and they chose to, to spend their own money on their
medical care, and it would not require them to forego their
Medicare benefits if they want to see a doctor outside the
Medicare System as they have to do now, which we think is
wrong. And we think it is wrong for a doctor to have to opt out
of Medicare for 2 years if he or she provides care and accepts
payment for that care to a Medicare patient.
Mr. Gingrey. I had another part to that, but Mr. Chairman,
I know we have got about a half a minute left on the vote, so I
will yield back and just say thank you to all seven of our
witnesses. You all have been fantastic today. We really
appreciate it. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
This has been an excellent hearing, excellent testimony,
and I think we have taken a big step today in moving beyond
previous discussions of the deficiencies of the Sustainable
Growth Rate System to an examination of the kind of payment and
delivery system we need and how to get there.
First of all, I want to thank all of the groups that
responded to the committee's bipartisan letter asking for their
suggestions. Their input has been very valuable, and I want to
thank this distinguished panel of experts who took the time to
testify here today in an effort to help solve this difficult
but extremely important problem.
I want to remind the members that they have 10 business
days to submit questions for the record. I ask that the
witnesses all agree to respond promptly to those questions.
With that the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:58 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.168

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.169

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.170

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.171

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.172

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.173

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.174

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.175

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.176

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.177

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.178

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.179

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.180

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.181

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.182

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.183

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.185

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.186

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.187

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.188

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.189

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.190

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.191

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.192

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.193

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.194

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.195

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.196

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.197

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.198

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.199

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.200

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.201

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.202

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.203

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.204

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.205

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.206

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.207

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.208

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.209

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.210

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.211

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.212

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.213

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.214

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.215

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.216

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.217

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.218

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.219

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.220

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.221

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.222

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.223

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.224

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.225

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.226

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.227

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.228

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.229

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.230

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.231

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.232

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.233

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.234

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.235

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.236

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.237

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.238

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.239

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.240

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.241

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.242

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.243

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.244

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.245

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.246

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.247

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.248

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.249

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.250

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.251

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.252

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.253

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.254

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.255

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.256

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.257

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.258

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.259

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.260

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74195.261


