- THE IMPORTANCE OF A DIVERSE FEDERAL JUDICIARY, PART 2: THE SELECTION AND CONFIRMATION PROCESS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE IMPORTANCE OF A DIVERSE FEDERAL
JUDICIARY, PART 2: THE SELECTION AND
CONFIRMATION PROCESS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COURTS, INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY, AND THE INTERNET

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MONDAY, JULY 12, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-32

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-332                    WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JERROLD NADLER, New York, Chair
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania, Vice-Chair

ZOE LOFGREN, California              JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Ranking Member
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas            STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,      DARRELL ISSA, California
Georgia                          KEN BUCK, Colorado
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          MATT GAETZ, Florida
KAREN BASS, California               MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York         ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island     TOM McCLINTOCK, California
ERIC SWALWELL, California            W. GREG STEUBE, Florida
TED LIEU, California                 TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington          CHIP ROY, Texas
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida          DAN BISHOP, North Carolina
J. LUIS CORREA, California           MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
SYLVIA R. GARCIA, Texas              SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 BURGESS OWENS, Utah
GREG STANTON, Arizona
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
MONDAIRE JONES, New York
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
CORI BUSH, Missouri

PERRY APELBAUM, Majority Staff Director & Chief Counsel
CHRISTOPHER HIXON, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COURTS, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, AND
THE INTERNET

HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr., Georgia, Chair
MONDAIRE JONES, New York, Vice-Chair

THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          DARRELL ISSA, California, Ranking
HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York                Member
TED LIEU, California                 STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
GREG STANTON, Arizona                LOUIS GOHMERT, Texas
ZOE LOFGREN, California              MATT GAETZ, Florida
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
KAREN BASS, California               TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
ERIC SWALWELL, California            THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
MONDAIRE JONES, New York             DAN BISHOP, North Carolina
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Michigan
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon

JAMIE SIMPSON, Chief Counsel
BETSY FERGUSON, Senior Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

Monday, July 12, 2021

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr., Chair of the
Subcommittee on the Courts, Intellectual Property, and the
Internet from the State of Georgia.............................     1
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Chair of the Committee on the
Judiciary, from the State of New York..........................     3
The Honorable Darrell Issa, Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on
Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet from the State
of California..................................................     4

WITNESSES
Panel I

The Honorable Monica M. Marquez, Associate Justice, Colorado
Supreme Court
Oral Testimony.................................................     7
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
The Honorable Anne K. McKeig, Associate Justice, Minnesota
Supreme Court
Oral Testimony.................................................    19
Prepared Statement.............................................    21
The Honorable Richard E. Myers II, Chief District Judge, United
States District Court, Eastern District of North Carolina
Oral Testimony.................................................    24
Prepared Statement.............................................    26
The Honorable Michael J. McShane, District Judge, United States
District Court, District of Oregon
Oral Testimony.................................................    29
Prepared Statement.............................................    31

Panel II

Ian Warner, Co-Chair, Judicial Merit Selection Committee for the
Western District of Washington
Oral Testimony.................................................    34
Prepared Statement.............................................    37
Rear Admiral A.B. Cruz III, USN (ret.), President, National Asian
Pacific American Bar Association
Oral Testimony.................................................    42
Prepared Statement.............................................    44
Jennifer C. Braceras, Director, Independent Women's Law Center
Oral Testimony.................................................    54
Prepared Statement.............................................    56
Elia Diaz-Yaeger, National President, Hispanic National Bar
Association
Oral Testimony.................................................    60
Prepared Statement.............................................    62

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

An article entitled, ``How Trump compares with other recent
presidents in appointing federal judges,'' Pew Research Center,
submitted by the Honorable Darrell Issa, Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet
from the State of California, for the record...................    88

APPENDIX

A map of APA Judges by Federal Judicial District from the
National Asian Pacific American Bar Association, submitted by
the Honorable Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr., Chair of the
Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet
from the State of Georgia, for the record......................   100

THE IMPORTANCE OF A DIVERSE FEDERAL
JUDICIARY, PART 2: THE SELECTION AND CONFIRMATION PROCESS

----------

Monday, July 12, 2021

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property,

and the Internet

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:04 a.m., via
Zoom, Hon. Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr. [Chair of the
Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Johnson of Georgia, Nadler,
Deutch, Jeffries, Stanton, Ross, Issa, Jordan, Chabot, Gohmert,
Johnson of Louisiana, Tiffany, Bishop, Fischbach, Fitzgerald,
and Bentz.
Staff Present: David Greengrass, Senior Counsel; Moh
Sharma, Director of Member Services and Outreach & Policy
Advisor; Cierra Fontenot, Chief Clerk; Merrick Nelson, Digital
Director; Jamie Simpson, Chief Counsel; Matt Robinson, Counsel;
Rosalind Jackson, Professional Staff Member; Betsy Ferguson,
Minority Senior Counsel; Andrea Woodard, Minority Professional
Staff Member; and Kiley Bidelman, Minority Clerk.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. The Subcommittee will now come to
order, and without objection, the Chair is authorized to
declare recesses of the Subcommittee at any time. Welcome to
this morning's hearing on the importance of a diverse Federal
judiciary.
Before we begin, I would like to remind Members that we
have established an email address and distribution list
dedicated to circulating exhibits, motions, and other written
materials that Members might want to offer as part of our
hearing today.
If you would like to submit materials, please send them to
the email address that has been previously distributed to your
offices, and we will circulate the materials to Members and
staff as quickly as we can.
I would like to ask all Members to mute your microphones
when you are not speaking. This will help prevent feedback and
other technical issues. You may unmute yourself at any time you
seek recognition.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Today, the Subcommittee continues its discussion on an
issue that impacts all Americans: Diversity within the Federal
judiciary. This past March, in our first hearing on this topic,
we discussed why judicial diversity is important. Witnesses
explained how judicial diversity, both personal and
professional, is essential to preserving public confidence and
trust in our judicial system, protecting the rule of law,
enhancing the quality of judicial decision-making, and making
sure that exceptional lawyers who aspire for public service
know that this path is open to all.
Today's hearing considers how we can achieve those goals by
examining a critical but often unexamined part of the pathway
to becoming a judge, namely, how a highly qualified lawyer's
name gets into the pool of candidates from whom the President
will ultimately select a nominee.
As we will hear today, the process has varied widely across
the country, and over time, often dependent on the involvement
of the home State Senators where the judicial vacancy has
opened, in addition to the President.
I hope to learn more today about how we can ensure that
highly qualified lawyers with a wide range of backgrounds and
legal experience are able to participate in the judicial
selection process.
There has been progress on this front. Just seven months
ago into his first year in office, President Biden has
nominated an historic, diverse slate of experienced lawyers
representing a broad array of professional legal backgrounds,
including work as public defenders, prosecutors, labor lawyers,
civil rights lawyers, Indian law practitioners, immigration
lawyers, commercial litigators, clerks, academics, and State
and Federal judges.
Their personal backgrounds are just as varied, from a
retired Army captain who deployed twice to Iraq, who also
happens to be the first Muslim ever appointed to a Federal
judgeship, to a State court judge who left his complex
litigation practice to open his own practice, specializing in
immigration law in order to serve the community he grew up in.
Yet, there is much more work to be done. One only need look
at the current composition of our courts to see that. For
highly qualified lawyers who don't fit a certain profile, the
path to the Federal Bench can seem as narrow as a tightrope.
Female and minority judges are still sorely
underrepresented on our Federal bench, which is dominated by
former prosecutors and corporate law firm partners from the
most expensive law schools in the country.
The lack of diversity is especially stark among bankruptcy
and magistrate judges, who, together, handle the vast majority
of the Federal docket. The upshot is this: If you are a
plaintiff or criminal defendant, you could very well look at
the Federal judiciary taken as a whole, and wonder if you will
get a fair shot. If you are a litigator or criminal law
practitioner, you might wonder how you will be heard, and if
you are an extraordinary lawyer who might want to be a Federal
judge, you might wonder if you really belong.
These problems can seem daunting, but a growing body of
best practices from State and Federal judicial selection
processes suggests that there are some straightforward steps we
can take in the right direction.
The Witnesses for today's hearing bring with them unique
knowledge and experience regarding the less visible but still
critical parts of our judicial selection process. I look
forward to hearing from them today as we move forward with this
discussion and how best to address this important issue.
It is now my pleasure to recognize the Ranking Member of
the Subcommittee, the gentleman from California, Mr. Issa, for
his opening statement. Mr. Issa?
I do not see Mr. Issa on camera, so I will now move to the
Chair of the Full Committee, the gentleman from New York, Chair
Nadler, for your statement.
Chair Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for holding
this series of hearings on the importance of a diverse Federal
judiciary. I appreciate the opportunity to focus today on the
selection and confirmation process.
A diverse Federal judiciary preserves public trust in the
courts and enriches judicial decision-making. As I said at the
Subcommittee's first hearing on this topic, we need to
determine why, in 2021, our Federal Courts remain so strikingly
nondiverse in so many ways, and what we can do to ensure that
the path to the Federal bench is open to all highly qualified
lawyers willing to commit themselves to equal justice under the
law.
To be sure, we have made progress. Although the judiciary
remains disproportionately White and male and corporate law
partners, prosecutors and those with Ivy League degrees still
predominate, the Federal Courts are certainly less homogenous
than they once were.
That progress did not just happen. It was the product of
decades of efforts by people like our distinguished Witnesses,
and by political leaders who recognized the value of increasing
diversity on the Federal bench.
This progress has unfortunately come in waves. It began in
earnest under President Jimmy Carter, who created a Circuit
Court nominating commission that was instructed to recommend
lawyers who have demonstrated outstanding legal ability and
commitment to equal justice under law, and whose training,
experience, or expertise would help to meet a specific need of
the court.
By the end of a single term, President Carter had appointed
four times as many women to the Federal bench as all his
predecessors combined, and more than twice as many people of
color.
Progress continued with President Clinton, whose White
House counsel explained that they wanted nominees who were,
quote, ``balanced people who had a life and a wide range of
experiences,'' unquote. It resumed again under President Obama,
whose White House counsel explained to them, quote, ``The
President wants the Federal Courts to look like America. He
wants the people who are coming to court to feel like it is
their court as well,'' unquote.
The effort to ensure that our judiciary encompasses a wide
range of personal and professional backgrounds has resumed once
more under the Biden Administration, whose White House counsel
made clear in a letter sent to Senators earlier this year, that
the Administration wanted judicial nominees who, quote,
``represent the best of America,'' quote, ``who look like
America,'' and quote, ``who have a wide range of life and
professional experiences.''
While Presidents may set the tone for who they will
ultimately nominate for a judicial vacancy, the judicial
selection process and practice is far more complex than the
requirements set forth in the Constitution, that the President
nominates, and the Senate confirms.
For example, most people may not realize that home State
Senators also often play a significant role in recommending
District Court nominees to the White House.
Most people may not be aware that our bankruptcy and
magistrate judges, who are even less diverse than the rest of
the Federal judiciary, are chosen by District and Circuit Court
judges.
As I think our Witnesses will explain, there are aspects of
the process that resemble many other jobs. For example, people
will not apply for a job unless they know about a vacancy and
how to apply for it. They probably will not apply if they do
not think that they are wanted or if they do not have an
adequate system of support and resources to help them through
what can be a long and complex process.
That is true for potential judges. It is as true for
potential judges as for anyone else. The late Justice Ruth
Bader Ginsburg, for example, explained that, quote, ``The first
time I ever thought of being a judge was when Jimmy Carter
announced to the world that he wanted to change the complexion
of the U.S. judiciary,'' which he did.
Justice Ginsburg's story parallels the experience of many
judges who have different personal and professional backgrounds
than their colleagues on the bench.
Fortunately, years of experience at both the State and
Federal level have given us some useful tools to make sure that
highly qualified, potential judicial nominees are not
overlooked.
I am pleased that we will be hearing from our distinguished
Witnesses about how to design a selection process that ensures
that highly qualified lawyers know about a vacancy and how to
apply, are encouraged to apply, and are evaluated fairly. I
look forward to hearing from our Witnesses on this very
important topic, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you. We have now been joined
by my colleague from California, the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee, Mr. Issa, who has been having some persistent
technological difficulties, and he finally is on. So, thank
you, sir, and the floor is yours for five minutes.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I apologize for the
poor video. I went to all the trouble of having everything set
up perfectly, and the computer doesn't work, but the iPhone
does.
I want to thank you for holding this important hearing. As
our Committee considers the expansion of the court, more than
ever, the question of getting it right with an additional
perhaps 50 or more nominees, in addition to the 100 current
vacancies based on retirements or senior status, I can't think
of a more appropriate time to hold this hearing.
There is no question at all that diversity within the court
or, if you will, the court representing a diverse group that
reflects the look of America, helps Americans believe that
every American has access to the opportunities and that justice
knows no particular color.
There is no question at all that today, the court does not
reflect exactly America. First, the Supreme Court reflects
Harvard more than it reflects other universities. It reflects
more men than women, and it reflects, if you will, the legacy
of its Presidents who appointed those individuals, meaning, it
has currently more people appointed by Republicans than
Democrats.
That is not just true today, but it was true at the time of
our founding. When George Washington appointed every member of
the court and the replacements, he appointed more Supreme Court
justices at a time when the Supreme Court was the court, than
any other President since. No question at all he was a White
male who appointed all White males.
The fact is, today the court is diverse. Today the court
includes Native Americans, Hispanics, women, men, people who
are foreign-born, and people who were born here. Just as then,
the court will never exactly reflect the population in the
United States, but, rather, it will reflect the population of
qualified candidates.
One of the considerations that we will hear today is, in
fact, are there sufficient qualified candidates? Are we getting
the best and the brightest, no matter where they came from, to
choose law, to choose judgeship, and to choose to serve for,
quite frankly, less money, and, in some cases, a harder job
than they would choose if they remained in the other parts of
their profession, including law.
One of the things that will be confrontational at times
will be, do we choose to have people represented us in the
court, because diversity creates people with different
opinions, or is diversity simply the legitimate statement by
the court that everyone is there.
If I stand or sit before an African American judge or a
woman, am I going to get a different case than if I sit before
an Italian American? One would hope, and I certainly believe,
that if we pick the right judges, it will make no difference as
to the country of origin, gender, or nationality of the judge.
Many people today reflect the court, the High Court, and
say that it has a bias toward one side or the other because of
who appointed them. That kind of discussion, although
interesting and, perhaps, sometimes reflective of the types of
people and their opinions, also undermines the belief that the
court in the case of a single judge trying you for either
criminal or civil, will, in fact, implement the law rather than
their opinion or their bias.
Today, we will have a discussion about, among other things,
opinions and biases, and whether or not the correct choice of
judges gives us a judge who is--he or she is relatively free of
those biases that the rest of us enjoy in our private lives but
a Federal judge should not and cannot enjoy in theirs.
Mr. Chair, again, I thank you. I believe this is an
incredibly important discussion and will lead to a better
understanding by all of us of what we must do in the way of
pushing for reforms in the court. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Issa. I will now
introduce our Witnesses for the first panel. The Honorable
Monica M. Marquez was pointed to the Colorado Supreme Court in
2010. She is the first Latina to serve on the court in its
history.
Among her many current commitments besides judging, she
serves as Chair of the Colorado Supreme Court's Task Force on
Lawyer Well-Being and is a co-leader on the Bench Dream Team, a
group of judges dedicated to diversity and inclusion in
Colorado's judicial system.
Prior to her appointment, Justice Marquez served as Deputy
Attorney General at the Colorado Attorney General's Office, and
as Assistant Solicitor General, and as Assistant Attorney
General. Before that, she practiced general commercial
litigation and employment law at a Denver law firm.
Justice Marquez earned her bachelor's degree from Stanford
University and her law degree from Yale Law School. She clerked
for Judge Michael A. Ponsor of the United States District Court
for the District of Massachusetts and for Judge David M. Ebel
of the United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit.
Welcome, Justice Marquez.
The Honorable Anne K. McKeig joined the Minnesota Supreme
Court in September of 2016, making her the first-female Native
American to sit on any State Supreme Court in the United
States.
A descendant of the White Earth Nation, Justice McKeig is a
native of Federal Dam, Minnesota, where she grew up on the
Leech Lake Reservation. She served as an Assistant County
Attorney for 16 years in Hennepin County, Minnesota, handling
child protective cases and adoption matters with a specialty in
cases that fall under the provisions of the Indian Child
Welfare Act. She then served as a District Court judge in
Hennepin County.
Justice McKeig co-authored law school curriculum entitled,
``Child Abuse and the Law,'' and teaches as an adjunct
professor. Among her many community engagements, she is a
member of the Speakers' Bureau for the Zero Abuse Project and a
member of the State Tribal Court Forum.
She attended St. Catherine University for her undergraduate
degree and received her law degree from Hamline University.
Welcome, Judge McKeig.
I will next turn to my colleague, the gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Bishop, to introduce Chief Judge Myers. Mr.
Bishop?
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am honored to introduce
Richard E. Myers, II, Chief Judge of the United States District
Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina. Judge Myers
is a native of Jamaica but grew up in Wilmington, North
Carolina. He graduated summa cum laude from UNC Wilmington, and
with high honors and Order of the Coif from the UNC School of
Law, eight years after yours truly.
Judge Myers had a distinguished career as an attorney in
private practice and as a Federal prosecutor. He served as
Assistant U.S. Attorney for both the central District of
California and the Eastern District of North Carolina, and
taught criminal law at our alma mater from 2004-2019.
In 2019, President Trump nominated Judge Myers to the
District Court bench, and the Senate confirmed by an impressive
68-21 margin. Judge Myers became Chief Judge of the Eastern
District of North Carolina this January.
I was privileged to meet then Professor Myers during my
tenure in the North Carolina Senate. I am thrilled to renew the
acquaintance and proud to introduce Your Honor to the Committee
today. I am eager to hear your perspective in today's
proceedings.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, and welcome Chief Judge
Myers.
The Honorable Michael J. McShane is a United States
District judge for the District of Oregon. Prior to serving on
the Federal Court, Judge McShane was a Multnomah County judge
for 15 years, presiding over a variety of criminal and civil
cases. He was appointed to the county's death penalty panel in
2003 and handled over 25 capital cases.
He teaches extensively on trial practice, advocacy, and
evidence, and he focuses much of his time off the bench working
with at-risk youth.
Prior to becoming a judge, Judge McShane worked at the
Metropolitan Public Defenders Office in Portland. Judge McShane
grew up in rural Eastern Washington and obtained his bachelor's
degree at Gonzaga University.
Afterwards, he joined the Jesuit Volunteer Corps, and
worked with homeless parolees in Portland, Oregon. He then
obtained his JD from Lewis & Clark Law School.
Judge McShane is one of 11 LGBTQ active, Article III
judges, and the first gay Federal judge serving the district of
Oregon. Welcome, Judge McShane.
Before proceeding with testimony, I hereby remind the
Witnesses that all your written and oral statements made to
this Subcommittee in connection with this hearing are subject
to 18 USC 1001.
Please note that your written statements will be entered
into the record in its entirety, and accordingly I ask that you
summarize your testimony in five minutes. There is a timer that
should be visible on your screen that should help you stay
within that time limit.
For this panel, we will not have any questions after the
Witnesses' testimonies.
Judge Marquez, the floor is yours. You may begin.

STATEMENT OF HON. MONICA M. MARQUEZ

Ms. Marquez. Mr. Chair, Ranking Member, and distinguished
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to
address you today about Colorado's efforts to increase
diversity of our State court bench.
I will highlight just a few of our initiatives underwent in
Colorado, but my written statement includes several others,
including links to more information about all those programs.
Our efforts to diversify our State court bench took on
renewed intensity in late 2018, when, following a series of
retirements, Colorado was left without a single Black District
Court judge serving in our State court system.
This underrepresentation was emblematic of the lack of
diversity throughout our State courts, and it prompted us to
make diversifying the bench an urgent priority. Since that
time, we have made some progress.
Of our 300-plus State court judges, approximately 41
percent are now women. We now have 12 Black, 31 Hispanic or
Latinx, six Asian American, one Native American, and three
multiracial judges, reflecting increases in each of these
categories since 2018.
Three key factors have contributed to our success.
First, with bipartisan support, the Colorado General
Assembly enacted legislation that established a full-time
position responsible for education and outreach efforts
regarding judicial vacancies and the application process.
To our knowledge, Colorado is the first State in the nation
to have a position of this kind within its judicial department.
Sumi Lee, our head of Judicial Diversity Outreach, has used a
data-driven approach to identify outreach opportunities and
develop robust educational programming.
With her work, we aim to demystify the application and
nomination process, and make it more transparent and accessible
to all potential applicants.
Second, we have engaged the broader legal community in this
effort. Our Diversity on the Bench Coalition includes affinity
bar presidents, law school deans, judges, and attorneys from
private practice and government.
This coalition partners with a number of community leaders
and organizations to develop viable candidates for judicial
vacancies, increase diversity on our nominating commissions,
educate decisionmakers at all levels of our merit selection
process about the value of a diverse bench, and promote the
value of bench diversity through focus messaging, articles, and
outreach to our broader community.
Separately, our Bench Dream Team, our group of State court
judges dedicated to diversity and inclusion, has partnered with
the Center for Legal Inclusiveness to update an orientation
video for our judicial nominating commissions.
This fall, the Bench Dream Team will pilot a new six-month
intensive coaching program to support diverse candidates for
judicial vacancies.
Our pipeline efforts extend to college and law students.
Law School Yes We Can, is one such program that mentors college
students from underrepresented communities and prepares those
students to apply for law school. This program offers
networking opportunities, leadership training, and LSAT
preparation.
For our diverse law students, we provide a host of
experiential learning and networking opportunities that can
lead to clerkships through the Judge Lorenzo Marquez Appellate
Externship Program, the Colorado Pledge to Diversity Summer
Clerkship Program, and even in the pandemic, our new virtual
coffeehouse, called Java With Judges.
Third, we promote the visibility of our diverse judges
because we know it is difficult to be what you cannot see. In
this vein, virtual meetings in the pandemic have actually
boosted our engagement with judges and potential candidates
from rural parts of Colorado.
Through these many partnerships, we hope to light pathways
to the bench from all four corners of our State.
In closing, I can attest personally that having a diverse
collection of backgrounds and life experiences among the judges
on an appellate court leads to richer and fuller discussions of
the issues, and ultimately, better and more thoughtful
decisions.
Equally importantly, having a diverse judiciary strengthens
public perception that the justice rendered by our courts is
truly equal. That perception of legitimacy is so critical. It
promotes confidence in and respect for the decisions rendered
by our courts, and, thereby, strengthens the rule of law
itself. I thank this Committee for its attention to these
important issues.
[The statement of Ms. Marquez follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Judge Marquez. I am
sorry. Thank you, Justice Marquez.
Justice McKeig, you may now begin.

STATEMENT OF HON. ANNE K. McKEIG

Ms. McKeig. Boozhoo, Mr. Chair, Ranking Member, and Members
of the Subcommittee. I am honored to have the opportunity to
address you today on the important topic of diversity in the
Federal judiciary. My Indian name is Awaniikwe. I am a proud
descendant of the White Earth Nation, and grateful daughter of
the Leech Lake Reservation in rural Northwest Minnesota.
In English, my name is Anne McKeig, and I am the first
indigenous woman ever to serve on any State Supreme Court in
the history of this nation.
In my Native language, my Tribal name means mist woman,
which in our community is the blanket of mist in the morning
that nurtures and protects the land across the White Earth
Nation. I can speak from experience that we, as indigenous
women, are all mist women. We are protectors of our children,
our spouses, and our communities.
Yet, history and life experiences tell us that despite
being protectors, we far too often feel unprotected by systems
that are supported and supposed to protect us, including the
Federal judiciary.
Now, I could spend the remainder of my time rattling off
the alarming statistics that illustrate why the Federal
judiciary contributes to our feelings and fears as indigenous
people such as the fact that there have been only four
indigenous people who have ever served as Federal judges since
the founding of this republic.
I believe that my time is best served on focusing on what I
believe to be the critical reasons that greater diversity is
needed in the Federal judiciary, which is fairness and
legitimacy.
If you can imagine an indigenous mother entering a Federal
Courthouse, and seeing a White probation officer, White staff
for pretrial services, a White judge, a White prosecutor, a
White public defender, a White court reporter, dictating her
destiny moving forward, she begins to believe that this process
is not legitimate or fair for her. She no longer feels a part
of the self-governance that we so hold dear in this country.
Diversity in the judiciary isn't simply about the color of
a person. It goes to the very core of what we need to preserve,
the role of the judiciary belief that all of us, we can wield
power in creating and maintaining our republic and feel a part
of the system.
I have a very nontraditional path to the bench and one that
would not have taken place but for the fact that I saw my
mentor, Judge Robert Blaeser, the first Native American judge
appointed to the Twin Cities District Court, and I saw his
investiture process.
I did not know him. I went and stood in the back of the
room, and it was during the course of his investiture, that I
begin to believe that a young woman from a reservation, a
hometown of 106 people, could potentially be a judge one day
and serve her community as a whole.
It was through his mentorship and belief in me and helping
me see that I had a greater obligation to my community, that I
could be a part of the solution.
Now, Minnesota has made, I believe, great strides in
diversifying our judiciary. We have held judicial boot camps,
which have been specifically sought out to the affinity
community so that we can demystify the judicial selection
process.
We have set up strong mentor programs like the one that I
experienced with Judge Robert Blaeser.
We have a strong judicial commission that includes Members
that are also from the public.
We have done much public speaking, including outreach
events, such as the Minnesota Supreme Court going to the Red
Lake Reservation, the first visit in our history to any
indigenous nation.
We also travel to high schools and hold court hearings as
though they were at our court in the high schools, and spend
time with students to encourage them, including all students
that they, too, could have a dream of becoming a judge.
It is incredibly important that those who come before our
court systems feel that they are a part of the system and that
they have a real opportunity to be heard.
I am grateful for this opportunity today. I thank you for
all the work that you are doing. Miigwech
[The statement of Ms. McKeig follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Justice McKeig.
Next, we will hear from Chief Judge Myers. Chief Judge
Myers, please, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF HON. RICHARD E. MYERS

Mr. Myers. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Ranking Member, and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. First, a fairly
selected judiciary is crucial because of the messages it sends
regarding equal opportunity, access to the courts, and the
fairness of our judicial system.
Discriminating on the basis of immutable characteristics
damages and defies those who choose to discriminate, and it
damages those excluded or chosen for that reason. Absolute
equality of opportunities is essential to judicial selection
and to the public's faith in the judiciary. No American should
believe that someone like me can't get fair consideration for
any position of public service.
Today, I want to talk a little bit about the path to a
diverse judiciary, and the collateral consequences of the
choices we make along the way. First, a little bit about my own
path, and then a look to the future.
I am a Jamaican immigrant of mixed ancestry. My family
moved to Miami in the late 1970s. In the early 1980s, we moved
again to Wilmington, North Carolina, where I now sit as a
Federal District judge. I may represent the future of the color
line. There are people eager to place me into a racial category
for reasons of their own, but my background and appearance
defies simple categorization.
When my family moved to Wilmington, I was repeatedly asked,
what are you? This was intended to provide the asker with
racial information to fit me for their preexisting pigeonhole.
Fortyhow years ago, my opportunities and social status were
very much dependent on the answer. The answer Jamaican was
insufficiently specific for some, and was often followed by the
more pointed question, no, what race? My answer, the human
race, was deemed by some people to be too clever by half, but
it was and remains my answer. I embody the American motto, e
pluribus unum, or the Jamaican equivalent, out of many, one
people.
This inquiry into my race has not gone away, although the
consequences have changed. I remember friends of different
races in law school arguing over my race, fortunately in an
attempt to claim me rather than disclaim me.
At every career stop, I was encouraged to select particular
boxes on personnel forms to ensure that the organization hiring
me got credit for diversity.
All this was troubling to me because it fostered the
perception that I would be treated as a representation of some
category, not as a unique individual with my own talents,
goals, and dreams.
Fortunately, I felt none of this racial pressure when I was
selected as a candidate to be a Federal judge. At the time, I
was a law professor at the University of North Carolina School
of Law. I brought a specific kind of diversity there, too. I
was an outspoken advocate of textualism, originalism, and
judicial restraint within the increasingly liberal, legal
academy.
My exposure to thousands of law students and leaders in the
legal field within our State as the conservative law professor,
I am sure was a significant reason I was nominated.
Before joining the academy, I served as a Federal
prosecutor and as a defense attorney before that. The
combination of personal autobiography and legal philosophy has
caused whiplash for some people's preconceptions.
I can happily say that at no time during my selection and
nomination process was I asked about my race, until after my
confirmation hearing. Ironically, as I was walking out of the
hearing, a reporter pointedly asked me what race I was, and
told me that the President was criticized by people who never
met me for failing to select a diverse candidate.
Looking forward, racism is real, and I have personal
experience with it, but I also believe that justice is blind,
and that all justices and judges wear the same Black robes for
a reason. We need to strive self-consciously and mightily to
achieve Martin Luther King's dream to create the day when we
all are judged not by the color of our skin, but by the content
of our character.
This is my chosen country. I have taken multiple oaths to
uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States, at my
naturalization ceremony, again when I became an Assistant
United States Attorney, and yet again, when I became a Federal
judge.
We have amended our Constitution multiple times to further
commit us to the principle that all people are equal before the
law. We still have much work to do before we fully accomplish
that goal. As a judge, I strive every day to find neutral
principles of law and apply them neutrally to all the people
who appear before me without fear or favor.
If the public reasonably believes a potential judge was
excluded or chosen because of an immutable characteristic, then
we as a nation lose faith that the judge chosen was truly the
best choice amongst all those available.
I encourage our leaders to remain committed to the
proposition that all people are equal before the law, to
consider every potential candidate as an individual, with all
the nuance that is requires, and to broaden the pipeline so
that we can seek the best candidates without fear or favor.
Again, thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Myers follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Chief Judge Myers.
Now we will turn to Judge McShane. Judge McShane, you may
begin.

STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL J. McSHANE

Mr. McShane. Greetings from Oregon. I want to thank the
Committee and its leadership for inviting me to speak today on
this topic of diversity. I am not going to speak today on the
importance of diversity. I believe this body would not be
holding such as hearing as this if it did not understand why a
truly diverse Federal bench is important to our democracy.
Instead, I want to talk about some of the challenges we as
a court are facing in our attempts at diversity inclusion and
some of the steps we can make to widen the opportunities for a
broader spectrum of judicial applicants. This means looking at
the traditional pathways to the bench and exploring some of the
nontraditional pathways to the Federal bench.
The last time I had an opportunity to speak on the subject
of diversity was a few years ago before a group of clerks and
young lawyers at the Federal Court administrative offices in
Washington, DC. It was part of a Gay Pride event, celebrating
Gay Pride Month.
One of the young lawyers asked me, how can we diversify the
Federal Courts? Without giving it much thought, I blurted out,
well, we need to lose our addiction to Yale and Harvard. The
entire room went silent. The fact is, almost every lawyer in
the room had, in fact, gone to Yale or Harvard.
I will be the first to say that these are great law
schools, but diversity and inclusion cannot rely simply on the
pedigree of a diploma from a particular school. It requires us
to reach out proactively and invite more people to the table.
So, why are the traditional pathways not working? What are
the traditional pathways?
Well, one of the first traditional pathways is judicial
clerkships. Many of my colleagues, and if you look, most of the
justices on the Supreme Court, began their career as a judicial
clerk. It is a job that opens doors.
When it comes to the hiring of clerks, local law schools
and regional law schools are often overlooked in favor of the
top-ranked schools. It is in these schools that we find that
they are much more accessible to a diverse group of students;
students from rural communities; working moms and dads;
students caring for an aging parent; students who were the
first in their family to navigate higher education; minority
students; and students who, quite frankly, had to hold real
jobs to survive while they went to school.
I have had clerks from top law schools, and I have had
clerks from local law schools. They are equal in their
excellence. Sometimes the only difference is the local law
schools actually grade the students' works.
Another traditional pathway to the Federal bench is the
magistrate judge positions. In most districts, magistrate
judges are chosen by the Article III judges themselves. There
is a tendency to pick somebody who is a known quantity,
somebody we are familiar with, who we have seen in court. That
often tends to be somebody who looks a lot like us, and that
often is somebody from the U.S. Attorney's office, or a law
firm.
We need to encourage people who don't necessarily look like
us to apply. I was very proud that the District of Oregon, 3
years ago, selected the first Muslim American judicial officer
in United States history when we selected Mustafa Kusabhai to
sit as our newest magistrate judge.
I have sat on many panels where invariably in law school,
we are asked, what is the path to becoming a Federal judge? The
traditional answer is to work at the U.S. Attorney's Office or
a large reputable law firm.
These are good answers, but why do we rely on these
traditions if we are seeking true diversity? Why aren't we able
to tell these young minds, go work with the poor; get a job
with Legal Aid; become a public defender, become an immigration
attorney; help injured workers, represent veterans in Portland,
or farmers in the Klamath Basin.
I know that when I was nominated to the bench, it was very
important to the Obama Administration that I came from a public
defender background. They seemed to tout that just as quickly
as they touted the fact that I was openly gay.
One of my friends actually added PD, public defender, to
LGBTQ, because it was so rare, and I still feel like I am a
little bit of a unicorn with that public defender past.
We need to explore these nontraditional career paths and at
least ask the questions: Why are we not seeking out those who
work with the poor and the marginalized. Is it they are less
intellectual? Is it they cannot be fair?
Serving the poor and marginalized should not be a strike
against anyone if they have the detachment necessary to follow
the law. I was a public defender, and I opposed the death
penalty. When I became a judge, I had to sentence somebody to
death because it was the lawful verdict of the jury. I followed
the law. That is what we do.
Finally, we need to work closely with the diversity law
associations, and encourage their student Members to apply for
clerkships, their young attorneys to participate in Federal
Court activities, and their qualified Members to seek
appointments.
The diversity law associations have to work together and
not against each other. In my nomination process, the diversity
bar associations came together and worked together and came up
with a number of endorsed candidates that they could put
forward to our Senator. It was only because of that, that my
name was able to get through and eventually become nominated.
So, I am so happy to see some of the diversity bar associations
are represented on our second panel.
So, thank you for giving me this opportunity. I am happy
to, at any time, answer any questions.
[The statement of Mr. McShane follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Judge McShane, and this
will conclude the first panel testimony for today's hearing,
and I would like to thank the Witnesses for their participation
and for their testimony.
We will now transition to the second panel of Witnesses.
With those Witnesses now being on our screen, I will now
introduce them.
Mr. Ian Warner is the Co-Chair of the Judicial Merit
Selection Committee for the Western District of Washington,
which was established by Washington State's U.S. Senators,
Patty Murray and Maria Cantwell.
In this role, he and the Committee review candidates for
the positions of U.S. District Court judge, advise the Senators
on the Committee's findings, and suggests potential candidates
for Federal Court vacancies before the Senators make their
final recommendations to the President.
Outside of his work with the Senators' Judicial Merit
Selection Committee, Mr. Warner is the Senior Director for
Public Policy with the Zillow Group.
Prior to this role he was legal counsel for the Mayor's
Office for the City of Seattle, and an associate with the law
firm Dorsey & Whitney, LLP, practicing in the areas of banking
and finance, securities, employment, and construction law.
Mr. Warner received his Bachelor of Arts degree from
Whitman College, and his JD from the University of Washington
School of Law. Welcome, Mr. Warner.
The Honorable A.B. Cruz, III, is the President of the Board
of Governors for the National Asian Pacific American Bar
Association. He also currently serves on the board of Graf
Acquisition Corporation, Incorporated, and is a Senior Adviser
at BarkerGillmore, LLC, providing executive coaching and search
services to legal leaders, CEOs, and corporate boards. He also
has served, and currently serves on many nonprofit and
charitable boards.
Admiral Cruz has helped lead several prominent companies to
diverse industries--excuse me--Admiral Cruz has helped lead
several prominent companies in diverse industries, including
USAA, Emergent BioSolutions Incorporated, and Scripps Network
Interactive Incorporated, and a variety of senior legal and
executive roles.
He is also a former Navy Admiral, who, during his 33-plus
years distinguished military career, led numerous high
performing operational teams and represented the United States
internationally in multiple high-level engagements with foreign
militaries.
Over the course of his naval career, he served as Deputy
Director of Maritime Operations for U.S. Fleet Forces Command,
and as Deputy Commander for both U.S. 4th Fleet and Naval
Forces Southern Command, among other posts.
Admiral Cruz holds a JD from the Catholic University of
America, an MA in marketing from the University of Maryland,
and a BS in general engineering and physical sciences from U.S.
Naval Academy. Welcome, Admiral Cruz.
Ms. Jennifer Braceras is the Director of the Independent
Women's Forum Law Center, a nonprofit organization that focuses
on women's policy issues. Prior to this role, she was a
contributing columnist and analyst for various media and news
outlets like Boston Globe Media, the Boston Herald, New England
Cable News, and, later, became the Editor-in-Chief of the New
Boston Post.
Ms. Braceras served on the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights
for approximately six years after having been appointed by
President George W. Bush. Before serving on the Commission, she
was a research fellow at Harvard Law School and a legal fellow
with the Independent Women's Forum.
Ms. Braceras was also an attorney with the law firm Ropes &
Gray, LLP, where she practiced labor and employment law.
Ms. Braceras earned her Bachelor of Arts from the
University of Massachusetts Amherst, and her JD from Harvard
Law School. Welcome, Ms. Braceras.
Ms. Elia Diaz-Yaeger is the President of the Hispanic
National Bar Association. She is a frequent speaker and CLE
presenter and serves as a diversity facilitator for the
Louisiana State Bar Association.
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger is also a shareholder in the insurance
section, Lugenbuhl, Wheaton, Peck, Rankin & Hubbard where her
primary areas of practice include industrial employment,
insurance defense and coverage, environmental law, commercial
litigation, and board governance and cybersecurity.
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger also serves as the Secretary of the Board
of Directors of OnPath Federal Credit Union, whose mission is
to strengthen the financial health of underserved communities
through financial service and education.
In addition, she has cofounded and volunteered in many
other community organizations such as the A.D. Crossman
Esperanza Library Project.
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger received her Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of
Science, and her masters in science from the University of
Southwestern Louisiana, and her JD from Loyola University, New
Orleans College of Law. Welcome, Ms. Diaz-Yaeger.
Before proceeding with testimony, I hereby remind the
Witnesses that all your written and oral statements made to the
Subcommittee in connection with this hearing are subject to 18
USC 1001.
Please note that your written statements will be entered
into the record in their entirety. Accordingly, I ask that you
summarize your testimony in five minutes. There is a timer, and
it should be visible on your screen that should help you stay
within the time limit.
Mr. Warner, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF IAN WARNER

Mr. Warner. Mr. Chair, Ranking Member Issa, and the Members
of the Subcommittee, I am honored--
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Please excuse me. Mr. Warner, I am
sorry.
Mr. Warner. No worries, Mr. Chair. I will begin again.
Mr. Chair, Ranking Member Issa, and the Members of the
Subcommittee, I am honored to address you today. Similar to my
written testimony, my comments today will primarily focus on
the Judicial Merit Selection Committee for the Western District
of Washington, which I Co-Chaired in 2020.
I will begin with a bit of context, including Part 1 of
this Subcommittee's hearing on judicial diversity. In that
March hearing, several esteemed judges and academics
articulated the statistical realities that the Federal bench
has lagged behind the diversity of our country and of our legal
community.
They also deftly explained the importance of judicial
diversity in terms of procedural justice and perception of
trust.
So, with that information already established in this
Committee's record, I will add that the U.S. District Court for
the Western District of Washington, has never had a lifetime
Native American or Asian American Federal judge, considering
that there are 29 Federally recognized tribes in Washington
State and that Washington State is home to one of our country's
largest AAPI communities.
I will also note the recent Cato Institute study which
found that the ratio of prosecutors to defense attorneys on the
Federal bench today is almost exactly 4-1.
So, in the context of today's hearing focused on the
selection and confirmation process, what do these statistics
mean? This lack of diversity on the bench speaks directly to
potential judicial applicants to say, need not apply if you are
from underrepresented legal backgrounds, women, lawyers of
color, LGBTQ, or Black.
These statistics also speak directly to witnesses,
litigants, and the community to say, you are an outsider here.
These realities must be addressed because the range of
interest and people that appear before the Federal judiciary
are broad. We must encourage qualified and historically
marginalized potential candidates to apply by being clear that
we believe Black, Brown, Native American, Asian American,
women, and LGBTQ lawyers can also represent the best of our
legal profession.
In this year, we were able to say that the White House is
serious about bringing in professionally diverse, historically
underrepresented people to the bench. You should apply.
The 2020 Committee was intentional about meeting that call
from the President, and Senators Murray and Cantwell. Last
December we convened to nominate candidates for five judicial
vacancies on the Western District Bench, one of the highest
overall sets of vacancies in the country.
Importantly, Senator Murray made several changes to the
Committee's composition with the intent to increase the
diversity of legal experience in the Committee. The Committee's
appointments included a then-U.S. attorney, a former long-time
Federal defender, an ACLU executive director, a youth legal aid
attorney, and others. Our youngest member was 33. Black Latino,
Native American, and other racial and ethnic groups were
represented.
At the Committee's first official hearing, we heard
directly from Senator Murray's staff, and discussed the
December 22, 2020, letter from White House counsel designate,
Dana Remus. That letter highlighted the White House's interest
in candidates with, quote, ``legal experiences that have been
historically underrepresented on the Federal bench,'' end
quote.
Meeting the directive to address historical
underrepresentation required innovation in our approach.
Innovation is often driven by diversity. In this context, the
Committee's diversity and innovative recruiting processes were
essential to attracting diverse applicants reflective of our
community.
We knew that the Committee Members, with their deep
community connection to the Seattle and Tacoma, Washington,
legal communities, made it generally more likely that
professionally diverse and historically underrepresented
applicants would apply.
That representational diversity was and is still not
enough. We also encouraged the Membership to highlight the
application process within their networks and directly to reach
out to qualified applicants who might otherwise hesitate to
apply.
We also publicized the vacancy announcement through
expanded channels, including the western chapter of the Federal
Bar Association, local minority bar associations, and local
media outlets.
The result of these recruiting efforts was the largest and
most diverse applicant pool since the Committee's inception. We
received more than 75 applications that truly represented
Washington's broader legal community.
The Committee then met over the course of approximately
eight weeks and deliberated until we reached consensus on a
slate of nominees. The outcome was the most professionally
diverse recommendations in the Committee's history. Those
candidates included civil rights attorneys, public defenders, a
Native law expert, and former U.S. attorneys.
Now, in conclusion, this very week, the Senate judiciary
will vote on three of our outstanding nominees--Lauren King, a
Tribal member, will be Washington's first Native--who would be
Washington's first Native American Federal judge and a Tribal
law expert; Tana Lin, a civil rights attorney and former public
defender who would be Washington State's first Asian American
Federal trial judge; and Judge David Estudillo, a current
Superior court judge in Grant County, a rural area of
Washington State that is home to farming and agricultural
communities.
This cohort of outstanding nominees look like America and
will play a key role into creating a Western District Bench
that reflects and engenders trust in its community.
I want to thank the Members of the Subcommittee and their
staff for holding this hearing on such an important topic and
welcome your questions. Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Warner follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Warner.
Next, we will turn to Admiral Cruz.
Admiral Cruz, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF REAR ADMIRAL A.B. CRUZ III, USN (RET.)

Admiral Cruz. Good morning, and thank you, Chair Johnson,
Ranking Member Issa, and--I see Committee Ranking Member
Jordan, and the distinguished Members of this Subcommittee.
It is indeed my honor and privilege to appear before you on
behalf of the National Asian Pacific American Bar Association,
or, as we call it, NAPABA. Thank you for highlighting the
importance of a diverse Federal judiciary, which is so critical
for ensuring faith and confidence in the rule of law.
NAPABA represents the interests of over 60,000 Asian-
Pacific American, or APA, lawyers and consists of a nationwide
network of nearly 90 affiliates. NAPABA is a leader in
addressing civil rights issues confronting APA communities, and
we have always been a strong national voice for increased
diversity on the bench, for equal opportunity in the workplace,
and for combating hate crimes and discrimination.
For the APA community, the hearing comes at a crucial
moment. Throughout the country, we are confronting the twin
scourges of anti-Asian-American hate and COVID, for which so
many Asian Americans have been falsely scapegoated.
The APA legal community has responded to help a population
that has suffered thousands of attacks, to represent victims,
and to use all legal mechanisms available to attain justice.
In order for our justice system to work as our Founders
designed it, with independence and sacred constitutional duty
to safeguard rights and liberties, the American public must be
assured that it is fair, impartial, and will provide equal
justice for all.
For the APA legal community, representation on the Federal
bench continues to be a struggle. Out of 673 Federal District
Court seats, only 27 are held by active APA jurists. Of 179
Federal Appellate court seats, only 10 active APA judges serve.
As this Subcommittee knows, there has never been an APA
candidate even nominated to the Supreme Court.
Underrepresentation is not confined to the Federal bench.
Currently, only six States have an APA justice sitting on their
State supreme court.
So, what accounts for this disparity? The APA legal
community faces particular barriers, including inadequate
access to mentors, lack of role models, and lack of
recognition. Stereotyping, even for ostensibly positive traits,
such as hard work and quiet diligence, has often disadvantaged
APA attorneys, who may be passed over for high-profile
assignments because of misguided perceptions that they are too
passive to be effective in a litigation or a courtroom setting.
Within the APA legal community, there are identifiable gaps
in the judicial pipeline. For example, APA law students are
well-represented in top-tier law schools, yet they do not
obtain judicial clerkships in comparable numbers. APA lawyers
are significantly underrepresented in law firm partnership
ranks, and APA lawyers are underrepresented in public-sector
leadership.
Traditional pathways to the bench, including clerkships and
law firm partnerships, often involve highly subjective criteria
such as likability, leadership potential, and other amorphous
factors as to whom judges, professors, and partners regard as
their proteges.
If I may, I would like to share a personal story about why
representation really matters.
When I was a midshipman at the Naval Academy and even after
receiving my commission, the lack of diversity in the officer
corps really struck me. My career had been driven by an abiding
love of this country, as the son of immigrants, and a strong
sense of duty and a deep pride in the Navy. There were times
during my career when I wondered, does this Navy reflect who I
am as an American?
Well, I can tell you that, when I was assigned to my very
first ship, I was one of only two officers aboard the USS Gray.
One day, I got a knock at the door, and, when I opened it, in
rushed a crowd of minority sailors of all different
backgrounds. They told me how inspiring it was to see an
officer of color aboard and, for once, for them, the Navy was
not someone else's Navy.
Faith and confidence in leadership was enhanced because
these sailors saw themselves in me. That moment changed my
perspective. It wasn't about me; it was about all those who
aspired to be me.
My written testimony discusses how, in a diverse nation, a
broadly representative military with a diverse officer corps is
more likely to uphold national values and be loyal to the
country they serve. Put simply, diversity is not a buzzword; it
is mission-critical. It is an imperative.
The same goes for the legal profession. As a former Naval
officer, I recognize in a courtroom the judge is the presiding
officer.
Look, judicial candidates will rise and fall on their own
merits, as it should be. However, we can and must do more to
cast a wider and deeper net to attract a broader pool of highly
qualified applicants, and those applicants must have role
models, mentors, and networks to help them succeed.
In order for the rule of law to endure and thrive in this
country and to prevent a loss of faith and confidence in the
judicial system, the courts cannot be someone else's but,
rather, must belong to all people.
Thank you for the time, and I am happy to answer any
questions you may have.
[The statement of Admiral Cruz follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Admiral Cruz. Thank you
for your military service to the nation.
Next, we will proceed to Ms. Braceras.
Ms. Braceras, you may begin.
If you will unmute.

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER C. BRACERAS

Ms. Braceras. There we go.
Chair Johnson, Ranking Member Issa, distinguished Members
of the Committee, thank you for your invitation to testify. My
name is Jennifer Braceras, and I am the Director of Independent
Women's Law Center, a former commissioner on the U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights, and a member of the Hispanic
National Bar Association.
A judiciary that reflects the vibrant tapestry of America
enhances the legitimacy of our system and gives Americans
confidence that justice is impartial and that our courts are
accessible to all.
It is undeniable that the historic appointments to the
Supreme Court of Sonia Sotomayor, Sandra Day O'Connor, Antonin
Scalia, Thurgood Marshall, and Louis Brandeis had special
meaning for Americans in certain communities.
Even at the lower court level, the confirmation of a judge
from a particular background is often a source of great pride
for the community.
Politics, whether partisan or ethnic, will always influence
judicial nominations to some degree. Our Constitution
anticipates this by allowing politicians to pick judges of
their choosing from constituencies of their choosing.
Neither politics nor diversity should ever be the primary
factor in selecting judges who serve for life. The primary
factor in selecting a judge should not be race or ethnicity or
sex or even an elite educational pedigree but, rather, judicial
philosophy.
The best judges are those who understand that their role is
not to correct the world's ills but to resolve specific
disputes according to the law. Good judges Act with humility
and with restraint, tethering their rulings to the law's
original meaning, not the political winds of the moment.
From a qualified pool of nominees committed to originalism,
restraint, and impartiality, politicians can of course consider
diversity as a plus.
So, how are we doing with respect to judicial diversity?
Statistics never tell the whole story, but consider these.
According to the American Bar Association, in 2020, the legal
profession was less than five percent African American, less
than five percent Hispanic, and less than three percent Asian
American, and yet The Washington Post reports that the Federal
judiciary is almost 13 percent African American, nine percent
Hispanic, and almost five percent Asian American. Given the
makeup of the profession and the pool of possible candidates,
our Federal judiciary is, in fact, remarkably representative.
It would seem that the best way to increase diversity on
the bench is to broaden the pipeline by expanding opportunities
to attend law school in many of the ways that Justice Marquez
mentioned in her testimony.
Representation matters, but diversity is often a moving
target, one that encompasses an ever-expanding list of
subgroups, immigrant communities, genders, and religious and
sexual minorities, not to mention various intersectional
combinations. Statistical parity is of course not possible, and
it should not be our aim.
Unfortunately, one obstacle to a more diverse Federal bench
has been the hypocrisy, rooted in racism, that the only
legitimate Members of an ethnic or racial group are those who
expound a particular dogma. I am old enough to remember how, in
2003, Democrats used the Senate filibuster to block the
nomination to the D.C. Circuit of Miguel Estrada, one of the
most brilliant lawyers in America and the epitome of the
American Dream. I have also been around long enough to observe
the 30-year campaign, by people who purport to care about
diversity, to delegitimize Justice Clarence Thomas as
inauthentically Black. Sadly, as these examples make clear,
those who claim to want a more diverse Federal bench often do
not.
In conclusion, the goal of judicial selection is not
proportional representation but the creation and maintenance of
the most fair and impartial judiciary in the world. As we seek
to diversify the legal profession and, in turn, the Federal
bench, we must never forget that the most important
qualifications for a judge are good judgment and commitment to
the rule of law.
Thank you for having me. I am happy to answer any questions
you may have.
[The statement of Ms. Braceras follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Ms. Braceras.
Next, we will turn to Ms. Diaz-Yaeger.
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF ELIA DIAZ-YAEGER

Ms. Diaz-Yaeger. Thank you.
Chair Johnson, Chair Nadler, Ranking Member Issa, Ranking
Member Jordan, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee,
thank you for holding this critical hearing on the importance
of judicial diversity. I am honored to be here.
My name is Elia Diaz-Yaeger, and I serve as President of
the Hispanic National Bar Association, or HNBA. The HNBA is a
nonprofit, nonpartisan, national Membership organization that
represents the interests of more than 67,000 Hispanic legal
professionals as well as the nearly 13 percent of law students
enrolled in ABA-accredited law schools in the United States and
its territories. We Act as a collective voice for issues of
common concern to our Members and our community.
Our organization has been working for over 50 years to
support the recruitment, retention, and elevation of Hispanics
in law schools, law firms, corporations, the judiciary, and
government. The HNBA has worked vigorously to identify, vet,
and endorse qualified individuals to fill the numerous
vacancies in the Federal Court system.
Since the start of the current Administration, the HNBA has
endorsed and provided the White House and U.S. Senators with 48
qualified candidates for Federal judicial vacancies, 47 of whom
are Hispanic.
Today, I will touch upon the importance of judicial
diversity, challenges in the selection and confirmation
process, and the path forward to increasing diversity in the
judiciary.
According to data from the Federal Judicial Center, only
nine percent of active Federal judges identify as Hispanic,
despite the fact that Hispanics are the nation's largest
minority group, representing almost 20 percent of the U.S.
population. Additionally, there are currently no Hispanic
judges in 36 of 50 States.
Research supports the value of diversity on the bench. A
diverse bench provides for diversity of experience,
perspectives, and backgrounds, and it creates a pipeline for
future judges that reflect the communities they will serve. A
diverse judiciary also helps combat complicit bias in our
government institutions and instills public trust in our system
of justice. Moreover, diverse backgrounds and experiences keep
implicit bias in check.
While identity does not predict viewpoint, studies point to
the presence of diversity as improving outcomes, and we believe
the same is true in the judiciary.
Sadly, there are several challenges diverse candidates face
when navigating the current selection and nomination process.
Procedural and personal biases in the confirmation process
limit opportunities for qualified Hispanics and other
minorities seeking to serve on the Federal bench.
Another challenge is the decentralization of the
nominations process. The selection process consists of 100
different U.S. Senators making their own recommendations, each
with differing views on the value of diversity. As a result, if
judicial diversity is not a priority in the Administration in
power, the demographics of judicial nominees recommended by the
Senators will tend to reflect themselves and their networks.
However, there are proactive measures that outside
stakeholders can take to advocate for more diverse candidates.
For example, the national affinity bars, like the HNBA, and a
number of other interest groups that care about the composition
of the judiciary can vet and put forward qualified candidates
to both the White House and Senators.
Another challenge to diversity on the bench is bias faced
by traditionally underrepresented individuals. A recent study
by the ABA found that widespread gender and racial bias
permeates the hiring, promotion, assignments, and compensation
in the legal industry. Similarly, statistics show that those
same biases are prevalent in the selection of judicial
nominees.
Even in situations where there are no personal biases at
play, key decision-makers in the process often turn to their
own narrow networks for judicial recommendations. As a result,
the current judicial selection process naturally causes an
unintentional bias that results in judicial nominees who are
lacking in diversity.
So, what can be done to widen the path forward to increased
judicial diversity? The Administration's nominations to date
are indeed a positive sign of movement toward a more diverse
representation of Federal judges, one that actually reflects
the communities that come before our courts. So, this progress
is a strong example of how decision-makers can exercise power
they have to effect change.
Change can also be affected by key decision-makers opening
their selection process to include stakeholders outside of
their usual networks. Rather than relying on the same law
schools or exclusive institutions and networks, a more
inclusive process, one that incorporates a wider breadth of
practice areas, law schools, experience, backgrounds, and
expertise, will naturally lead to more diverse candidates being
provided the opportunity to be considered. In turn, that will
result in an increase in mentorship and pipeline growth.
I want to thank the Subcommittee for taking time to
consider this critical issue. Public dialogue around the lack
of diversity in the judicial system helps raise awareness both
about the need and the challenges in promoting diversity on the
bench. On behalf of the HNBA, we welcome further dialogue with
the Members of this Subcommittee in working to promote diverse
candidates onto the Federal bench.
Thank you, Chair Johnson and Ranking Member Issa, for
holding this hearing today and for inviting our organization to
speak. I look forward to answering any questions you may have.
[The statement of Ms. Diaz-Yaeger follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Ms. Diaz-Yaeger.
We will now proceed under the five-minute rule with
questions. I will begin by recognizing myself for five minutes.
Admiral Cruz and Ms. Diaz-Yaeger, I would like to discuss
why judicial diversity matters.
At the Subcommittee's first hearing on this topic a few
months ago, Judge Edward Chen explained and recounted a number
of instances where a judge drew on their own life experiences
with their colleagues to help their colleagues to understand
crucial elements of a case in ways that they might have missed.
For example, Judge Chen described how Justice Ginsburg
helped her colleagues see how a strip search might feel to a
middle-school-age girl. Judge Henderson, the first Black judge
on Judge Chen's court, explained to a colleague that the
shockingly racist graffiti a plaintiff described was far more
common than his colleague thought.
Judge Chen explained that, quote, ``there is a cost when
voices are missing from the room,'' end quote. Do you agree
with that sentiment? First Admiral Cruz and then Ms. Diaz-
Yaeger.
Admiral Cruz. Yes, Chair. Thank you for that question. I do
believe that it is imperative that there be diversity of views,
perspectives, and experiences. It is not only a good thing, but
also imperative.
The more voices you have at a table, the more perspectives,
the more robust the discussion and debate and the challenges
are. What this results in is more beyond-the-norm thinking,
greater creativity, greater innovation, and, ultimately, my
belief and my experience is better decisions and better
results.
So, again, that is why any organization, whether it be a
corporation, whether it be the judiciary, diversity of views
and perspectives and experiences is an imperative.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Admiral Cruz.
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger?
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger. Thank you. I would echo what A.B. Cruz
just said. It is imperative that a broad perspective and a
broad understanding and ability to get that information from
others helps you understand and put things into perspective.
The more backgrounds, the more experiences, the more different
types of individuals that are on the bench, that can work
together, actually helps you get a better perspective and,
indeed, a better outcome and a better result.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you.
Mr. Warner, would you like to add anything to this?
Mr. Warner. Yeah. I really enjoyed that March 25 hearing,
because I do think those examples that were given by the judges
were really illustrative of how judges do all look at the Black
letter law but bring their life experiences to the bench as
well.
In particular, myself, I have clerked in the Division One
Court of Appeals in Washington State, and I will tell you, in
that setting, working with other clerks and other law students
to look at the facts of a case and help the judge apply them to
the law, those conversations amongst colleagues were incredible
in my learning experience to understanding the importance of
diversity and viewing directly how diversity does actually
influence judicial outcomes.
In that way, it brought me much closer to wanting to learn
more about the bench and bring other students of color like
myself behind the curtain of the bench, where we often don't
immediately get access. I think that was an important lesson
for me, young in my career, and one that we try to replicate
for others here in the Western District.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you.
Mr. Warner, at the start of this year, President Biden's
White House Counsel wrote a letter to Senators explaining the
Administration's focus on nominating judges who, quote,
``reflect the best of America and who look like America,'' end
quote, including, quote, ``individuals whose legal experiences
have been historically underrepresented on the Federal bench,
including those who are public defenders, civil rights and
legal aid attorneys, and those who represent Americans in every
walk of life,'' end quote.
What impact has that letter had on promoting judicial
diversity?
I would like for Admiral Cruz and Ms. Diaz-Yaeger to also
respond. If you could do so very quickly.
Mr. Warner. Yes. In my opening comments, I did mention
that, at our Committee's first hearing, we read and referenced
White House Counsel Remus's letter at that time and spoke
directly to the Senators about it. The intent of doing that at
the opening meeting was to really coalesce our Committee
Members around the task that we had at hand, and that was, very
clearly, to look for diverse legal experience.
Public defenders, civil rights attorneys, and youth legal
aid attorneys ended up being in our group of applicants, and
that was a part of our recruiting efforts. Then, ultimately, as
you see in our nominees, we have those diverse legal
experiences represented, and hopefully we will see them on the
bench here soon.
Admiral Cruz. Yes, Mr. Chair, I will quickly respond. We at
NAPABA see diversity as a term and a concept, really broadly
defined--not just race and ethnicity but also gender, sexual
orientation, veteran status, disability, and, as Mr. Warner
just mentioned, professional diversity--law school diversity,
public defenders, legal aid attorneys, government, and
nongovernment attorneys as well.
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So, I would echo what Mr. Warner and Mr. Cruz said, but,
more importantly, these nominations show the community that the
widening of the net is occurring. That means that individuals
can come forward that are definitely qualified to be on the
bench. They are actually being invited and welcomed to the
table for consideration.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you.
I have exceeded my time.
Next, we will have questions from the gentleman from Ohio,
Mr. Chabot.
Mr. Chabot?
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I am a lawyer by training and spent nearly two decades
practicing law back here in my congressional district in the
greater Cincinnati area. Since getting elected to Congress, I
have served on this Committee now for 25 years. I have served
as the Chair for six years of the Constitution Subcommittee,
and my Ranking Member was none other than the current Chair,
Mr. Nadler, for six years.
In my career, I have come across a lot of judges in
courtrooms as well as in judicial hearings that we have had
over those decades, and I found the vast majority of the judges
that I have come into contact with well-qualified and able to
fairly adjudicate cases based on the Constitution, based on the
laws that we pass in Congress at the Federal level, and based
upon the laws that the various State legislatures pass at the
State level.
Today's hearing is the second part in a series of hearings
which seem to suggest that, for many of my Democratic
colleagues, that the most important determining factors in
judicial selection ought to be race or gender or both.
While it is important to have a diverse Federal judiciary,
I would argue that the most important factor is selecting and
confirming nominees--whether it is a candidate or whatever--
that they are qualified, highly qualified, and that they are
impartial in their legal decisions.
During his Administration, President Trump nominated dozens
of qualified and diverse judicial candidates who were, time and
again, opposed by virtually every Senate Democrat and likely
some here on our Committee, even though we don't actually get a
vote, not because they were unqualified, but that their legal
ideology did not align with the Democrats' political views.
Take, for example, Justice Amy Coney Barrett. She was rated
``well-qualified'' by the American Bar Association and, despite
her academic and professional achievements, received zero votes
from Democrats during her confirmation process.
Or take Judge Neomi Rao. She also received a ``well-
qualified'' rating from the ABA. Despite receiving similar
academic and professional accolades as Justice Barrett, she
also didn't receive a single vote from Senate Democrats. Today,
she is the first Asian-Pacific American woman to sit on the
D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals.
In March, we saw two of our Senate colleagues, Senators
Hirono and Duckworth, saying that they would oppose all
nonminority or non-LGBTQ appointees that Biden would appoint.
It goes on and on.
Many of my Democratic colleagues seem to want to make
everything about race, unfortunately. They get to control
everything, what these hearings are. They get to decide what we
talk about, et cetera. I would like to see maybe a hearing on
the lack of conservative political--or conservative professors
at the college level, perhaps, or on city councils across the
city. Very few conservatives there. Or among the media, for
example, reporters nowadays.
Let me ask a couple questions here.
Ms. Braceras, there are many examples, like Justice Amy
Coney Barrett and Neomi Rao and others, whom the Democrats have
time and again opposed, not because they are not qualified but
because they don't share the same political views. Could you
comment on that, Ms. Braceras?
Ms. Braceras. Sure. In fact, sometimes I think that
conservative minorities are the most discriminated group of
nominees, in fact, it is precisely because of their minority
status, their intersectional status, if you will, being both
conservative and minority, that the left deems them so
dangerous.
We saw this for a fact when Senator Durbin's memo was
leaked back in the early 2000s indicating that Miguel Estrada--
the Democrats viewed Miguel Estrada as being this precisely
because, quote, ``he is Latino,'' unquote.
So, I think that, when we talk about diversity,
representation is important, it is important on the Federal
bench, so that the American public has confidence that
everybody has access and that judges are impartial and that we
all have access to justice. When we talk about diversity, we
have to include all Members of racial and ethnic groups, not
just the ones who expound particular dogma.
You mentioned Judge Neomi Rao, another good example. We see
it time and time again, that judges who are originalists or
nominees who are originalists, who want to apply the law
neutrally, without an agenda, they are not accepted by the
Democrats, even though they represent diverse communities and
are oftentimes, as you noted, the first member of that
community to serve on a particular court.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much.
My time has expired, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you.
We will now turn to the Chair of the Full Committee, Mr.
Nadler
--who I do not see on the screen.
With that, we will now go to the gentleman from Florida,
Mr. Deutch, for five minutes.
Mr. Deutch. Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks for calling this
important hearing.
Judges on the bench, it is clear, should look like our
communities. They should reflect our communities. They
shouldn't all--as we have heard today, they shouldn't all be
from one or two law schools, shouldn't all be predominantly
White males or former prosecutors or from big law firms.
Diversity on the Federal judicial bench helps restore
legitimacy to the Federal Courts that hear and resolve issues
that impact everyday Americans.
So, in December of 2020, the incoming Biden Administration
expressed an intent to nominate people to the Federal bench who
reflect the best of America and look like America and expressed
a desire to appoint people to open Federal District Court
judicial seats that have been historically underrepresented on
the Federal bench, including public defenders, civil rights,
and legal aid attorneys, and those who represent Americans in
every walk of life.
To assist in outreach and evaluating nominees for the
Federal bench, my State of Florida has created three Federal
judicial nominating commissions--one for the north, central,
and southern part of the State--that are composed of appointees
with diverse legal, educational, ethnic, religious, and racial
backgrounds. The commissions reflect the diversity of
population that makes our State of Florida so unique.
I would like to ask Mr. Warner about this issue
specifically and procedures, processes that could be put in
place to help ensure a diverse pool of nominations and whether
your Committee addressed effective outreach to find qualified
people for judicial vacancies.
If you could speak to that, and then I have a follow-up for
you.
Mr. Warner. Thank you, Representative.
Yeah. This year, we actually changed the composition of the
Committee from 6-10 Members, and I think that expansion gave us
additional opportunities to find more professional diversity
and put that professional diversity onto the Committee.
I will also say that the discussion after the recruitment
process was made much richer by that diversity of legal
experience. We had folks on our Committee with Tribal law
expertise, which we had lacked previously. When vetting
judicial candidates, be it judicial judges on a Federal bench,
it is helpful to have folks in the room that do have that
Native law expertise to be those evaluators.
The diversity of the Committee also created efficiencies in
recruiting. When you want to reach out to minority bar
associations and you look around your Committee and you have
several former presidents and current Members on important
Committees within these affinity and minority bar associations,
you have created incredible efficiencies, because you can know
that your judicial vacancy announcement isn't just going to be
placed in the agenda; it will have someone show up to the
Committee that can speak directly to the Committee and talk to
its Membership about the importance that they have their
qualified Members apply.
So, I will wrap up by saying I do think we created some
real efficiencies and improved our Committee this year by
expanding the Membership.
Mr. Deutch. Thanks.
In the first hearing that the Subcommittee held on the
importance of diversity in the judicial system, we discussed
about the need to have a diverse judiciary and how critical
that is to maintaining public trust.
The public trust in the judiciary would also seem to extend
to how nominees with diverse backgrounds are treated during the
confirmation process. The Ranking Member on the Senate
Judiciary Committee has recently expressed a need to scrutinize
public defenders who are being nominated to the Federal bench
based on the perception that they could rule in a certain way.
So, Mr. Warner, let me just finish with you. Again, how
does extra scrutiny or the call for extra scrutiny of nominees,
particularly nominees who are not the traditional type of
nominees to the Federal bench, what does that do to impact the
public's perception of the bench?
Mr. Warner. Well, Representative, I think you hit the nail
on the head when you used the word ``traditional'' just now. I
think as we see more civil rights litigators, more civil legal
aid attorneys go through this process, you get that confidence
in representation that you have seen someone before you get
through the process. We can't promise that you are going to
make it all the way through, but the idea that you have seen
someone like you with your legal background go through it and
some will achieve, that confidence really does then engender
more applications from people who may choose that legal route.
The same is true for law students. There are law students
out there that may begin their careers as public defenders and
now immediately think they can no longer be a Federal judge. As
we progress in this task, I am hopeful that that perception
decreases, and we get more of those applicants.
Mr. Deutch. As am I, Mr. Warner.
Chair Johnson, thank you again for holding this hearing
today. I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you.
We will next proceed to the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Jordan, the Ranking Member of the Full Committee, for five
minutes.
Mr. Jordan? Your haircut makes you look a lot younger today
too.
Mr. Jordan. Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I don't know about
that. I am feeling pretty old here. Mr. Chair, thank you for
this hearing.
I am going to yield to the gentleman from California, Mr.
Issa.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Ranking Member Jordan.
Thank you, Chair, for holding this hearing. I think one of
the things that is coming out of this is, the very testimony
helps us frame questions I might otherwise not have asked.
I want to first ask Admiral Cruz, you mentioned that
likability was one of the characteristics that you thought
should not be used. Is that correct?
Admiral Cruz. Well, it is often--in many contexts, like in
law firms, likability does come up. I am not saying it can't be
used, but it certainly--
Mr. Issa. Would it surprise you that at the University of
California and other universities in California likability has
been deliberately put in to expand the diversity of the
candidates--in other words, to move them up, where they
otherwise would not be qualified based on their test scores and
grades?
Isn't likability, in your own words and observation, a
great way to end up not necessarily getting the best candidate,
unless likability is somehow essential? I certainly would say,
if I wanted a salesman, I probably would like likability. I
don't know that Admiral Halsey was famous for being
particularly likable, in my reading.
Admiral Cruz. Yeah, Ranking Member Issa, I was talking
about or referring to a particular context, just as you just
did. Certainly, in the context of law firm hierarchy and
fitting in, the more senior partners can often gravitate to
people who are more like them. That was the context in which
I--
Mr. Issa. Yeah. No. I appreciate it. I just wanted to make
sure we touched on that.
Ms. Braceras, I want to go back to something you said. You
gave us some startling statistics, basically looking at Members
of the bar of the three major identified minorities--African
American, Hispanic, and the like. Basically, they are each at
about five percent, while their population would be larger than
that, but certainly 13 and nine percent for African American
and Hispanic.
Would you say that, if we were to use the lower figure, we
would, by definition, have to reach to candidates, to the
detriment of candidates that might be more qualified based on
an analytical statement?
Ms. Braceras. Well, the number-one qualification for being
a Federal judge is that you have attended law school. So, if
you haven't attended law school, you are not going to be
picked. The problem is that, as Justice Marquez noted in her
testimony, we need to do a better job of making law school
accessible to diverse communities.
Now, particularly when you are talking about immigrant
communities or working-class communities or communities from
lower socioeconomic brackets, cost comes into play. You also
have, related to that, the fact that the salary of a Federal
judge is in no way reflective of what people can make in law
firms or in other aspects of the legal profession, even in some
public-interest areas of the legal profession.
So, what we have found, actually, in Massachusetts is that
it is very hard to recruit from candidates from diverse
backgrounds who are concerned about finances because they don't
want to leave lucrative professions to take a pay cut to join
the Federal bench.
So, even some diverse candidates that may be qualified
along every axis--judicial philosophy professional backgrounds,
all the above--may not be willing to leave their current
professions to take a job on the court.
So, it is not just that we have to increase the pipeline to
law school; it is that we have to make Federal judicial service
attractive to those who weren't born wealthy.
Mr. Issa. Yeah. Well, I will take some pride in the fact
that some years ago we de-linked Congress's $174,000 salary so
that judges have continued to rise while Members of Congress
have held their own salary in check.
One closing question. Does anyone dispute here that, at the
District Court level, at the end of the day, you have exactly
one judge judging your case, and, as a result, there is no
diversity at the table when you are before that one Federal
judge who runs his or her courtroom as he or she sees fit?
Ms. Braceras. Yes, that is correct. As Judge Myers so aptly
pointed out, judges wear Black robes, and they wear them for a
reason. They wear them to indicate that, regardless of their
race, sex, sexual orientation, class, whatever law school they
attended, whatever State they live in, when they put on that
robe, they are a judge, and diversity of opinion doesn't
matter. What matters is good judgment and impartiality and
application of the law. That is what the Black robe represents.
So, when a litigant comes before a judge, whether that
judge is male, female, Black, White, the litigant should be
confident that they are going to be treated fairly and that
they are going to get the same results based on the law. It
should not be that a litigant is nervous to find out, oh, they
drew Judge So-and-So because that judge has a particular
agenda--left, right, or otherwise. The judge only has one
agenda, and that is the law.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you.
We will now turn to the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Jeffries, for five minutes.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you so much, Chair Johnson, for
continuing to convene hearings on this incredibly important
subject.
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger, am I correct that approximately 30 percent
of the Federal judiciary constitutes judges who were nominated
by former President Trump?
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger. I don't have those exact numbers in front
of me. As the HNBA is nonpartisan, we applaud any diverse
individuals that are promoted by any party. We endorse
individuals based on their qualifications and not based on
their party affiliation.
Mr. Jeffries. Right. I didn't ask about the party, but
specifically just asking about the nominee, in terms of who
placed that nomination into motion.
In terms of his judicial appointments--and let me know if
you don't know this statistic--but approximately 90 percent of,
I believe, former President Trump's nominations were White. Is
that correct?
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger. I believe that percentage is actually
accurate.
Mr. Jeffries. Am I correct that approximately 75 percent of
former President Trump's nominations to the Federal bench were
male?
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger. I believe that is an accurate
representation as well.
Mr. Jeffries. It is my understanding that he nominated
approximately 54 Circuit Court judges who were confirmed and
that not a single one of the judges appointed during his
Presidency to the Circuit Court were African American. Is that
right?
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger. That is a correct percentage.
Mr. Jeffries. Am I correct that, of the 54 Circuit Court
judges appointed by--or nominated by President Trump and
ultimately confirmed, only one was a Hispanic American? Is that
right?
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger. I am not--I don't have that percentage in
front of me. I believe that is, in fact, accurate.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay.
So, I just think that, obviously, qualifications are
paramount in terms of one's capacity to be able to evaluate the
cases that come before an Article III Federal Court. I was
proud, myself, to have an opportunity to clerk for a Federal
District Court judge in the Southern District of New York, as
was the case, I believe, with many of my colleagues. It does
seem that, in addition to professional qualifications, which
certainly extend beyond the law school that one went to and/or
the professional experiences that one had beyond the so-called
White-shoe law firm or a Federal prosecutor's office, that this
is a country that was founded, anchored, in part, in the
principle of e pluribus unum--out of many, one.
So, the Federal bench should seemingly reflect the ``many''
the Framers of the Constitution thought was important to the
country in the broadest possible way--race, religion, gender,
sexual orientation, region, yes, ideology, and also life
experiences.
So, Mr. Warner, you testified that people spending a
majority of their career in private practice or as Federal
prosecutors compromise approximately 70 percent of active
Federal appeals court judges. Is that right?
Mr. Warner. That is right, Representative Jeffries.
Mr. Jeffries. How does this lack of professional diversity
impact the court and the justice that the American people can
expect to receive?
Mr. Warner. Well, I think the skill sets on any bench that
we look at should be considered as we make additional
appointments. As we look at any given bench, if the bench is
entirely full of former U.S. assistant attorneys and we have no
immigration law experts, no defenders, no Federal defenders,
and no others with divergent legal expertise, I think it is
fair for the public to worry that we may be missing other areas
of broad legal expertise that we need on our Federal benches.
So, I think it is within these Committees' purview to
really focus on recruiting those types of legal expertise that
might be missing on their particular bench to continue to
engender trust in the community.
Mr. Jeffries. Yeah. Thank you.
I think a Congress that is diverse, broadly speaking, is
consistent with what we are supposed to be, as the house
closest to the American people. You want to reflect that
diversity in every possible way. It seems to me that the
Article III Federal bench should reflect that broadest possible
diversity as well.
Thank you, Chair Johnson, for convening this hearing.
Thank you to all the Witnesses and the judges who serve
this country well.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, sir.
Next, we will go to my friend, the distinguished gentleman
from Texas, former judge, Judge Gohmert.
Five minutes, sir.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I appreciate
that.
I see that we still have Judge Myers. Is he open to being
questioned?
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Well, our first panelists are not
questioned today.
Mr. Gohmert. Ah. Okay.
Well, Judge Myers, thanks for your availability.
Ms. Braceras, we heard earlier about what it means to walk
into a court and identify by race with the judge, the people
involved in the court. My experience in Federal Court was a
great deal different. It depended on the client, and we were
much more concerned with the political leanings and the beliefs
of the judge as to how the client was going to be treated.
If you were going into court, would you be more concerned
that you were going before a very activist judge who is known
for legislating from the bench, who didn't care for your
political positions, or someone that actually, regardless of
race, creed, color, gender, or any of those things, actually
was open-minded that you could see from prior rulings? What
would your thought be as you go into that courtroom?
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Ms. Braceras, you may unmute.
Ms. Braceras. Yep. Got it. Sorry.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Okay.
Ms. Braceras. Thank you for your question.
My hope would be that whatever judge I was before,
regardless of who appointed that judge, regardless of that
judge's political views, and regardless of that judge's
personal background, would give my client a fair hearing. That
is the way the system is supposed to work, and, theoretically,
there should never be an issue.
My concern, in this day and age, would be more that the
judge was politically motivated or had a political bias. The
truth is, it doesn't really matter whether there is political
balance on our courts if judges are doing what they are
supposed to do, which is leaving that political and personal
bias at the door when they put on their robes and coming to the
bench as neutral arbiters of the law.
So, balance isn't really the issue when it comes to
politics. The issue is judicial philosophy. Only when we
appoint judges who understand that their role is not to solve
social problems but to resolve disputes pursuant to the law,
only then can we be sure that our clients are getting a fair
hearing.
Mr. Gohmert. Yeah. Well--and having heard Judge Clarence
Thomas, Justice Thomas, brought up earlier, I couldn't agree
with you more. I remember Miguel Estrada. They left that
incredible luminary out there just hanging, left his life in
limbo, month after month after month, and his treatment was so
outrageous. I am sure you recall Clarence Thomas stating that
he was the wrong Black man. His race really made him more
susceptible to being attacked.
I was glad to hear earlier the comment that we have too
many judges from Yale and Harvard. There are outstanding law
schools all over this country, some more so in certain fields
than others. I have been shocked at just how few Supreme Court
justices are considered that went to some other law school, no
matter how brilliant. I would love to see more diversity in
that area.
Would you comment about that?
Ms. Braceras. Sure. Well, as a graduate of Harvard Law
School, I can't say I think there are too many of us out there,
but I agree with your basic premise that elite educational
pedigree is not necessarily the best determinant of what would
make a good judge.
I was thrilled to see Justice Barrett bring that type of
diversity to the Court. Notre Dame is of course still a very
prestigious law school, but it is not up with the ranks of
Harvard or Yale in terms of the number of judges that we have
from those schools. So, I was pleased to see her bring that
diversity.
I think she is a perfect example of how, really, you can
find competent, brilliant judges from any law school in the
country. So, the test shouldn't necessarily be, did you go to
Harvard or Yale? The test should be, are you impartial? Do you
have the integrity? Do you have the professional experience
after graduating from law school? Frankly, do you have a sound
judicial philosophy that will tether your rulings to the text
of the Constitution and the text of the statutes passed by
Congress?
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you.
My time has expired. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you to the Witnesses.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, sir.
We will now hear from the distinguished gentleman from
Arizona, Mr. Stanton, for five minutes.
Mr. Stanton. All right. Thank you very much, Chair Johnson.
What an outstanding hearing thus far. Very educational,
informative, and will affect our public policy moving forward.
Thank you to the Witnesses for being here today.
In my home State of Arizona, we are lucky; we have 22
Federally recognized Native-American Tribes. We are so proud
that the first Native-American woman ever appointed to the
Federal judiciary, Judge Diane Humetewa, serves on the Federal
District Court here in Arizona.
That leads me to my first question. I am going to direct it
to Mr. Warner.
President Biden recently named Lauren King for a seat on
the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Washington.
If confirmed, Ms. King will become the third Native American
currently sitting on the Federal bench. In fact, Ms. King will
become only the fifth Native American ever to serve as a
Federal judge.
I am really interested in that commission that you
discussed earlier. I wanted to find out, as your commission
worked to recommend candidates for judgeships, how did you
account for such a historic lack of representation from the
Native-American community, and how did you focus on remedying
that issue?
Mr. Warner. Thank you, Representative Stanton. I will note
that Washington has 29 federally recognized Tribes, and still,
still, no Native-American Federal judge just yet.
So, how did the Committee approach that work? Well, we
first focused on, again, the professional experience that was
needed and lacking directly in our bench, to have someone with
real Native law expertise.
I will also say that there were only a few folks in the
pool of applicants with that expertise. That also spoke to us
in terms of our Committee needing to do a better job going
forward in reaching out to Native law experts to be clear with
them that our bench needs them, that the White House is
interested in their application, and that they have an
opportunity, should they apply to actually move through the
process. So, that is what we set out to do.
We looked in our applicant pool for folks with deep
experience of Native law. Of course, Lauren King rose quickly
to the top because of her professional background and
experience, which also lends to us possibly having the first
Native-American Article III Judge in Washington.
Mr. Stanton. That is great.
My home State of Arizona is part of the Ninth Circuit.
Currently, there is only one openly gay member of the bench in
the Ninth Circuit.
So, I want to hear from Admiral Cruz and Ms. Diaz-Yaeger on
this one.
Lack of diversity in the Federal judiciary hurts our
justice system. How do we go about making a plan to address
such vast disparities in making up our Federal bench?
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger. I am happy to address that first,
Congressman.
So how do we do that? What we do is we expand our networks.
We rely on affinity bar organizations, such as the HNBA. So, by
expanding that network, you also expand, inherently, the
pipeline. That pipeline then will help, as we move forward,
grow the number of diverse candidates that are considered and
go to the Committee, make it possibly through the Committee for
selection.
So, I think that you have to work on a level starting from
law school, letting them know this is a possibility, work on
their pipeline, make sure that the Committee Members work with
affinity bar organizations. Almost all the affinity bar
organizations have vigorous vetting requirements, and we have
boots on the ground. So, we know the individuals in that State,
we know the qualifications, and we are more than happy to
assist in providing qualified candidates to move forward.
Mr. Stanton. Admiral Cruz?
Admiral Cruz. Yeah, Congressman, I would add that, to fill
the pipeline that Ms. Diaz-Yaeger referred to all those
involved, all concerned involved in the identification, the
attraction, the vetting of judicial candidates, really need to
optimize their processes and intake, perhaps quite drastically.
I am glad that Mr. Warner has highlighted a model that has
worked in his venue. Bottom line, those involved need to go
wider, go deeper. They need to beat the bushes.
We at NAPABA are very active, capitalizing on our 90
affiliates to--and we are very active in certainly those areas
where there are vacancies. We are making sure that we address
the issues of oblivion around career possibilities, the lack of
mentors that I mentioned earlier, role models, and, frankly,
the lack of leadership development.
Mr. Stanton. All right.
My final question is, what can we as Members of Congress do
to support your efforts to identify and encourage diverse legal
professionals from our districts and communities to join the
judge candidate pool?
That is either for Mr. Warner, Admiral Cruz, or Ms. Diaz-
Yaeger.
Mr. Warner. Representative Stanton, I will start by saying,
I think appointing diverse commissions is really the key to
some of the success that we have had in the Western District of
Washington.
In my last answer about Lauren King, I should have
mentioned that one of the reasons we had the ability to
evaluate Tribal law expertise is because we had a Tribal law
expert, Rion Ramirez, who represents one of our local Tribes,
on the Committee. So, we had that level of expertise to truly
say this person or that person will have an ability to bring
value to the bench from a professional and diversity standpoint
that we need.
Admiral Cruz. If you had to add one more thing to a
wishlist, If you could influence folks in the other chamber,
the Senators, to broaden out their identification and search
process for candidates, utilizing the resources such as the
HNBA, such as NAPABA, such as the NBA and all the other
affinity bars, I think it would inure to the benefit of the
entire process.
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger. I would add to that that if the Members of
Congress actually expand their networks, expand the individuals
that they hire to work in their offices for those experiences,
then you are leading by example. By leading by example, you can
then encourage people within your networks to also do the same,
and that would also help increase the pipeline and the networks
and the mentoring.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you much.
I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you.
We will now turn to the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Johnson, a distinguished lawyer, for five minutes.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate that.
This is an important hearing. This Subcommittee, as you
noted earlier, is having its second hearing about the
importance of a diverse Federal judiciary.
As Ms. Braceras said so well a few months ago, the Black
robe of all judges holds important symbolism. Regardless of a
judge's immutable characteristics or philosophy, we all believe
and our system counts upon them to be fair and impartial and
objective.
The other symbol of our profession is Lady Justice, of
course. The symbol--she wears a blindfold to show the
importance of the application of law without corruption or
favor or greed or prejudice at all.
So, hopefully all of us would aspire to appoint judges to
the bench that--it doesn't really matter what their background
is, as long as they are fair and impartial in the application
of the law. That is the idea.
As we all know, sadly, a lot of is that being jeopardized
by politics today. That is the unfortunate situation we find
ourselves in, is that more and more of the American people are
losing faith in the institution of our system of justice. That
is of grave concern to all of us.
I was a Federal Court litigator for two decades prior to my
election to Congress. Some of my former colleagues at the bar
believe, as do many Americans, that leading Democrats on
Capitol Hill, for example--not all, but some--have used the
cause of diversity to politicize the judicial selection and
confirmation process.
I want to echo what has been touched upon previously here
today, that some Democrats have repeatedly opposed women and
minority nominees to the bench just because they were chosen by
Republican Presidents. It is a vicious and personal opposition
sometimes. We have mentioned today, Justice Clarence Thomas.
Ever since his nomination to the Supreme Court, he has been
unfairly targeted and maligned in so many ways.
Senate Democrats later filibustered President George W.
Bush's nomination of Miguel Estrada to the D.C. Circuit Court.
We have talked about that. Ms. Braceras mentioned today the
leaked memo by Senator Durbin, who stated that Mr. Estrada was,
quote, ``especially dangerous because he is Latino,'' unquote.
More recently, Democrats opposed President Trump's diverse
judicial nominees. Supreme Court Justice Amy Coney Barrett,
only the fifth woman to serve on the nation's highest court,
received exactly zero Democrat votes, as was mentioned today,
during her confirmation, even though she was rated ``well-
qualified'' by the ABA and has impeccable character and
credentials. During her earlier confirmation to the Seventh
Circuit, we all remember Senate Judiciary Committee Ranking
Member Dianne Feinstein outrageously maligned her Catholic
faith by pronouncing to Justice Barrett that ``the dogma lives
loudly within you.'' So much for the ban on a religious test.
I just have a couple moments. I want to ask Ms. Braceras,
what do you make about the Democrats' consistent opposition to
diverse nominees selected by Republican Presidents? You have
elaborated a little bit on that this morning, but I wondered if
there was anything more you wanted to add on that.
Ms. Braceras. Well, we can't both say that we want to
increase the diversity of the Federal bench, and then reject
nominees that would do that. If diversity truly is a paramount
concern, then we need to accept it in all its forms.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Can you think of any other recent
examples where some Democrats, let's say in the U.S. Senate,
resisted an unfairly maligned, a diverse judicial nominee that
President Trump nominated?
Ms. Braceras. Sure. Well, we talked about judge Neomi Rao a
few moments ago. She is one of the first ones that come to
mind, particularly because, like Miguel Estrada, her
qualifications were so impeccable. She would have brought--and
did bring--diversity to the court in which she was appointed
to. It was an historic nomination.
It is sad to me to see that people who purport to want to
diversify the Federal bench only want to do so when those
diverse nominees come from their party. It would be nice to see
them support them across the aisle.
Let me take a moment to say that I know that the Hispanic
National Bar Association has been particularly good. I am not
quite so sure about recent years, but I know that, overall,
their track record of supporting nominees across the aisle has
been pretty good, and I am proud of that.
That is not necessarily true for the politicians who are
voting on these nominees.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. I have only got 20 seconds left.
I will just say, I am going to state the obvious, that I think
all Members of this Committee should aspire to getting us back
to the point where we nominate people on their merit, and not
necessarily on all these other things, and their politics and
everything else.
I don't know how we put that genie back in the bottle, but
I hope one day we can so that we can restore the American
people's faith in our institutions.
I am out of time and I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. The gentleman yields back. We will
now hear from the extremely distinguished gentlewoman from
North Carolina, Representative Ross, for five minutes.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and it is North
Carolina Day in this Committee. Welcome, Judge Myers, it is
great to see you, and, of course, we have got somebody from
Duke who I will be asking a question of in a few minutes.
So, I practiced in North Carolina. Representative Bishop
and I talk about this quite a lot. We graduated in the same law
school class, and, so, you have got a Democrat and a Republican
from North Carolina sitting on this Judiciary Committee. I will
say President Biden just signed into law a bill that we got
through this Committee, so bipartisan work can be done.
I have seen how partisan these kinds of appointments can be
and, of course, Judge Myers knows about how long it took to
fill his particular position because of the differences between
an Administration and our Senators.
Before judge Myers was appointed, there were two African
American women who were rated as very well-qualified who simply
were rejected by our Senators, one of whom had been elected
statewide twice. So, we need to get past this partisanship, and
focus on qualifications while we focus on diversifying the
bench.
I have practiced in the corporate arena, and I have
practiced before administrative agencies, and I have been a
civil rights attorney. I can tell you that the more diverse the
perspectives and the backgrounds that we bring to any
collective body that is making a decision, the better decisions
we are going to get, because we cannot simply just have an echo
chamber of people who see things one way.
Our judiciary, as our legislature, and our Congress, need
to reflect the people they serve, and need to have the lived
experiences of the people that they serve. So, I appreciate all
these comments that we are getting here.
I will share one anecdote before I ask my questions. I was
the youngest woman in the North Carolina legislature when I
first got elected, and the Speaker asked me about appointing
people to some of these Committees, and I gave him a number of
names of highly qualified people. He said, ``Where have these
people been?'' I said to him, ``Mr. Speaker, where have you
been?'' That leads to this next question for Mr. Warner.
So, in North Carolina, when we have gone about appointing
judges, occasionally there will be these ad hoc commissions
where we will try to get different people's input, but there
isn't a more formal process like you have.
Could you tell us how we can replicate this around the
country and get more input from a variety of people, so that it
is not just left up to political whim.
Mr. Warner. Thank you for the question, Representative
Ross. I will start by saying that the Co-Chairs of the current
Committee would love to help and answer your questions, but I
am also sure that Senators Murray and Cantwell's offices would
also be happy to work with all of you to replicate the
processes that we have continued to iterate on in the Western
District of Washington.
I will say that it is really a conversation with the
Senators' offices to understand the needs of the Senators'
offices, along with the White House, every time that we have a
vacancy. Then we get together and look at our last Committee to
decide whether we need to add additional Members to really
reach out into our community to make sure that we are finding
those people that were already there.
We just need to look a little bit harder. So, happy to work
with you or your staff or make this connection.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much. Ms. Diaz-Yaeger, given that
many judges look to clerks to--well, we look to see if they
have had clerkships. How do we diversify those clerkships? How
do we get more people in that pipeline?
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger. Well, there are several methods to get
more people into that pipeline. The first method is to
encourage those judges to look outside their own networks and
to look at different schools and to consider different
individuals based on their experience, not just based on which
school they went to.
The other way is to actually work at the law school level
and let those individuals know that these opportunities do
exist for you, and how to set your trajectory to actually be
able to be considered for a clerkship. Many of them, because
they don't have the network, they don't know the connections,
they don't have family members that are lawyers or judges, they
don't understand the process. They don't know that it is
actually something that can happen to them.
If you ask all the women in law school, and you ask
somebody about the clerkships, their usual response is going to
be something along the lines of, it is who you know. So, we
need to broaden that scope more.
So, it is kind of a dual-prong approach. You are looking at
the law schools, making sure they understand this is how you do
it, it is available to you; and then asking the judges to
broaden their scope, broaden their network as to who they would
consider.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr. Chair. My
time is expired.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you. We will now proceed to
the distinguished businessman from Wisconsin, Mr. Tiffany, just
as Mr. Issa is a distinguished businessman. Mr. Tiffany?
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Chair, you are pouring it on this morning.
Thank you very much.
First, I just want to say in regard to Judge Myers, thank
you so much for being here today, and I would like to know who
the 21 people are that voted against you, because if we are
seeking a diverse judiciary, they clearly cast the wrong vote.
Admiral Cruz, over the last 30 years, have we made
progress?
Admiral Cruz. In judiciary?
Mr. Tiffany. Yes.
Admiral Cruz. Yes. Obviously, I think we have. I don't have
the statistics in front of me, but certainly in answer to--
Mr. Tiffany. No, I appreciate that, Admiral Cruz, thank
you, because I think we have, too. You especially focused on
AAPI judges, and Senator Whitehouse, a Democrat from Rhode
Island, called her a cartoon of a fake judge. Do you think that
is an accurate statement? Do you think it is an appropriate
statement?
Admiral Cruz. It is not a statement I would use.
Mr. Tiffany. Yeah. Thank you very much, Admiral, I
appreciate that. I would also point out that Ivy League schools
are currently discriminating against Asian-American students,
just for the record.
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger, in regard to Miguel Estrada--I want to
make sure I say this correctly--Democrat leadership back when
he was being considered in the early 2000s, they said he was
especially dangerous because he is Latino. I find that
statement reprehensible. Do you?
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger. I am not familiar with the statements that
were made. I don't believe that statements that deal with
personal traits are ever appropriate.
Mr. Tiffany. Yeah. Thank you very much. Democrat
[inaudible] that statement, and I would encourage you to take a
look at that quote that was found. I believe it is awful.
Ms. Braceras, have we made progress?
Ms. Braceras. A hundred percent, we have. In fact, as the
numbers that I submitted in my testimony suggest, minority
groups are overrepresented in the judiciary compared to their
population in the [inaudible]. So, we have done a great job at
recruiting people to the bench and getting minority candidates
on the bench.
It is an important thing to do. We need to continue to do
it, but the most important thing we need to do is to increase
the pipeline and the pathway to law school.
Mr. Tiffany. You think we are headed in the right
direction, and we are making progress as we speak. Is that
correct?
Ms. Braceras. We have made progress, and we continue to
make progress.
Mr. Tiffany. Yeah, that sounds great. I really think, Mr.
Chair, I get two things from this hearing. So, we hear the
concern about diversity, but two things are coming out of this.
We are making real progress.
I listen to the gentleman from Washington who has very
eloquently stated how they are making real progress. They are
fixing what he believes is a problem out there in terms of
recruitment, and what we are hearing today is that real
progress is being made, and it was as a result of a Democrat
United States Senator who did not have it right, that he has
been able to convince her that she needs to take a different
approach to getting diversity to the bench. So, I just think
that there is real progress being made in that way.
I think the second thing that has come out of this is, as
Judge McShane said, there is a problem with where they come
from, and no offense, I hope, delivered, Ms. Braceras, but it
sounds like we need to get outside of the Ivy League schools
here as far as where we are getting recruits. So, what I am
hearing is, we are making real progress.
It does deeply concern me, if this is an effort to do the
same thing as this Democrat-run Congress did with the farmer
and restaurant program, where we now have a Federal government
that is actively discriminating against certain members of
society, this is going to end really badly.
Because I think about that shield that is in our room, in
the Judiciary Room, that says E Pluribus Unum, and
Representative Jeffries referred to that earlier. Out of many,
one.
We are seeing active discrimination that is going on by
this Congress of the United States, and that is not a good
direction to be going in. So, if diversity is a code for
judicial activism, this is going to end badly for all
Americans.
It is going to end badly for all Americans, because I think
all Americans, regardless of race, creed, or color, what they
expect when they come into the courtroom, is, they want to have
justice. This is one of the fundamental pillars of a free
society, that all men are going to be created equal before the
law. Let's make sure that is happening through this process.
I yield back, and thank you very much for the compliment,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, and I might add that we
have tried hard to steer away from politics in this hearing.
Diversity on the bench is certainly an attribute that is
valuable. It is not to be disparaged. We can have different
views about it, and certainly, some who may tend towards
originalism believe that White males interpreting the
Constitution through the eyes of a White male who existed back
when the Constitution was written, suffices for today's
realities, but it is scary to people who go to court and all
they see is White males on the bench.
Mr. Warner, since you were referred to--
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Johnson, if I may interrupt for just a
second. I hope you will allow Judge Myers to make a comment in
regard to your statement. I yield back. I will be done now.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Yeah. Well, I am going to yield to
Mr. Warner who was referred to, for his response, if he should
have one.
Mr. Warner. Thank you, Representative Johnson. Yes, I would
like to be clear that Senator Murray needed no convincing in
reconstituting our Committee to broaden the diversity of the
group. In fact, I was a bit hesitant to extend our group all
the way to ten members from an administrative perspective,
because that was my role.
I will tell you that I was wrong in that we really did
create efficiencies with a larger ten-person committee, again
because that committee truly knew the community and the folks
that were hiding in plain sight with the expertise that we
needed, had connections to the membership, and in that way, we
are even more efficient than we have been in the past.
I will also say that today, yes, I believe that we have
made great progress, but it is still the case in the Western
District of Washington that we have never had a Native American
or Asian-American judge, and that is not progress enough, and
so we have much more work to do. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you.
I will now proceed to the gentle lady, distinguished gentle
lady and former lieutenant governor of the State of Minnesota
and a lawyer, Representative Fischbach, for five minutes.
Mrs. Fischbach. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and I
appreciate the opportunity, and I want to thank all the
testifiers for being with us today because I really appreciate
just the perspective and the information.
I do understand that one of my colleagues has a few more
questions that he would like to follow up on, and I would like
to yield my time to the good Congressman Issa.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentlelady. There is no limit to the
amount of good questions that come out of a hearing like this,
and I thank you for yielding.
It is interesting, I have put about eight Members of my
staff over 20 years through law school, and as I have watched
them each go to law school, and then take the bar, I have been
struck by the fact that law school doesn't teach what you need
to know to pass the bar, and neither of them seems to teach
what you need to know to be a practicing attorney.
So, I am going to ask--and I will start with Ms. Braceras,
but I think each of you could answer this: If we assume that as
one of my favorite but unheard of songwriters wrote, Gary Hall,
who wrote, ``Any little boy can be the President if he was born
in the U.S.A., any little girl can, too.''
The fact is, we know that to be President, you have got to
be 35 and naturally born. Let me just quickly, if you are 25
years old and graduated from law school, what is it you do not
have that you need to acquire to be a Federal judge? I would
like all of you to answer it in writing, but maybe we will
start with just one oral answer.
Ms. Braceras. Well, I would say experience, maturity, and
judgment. The most important quality of being a judge is good
judgment, and that is something that it sometimes takes people
several years of practice to acquire.
Mr. Issa. So, although we don't have a strict age, we
generally take someone in their 40s or 50s to be Federal
judges, so they kind of get the age and some experience.
I am going to follow up, since you are a Harvard alum, none
of the attributes you mentioned actually have anything to do
with, if you will, the quality of the law school you went to or
the prestige, correct?
Ms. Braceras. That is absolutely correct.
Mr. Issa. Just to follow up, because I haven't practiced
before the Federal bar, when you are before a Federal judge,
you have got a pretty diverse group of cases. You have got
patent, antitrust, a host of criminal cases, obviously
immigration at times. Is there any one person, any one lawyer
you ever found who came to the bench with the ability and
experience in all those areas?
Ms. Braceras. No, of course not. In fact, I will refer to
my own father, who is a judge on the Second Circuit Court of
Appeals, Judge Jose Cabranes. He was appointed to the bench by
President Carter at the age of 38, the first Puerto Rican
appointed in the continental United States. Many people thought
he didn't have the experience at the time. He had been a
litigator for only a few years, and then was coming to the
bench from being general counsel of Yale University. People
thought he didn't have enough courtroom experience. He had
never tried a case to completion, although he had argued many
motions.
I would argue, and I hope most of you would agree that he
has turned out to be a fantastic judge, a judge that is
respected on both sides of the aisle. So, you don't have to
have experience in every area of the law to be a District Court
judge. Most of judging you will learn on the bench.
Judges go to judge school once they are first appointed,
and they learn from their colleagues, and they learn from
experience. So, what is really most important is not experience
in terms of, have you tried cases in every single area of the
law that you might face.
The question is, do you have maturity of judgment? Do you
have a sound judicial philosophy? Do you have integrity? Do you
have the legal skills to learn on the job and to make decisions
quickly and decisively and impartially?
Mr. Issa. Now, I am going to presume, that if you have read
Alan Dershowitz' book about early in the 20th century when
there was a proposal to reduce the number of Jewish people
attending Harvard, I would assume that you would object to us
limiting the number of Harvard nominees in the future.
Ms. Braceras. Well, I don't think there should be any
arbitrary limits. Our Constitution anticipates that this is a
political process. The Constitution left it to the President to
make the appointments and the Senate to confirm, and the
Senators have a role to play in terms of selecting nominees to
the District Court, and sometimes the Court of Appeals as well.
That is all appropriate and consistent with our Constitution.
I don't think there should be any arbitrary rules about who
they should pick or what their background should be.
Mr. Issa. Well, thank you. Mr. Chair, at this time, I think
it is appropriate to ask that the article from the Pew Research
Foundation be placed in the record because it, quite frankly,
shows that Jimmy Carter had more appointments than Donald
Trump, and as was just noted, some of them are still on the
bench.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I think his were a little more
diverse as well, President Carter. So, noted, and without
objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

MR. ISSA FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Next, we will hear from the
gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Fitzgerald, distinguished
newspaper publisher, for five minutes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Mr. Chair, appreciate it.
I just wanted to back up a little bit, and if we could,
address what some of the Members had touched on, and that was a
profile that is being developed by specific courts in a
predisposition on how they take cases, receive cases, who
presents in front of them, which attorneys are either shopping
venue or looking for a specific judge and--because my
experience has been if you want an attorney that practices in a
specific court, with specific attorneys, you go to one district
or another.
It is a predisposition that you would actually make the
determination to which you are hoping for the best outcome.
Then, let's talk about the circuits. When you are in front
of a three-judge panel and you know that, well, we are in
pretty good shape going into this case--as I have had many
discussions with attorneys that have represented the State
legislature over the years--isn't that as big an issue as
anything that we have discussed here this morning? I was
wondering if Ms. Braceras could address that first.
Ms. Braceras. Yes, I agree. Forum shopping is a problem. It
shouldn't be that way. Theoretically, you should get the same
justice in the Eastern District of Texas that you would get in
the Southern District of New York. That is absolutely what we
should aspire to. I am not sure how you fix that, but I agree
with the premise of your question.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Mr. Warner, do you have comment on that
aspect of what we have been discussing here today?
Mr. Warner. I am here to focus on the Western District
Bench and our appointment process, but I will try to answer in
saying that forum shopping happens for many different reasons.
I don't think it is necessarily tied to the diversity that
we are talking about today, but one aspect that could be
included there is, do benches, across the Federal bench in
particular, have the legal expertise that is necessary to
address the broad issues before the court. So, to the extent
that diversity of legal expertise plays a role in forum
shopping, then I guess yes, I agree that diversity of legal
experiences is important.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good.
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger, do you have a comment on that topic?
Ms. Diaz-Yaeger. Well, I agree with what Mr. Warner said.
Forum shopping does, in fact, happen. It happens for a plethora
of reasons. Perhaps diversity of experience, diversity of
knowledge with regard to the area of expertise, may actually
play into part of that.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Yeah. So, Mr. Chair, my question and what I
have been pondering as we have been listening to the input
today is, how does this happen? Where are these judges coming
from? Why is there this predisposition, whether it is in the
Western or Eastern District of one of the States or if you end
up in the Seventh Circuit in Chicago, whatever it may be, that
suddenly it is about the makeup of the judges and their views,
which many attorneys are well aware of before they even enter
the courthouse.
So, I think that is something to be pondered as much as any
other question about race and equity that we have heard today,
so.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you.
We will now go to the--let's see--the gentleman from
Oregon, Mr. Bentz. Mr. Bentz, you may proceed.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I would like to begin
by giving a shout-out to Justice McShane who graduated from
Lewis & Clark Law School as I did, and I am sure he is doing
absolutely wonderfully in whatever the competition structure is
between my law school and Harvard, but I am, yeah, a shout-out.
I would like to ask him a question, but of course we are not
asking that panel questions, so let me ask this question of Ms.
Braceras.
It happened that I was asked by my predecessor to serve on
the review panel for possible appointees to the Ninth Circuit
and to the Oregon District Court, and not that long ago, three
or four years. There were seven of us, and it was highly
political, and we had initially 21 applicants, I believe, and I
said, ``that is too few.'' So, we reopened the application
process. We ended up with 45, I believe.
We were looking for both recommendations to the Ninth
Circuit and to the U.S. District Court out of that pool. There
then ensued a review of 40--whatever it was--44 big, huge piles
of documents that reflected these people's absolutely wonderful
backgrounds. I could not believe how qualified those people
were.
Then we reduced it down to 14, and then we interviewed
those people for two days; seven one day and seven the next.
Incredibly incredible people, every one of them. My question is
this:
Before we went to those interviews, all we had was paper,
and I didn't feel inclined to Google anybody or anything else,
and I don't recall any indication in the application forms of
what race or what gender or what minority or anything of that
nature. In other words, my review was without that input.
My question to you would be, was that the right way to do
it, or should we have been told--should there have been a forum
calling out the minority status of these applicants?
Ms. Braceras. I actually think that is highly unusual. I
served on a search Committee for a magistrate judge, and my
husband actually serves on the Judicial Nominating Commission
for our State. I have had some informal experience also
advising people in White House's Counsel's Office about
potential nominees.
It has always been, from my understanding, a transparent
process in terms of people having opportunity to identify their
background. I have never seen a process actually or heard of a
process that didn't ask them to identify their backgrounds.
That doesn't mean that is not an acceptable way to do it.
I do think the point you made initially about expanding
your search is an important one, because you said that you
started off with a certain number of candidates and you asked
for more. I think a lot of--when we talk about increasing
diversity on the Federal Bench, recruitment is a big part of
that, encouraging people to apply, reaching out to the affinity
bars that we have talked about, and getting the word out that
these are opportunities that are available, that people should
throw their hat in the ring.
So, I think the main way to get diversity, in addition to
increasing the pathway to law school and the number of law
school graduates who are people of color, would be in terms of
recruiting and getting people to throw their hats in the ring.
That is where we can make the biggest difference, I believe.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you for that. In the minute I have left, I
will ask this question to Mr. Warner. It seems almost as if--
and I think a number of previous folks have bumped into this--
that we are condemning, if you will, the current folks on the
bench by saying that they are inadequate in that they are, as a
group, not adequately representative of different portions of
our population.
If that appears to be--and this is not to say that I in any
way support not having minorities. I am totally supportive of
having a balanced bench as long as we don't give away, as Mr.
Johnson mentioned, the primary focus on the merits.
My question to you is: How would you measure that
inadequacy now? I know we heard at the District Court level
when someone, a minority, comes before a nonminority judge,
there is a problem. What other problems come up, let's say at
the appellate level, by virtue of this inadequate
representation of minorities?
Mr. Warner. Thank you, Representative Bentz. First, I
wouldn't say that we are at an inadequate place with our
current Western District Bench. In fact, we are very proud of
the diversity on our Western District Bench that is currently
there, but the reality is that we have several judges retiring
or going into senior status, and, so, we have five vacancies,
and those five vacancies are coming up now in a context where
we have more diversity within our legal community than we did
15 years ago, and the judiciary should continue to reflect the
changing landscape of our local community. So, we were
intentional about doing so in this process.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, and Representative
Bentz, I neglected to point out the fact that you, yourself,
have served admirably as an attorney partner in a law firm for
decades, and a farmer. So, thank you for your service.
I believe that we have exhausted the number of
Representatives who are available for questions, and so we are
at the conclusion of today's hearing. So, I want to thank all
of the panelists for appearing and for their testimony.
Without objection, all Members will have five legislative
days to submit additional written questions for the Witnesses
or additional materials for the record. With that, our hearing
is adjourned.
By the way, I like the bolo tie, Representative Issa.
Mr. Issa. Well, thank you. Being in the West, it seemed
appropriate to wear today in San Diego. So, in the land of
Ronald Reagan, an open shirt would be inappropriate but not
this tie.
So, thank you again for holding this hearing. I think we
all benefited. I would like to remind all the Witnesses that I
did ask for an in-writing list of those characteristics they
think are most important in the way of skill sets before coming
to the bench.
Because I think that the diversity of their answers could
well help both you and me.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, and I want to thank
the--especially thank the Members of the first panel who had
the staying power to stay throughout the second panel. So once
again, thank you for all of the panelists and everyone have a
great day. This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:37 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
