- THE TEXAS ABORTION BAN AND ITS DEVASTATING IMPACT ON COMMUNITIES AND FAMILIES

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE TEXAS ABORTION BAN AND ITS
DEVASTATING IMPACT ON COMMUNITIES AND FAMILIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 2021
__________

Serial No. 117-45
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

48-243                    WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JERROLD NADLER, New York, Chair
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania, Vice-Chair

ZOE LOFGREN, California              JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Ranking Member
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas            STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,      DARRELL ISSA, California
Georgia                          KEN BUCK, Colorado
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          MATT GAETZ, Florida
KAREN BASS, California               MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York         ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island     TOM McCLINTOCK, California
ERIC SWALWELL, California            W. GREG STEUBE, Florida
TED LIEU, California                 TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington          CHIP ROY, Texas
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida          DAN BISHOP, North Carolina
J. LUIS CORREA, California           MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
SYLVIA R. GARCIA, Texas              SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 BURGESS OWENS, Utah
GREG STANTON, Arizona
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
MONDAIRE JONES, New York
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
CORI BUSH, Missouri

PERRY APELBAUM, Majority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
CHRISTOPHER HIXON, Minority Staff Director
------

C O N T E N T S

Thursday, November 4, 2021

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Chair of the Committee on the
Judiciary from the State of New York...........................     2
The Honorable Jim Jordan, Ranking Member of the Committee on the
Judiciary from the State of Ohio...............................     4

WITNESSES

Dr. Ghazaleh Moayedi, OB/GYN; Board Member, Physicians for
Reproductive Health; Board Member, Texas Equal Access Fund
Oral Testimony.................................................     7
Prepared Testimony.............................................     9
Dr. Khiara Bridges, Professor of Law, University of California,
Berkeley School of Law
Oral Testimony.................................................    12
Prepared Testimony.............................................    14
Ms. Catherine Glenn Foster, President & CEO, Americans United for
Life
Oral Testimony.................................................    26
Prepared Testimony.............................................    28
Ms. Stephanie Loraine Pineiro, Co-Executive Director, Florida
Access Network
Oral Testimony.................................................    40
Prepared Testimony.............................................    43

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Materials submitted by the Honorable Andy Biggs, a Member of the
Committee on the Judiciary from the State of Arizona, for the
record
An article entitled, ``Margaret Sanger founded Planned
Parenthood on racism,'' The Washington Times.................    68
An article entitled, ``Margaret Sanger's racist legacy lives on
at Planned Parenthood,'' Washington Examiner.................    71
An article entitled, ``Remove statues of Margaret Sanger,
Planned Parenthood founder tied to eugenics and racism,'' USA
Today........................................................    74
An article entitled, ``Americans Still Oppose Overturning Roe v.
Wade,'' Gallup, submitted by the Honorable Sylvia Garcia, a
Member of the Committee on the Judiciary from the State of
Texas, for the record..........................................    92
Materials submitted by the Honorable Burgess Owens, a Member of
the Committee on the Judiciary from the State of Utah, for the
record
An amici curiae for United States of America v. State of Texas,
et al........................................................   102
An article entitled, ``OPINION: Planned Parenthood Is The
Greatest Threat To Black Lives In America,'' Daily Wire......   130
A statement from the Texas House Women's Health Caucus, submitted
by the Honorable Veronica Escobar, a Member of the Committee on
the Judiciary from the State of Texas, for the record..........   144
Materials submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Member
of the Committee on the Judiciary from the State of Texas, for
the record
An article entitled, ``These Texas women got abortions from a
California doctor after the state's ban. Here are their
stories,'' San Francisco Chronicle...........................   162
An article entitled, ``Texas' Abortion Law Could Worsen the
State's Maternal Mortality Rate,'' Time......................   172
An article entitled, ``Texas abortion: Doctor sued in first
known challenges of new law,'' BBC News......................   179
An article entitled, `` `My body is not their property': Texas
woman's journey across state lines for an abortion,'' ABC
News.........................................................   182
An article entitled, ``Opinion | Why I violated Texas's extreme
abortion ban,'' Washington Post..............................   192

APPENDIX

Materials submitted by the Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Chair of the
Committee on the Judiciary, for the record
A report entitled, ``ADVANCING BIRTH JUSTICE: Community-Based
Doula Models as a Standard of Care for Ending Racial
Disparities,'' Ancient Song Doula Services, Village Birth
International, Every Mother Counts...........................   200
An article entitled, ``Racial Disparities in Maternal
Mortality,'' New York University Law Review..................   233
An article entitled, ``How False Narratives of Margaret Sanger
Are Being Used to Shame Black Women,'' Rewire News Group.....   323
A letter submitted by the National Asian Pacific American
Women's Forum................................................   335
A statement submitted by NARAL Pro-Choice America..............   337
A statement submitted by Planned Parenthood Federation of
America and Planned Parenthood Action Fund...................   341
A statement submitted by the Center for Reproductive Rights....   346
An excerpt from the statement of the Honorable Virginia Foxx, a
Member of Congress from the State of North Carolina, House
Committee on Oversight and Reform hearing, submitted by the
Honorable Andy Biggs, a Member of the Committee on the
Judiciary from the State of Arizona, for the record............   358
A report entitled, ``The Judicial Waiver Process in Florida
Courts,'' If/When/How: Lawyering for Reproductive Justice,
submitted by Ms. Stephanie Loraine Pineiro, Co-Executive
Director, Florida Access Network, for the record...............   362

THE TEXAS ABORTION BAN AND ITS
DEVASTATING IMPACT ON COMMUNITIES AND FAMILIES

----------

Thursday, November 4, 2021

House of Representatives

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 12:09 p.m., in Room
2141, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jerrold Nadler [Chair
of the Committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Nadler, Jackson Lee,
Johnson of Georgia, Bass, Jeffries, Cicilline, Raskin, Jayapal,
Demings, Scanlon, Garcia, McBath, Stanton, Dean, Escobar, Ross,
Bush, Jordan, Chabot, Gohmert, Issa, Buck, Johnson of
Louisiana, Biggs, McClintock, Tiffany, Massie, Roy, Bishop,
Fischbach, Spartz, Bentz, and Owens.
Staff present: Perry Apelbaum, Staff Director and Chief
Counsel; Aaron Hiller, Deputy Chief Counsel; David Greengrass,
Senior Counsel; John Doty, Senior Advisor; Moh Sharma, Director
of Member Services and Outreach & Policy Advisor; Jordan
Dashow, Professional Staff Member; Cierra Fontenot, Chief
Clerk; John Williams, Parliamentarian and Senior Counsel;
Merrick Nelson, Digital Director; Kayla Hamedi, Deputy
Communications Director; James Park, Chief Counsel for
Constitution; Will Emmons, Professional Staff Member/
Legislative Aide for Constitution; Matt Morgan, Counsel for
Constitution; Ella Yates, Minority Member Services Director;
Betsy Ferguson, Minority Senior Counsel; Caroline Nabity,
Minority Counsel; Elliott Walden, Minority Counsel; Andrea
Woodard, Minority Professional Staff Member; and Kiley
Bidelman, Minority Clerk.
Chair Nadler. The House Committee on the Judiciary will
come to order. Without objection, the Chair is authorized to
declare recesses of the Committee at any time.
Before we begin, I want to thank the Members and the
Witnesses for their patience in delaying the start of the
hearing. We welcome everyone to this morning's hearing on the
Texas abortion ban and its devastating impact on communities
and families.
Before we begin, I would like to remind Members that we
have established an email address and distribution list
dedicated to circulating exhibits, motions, or other written
materials that Members might want to offer as part of our
hearing today. If you would like to submit materials, please
send them to the email address that has been previously
distributed to your offices and we will circulate the materials
to Members and staff as quickly as possible.
I would also remind Members that guidance from the Office
of Attending Physicians states that face coverings are required
in all meetings and in closed spaces such as the Committee
hearing except when you are recognized to speak.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Sixty-five days, that is how long women in Texas have been
effectively stripped of their constitutional right to abortion.
Earlier this year, Texas enacted Senate Bill 8, or SB 8 which
bans abortions after six weeks of pregnancy before many people
even know they are pregnant, thereby effectively blocking
abortion access in the State entirely.
Although the law is clearly unconstitutional, its unique
structure which relies solely on a private enforcement or
really bounty system, has thus far allowed it to evade judicial
review on the merits. SB 8 offers up a bounty, a minimum of
$10,000 in legal fees to those who successfully bring a suit
under the law's private cause of action provision. This
provision permits any individual, not only abortion providers,
but anyone who ``aids or abets a violation of the abortion
ban,'' a term so broad it would encompass practically any
action from driving a patient to a clinic to merely offering
personal advice.
This law created a perfect storm in Texas, which already
has some of the most restricted abortion laws in the country
because of the way it was written and because of its
enforcement method. The Supreme Court had two opportunities to
stop the law from taking effect during pending legal challenges
and twice it failed to do so. As a result, communities and
families in Texas have been devastated and the ban has had
ripple effects to the State, around the region, and the
country.
There is no question that SB 8 is blatantly
unconstitutional, and that the Texas legislature intentionally
ignore decades of legal precedent in enacting the law. To
anyone who has been paying attention, this law did not appear
out of nowhere. Rather, it is the result of a decade's long
well-funded campaign by anti-abortion activists who steadily
chip away at the right to abortion. These efforts have
culminated in SB 8 and they have had one goal, to challenge and
eventually to overturn the constitutionally-protected right to
abortion.
Nearly 50 years ago, the Supreme Court recognized that
right in Roe v. Wade. The Supreme Court has repeatedly upheld
this critical constitutional right against legal challenge.
Generations of Americans have come to rely upon the right to
abortion to make the deeply personal decision about whether or
when to have children. As the Supreme Court observed nearly 30
years ago when it reaffirmed the right to abortion in Planned
Parenthood v. Casey, the ability of women to participate
equally in the economic and social life of the nation has been
facilitated by their ability to control their reproductive
lives.
Access to safe, legal, and affordable abortion allows
people to make choices about their own lives, when to start a
new job, when to go back to school, and eventually when to
start or grow a family. When the States chip away at, in the
case of Texas newly banned abortion access, they are not just
controlling women's bodies, they are controlling their lives.
That, in fact, falls most directly on communities of color,
low-income women, and vulnerable populations.
This hearing occurs just days after the Supreme Court heard
oral arguments in Whole Woman's Health v. Jackson and the
United States v. Texas. Legal challenges to SB 8 were brought
up by abortion care providers and the Department of Justice,
respectively.
At the heart of these cases is the question of whether a
State can effectively nullify the Constitution within its
borders. SB 8 is designed to thwart a court's authority to
review and potentially block a State law that prohibits the
exercise of a constitutional right before it takes effect by
delegating to private parties the authority to enforce the law.
SB 8's bounty system, which is just as troubling as the six-
week ban is meant to enforce, is a deliberate and disturbing
effort by the Texas legislature to evade judicial scrutiny long
enough for a clearly unconstitutional law to take effect. It
worked.
SB 8's bounty system should be concerning to anyone who
holds dear their constitutional rights. As Justice Kavanaugh,
likely no fan of abortion rights, suggested during oral
arguments on Monday, SB 8 could set a troubling precedent and a
model for States to undermine not only abortion rights, but any
constitutional right that a State legislature may disfavor,
whether it be the right to free speech, the right to religious
liberty, or the right to bear arms.
In addition, this perverse bounty system is designed to
have a chilling effect on the ability of people to access
abortion. Pregnant people in Texas may now be reluctant to
confide in one's trusted neighbors, coworkers, or friends, or
to seek help from organizations and advocates if they have
questions. Providers have expressed confusion and concern about
how to advise their patients and where to seek care for
pregnancy complications.
The system was built to create fear, anxiety, and isolation
for women and for providers in the State and in many ways, it
has succeeded. SB 8 has not diminished the need for abortion in
Texas or anywhere else in the country. People in Texas or
particularly those in communities of color and low-income
communities already face immense hurdles in accessing abortion.
In the last 20 years, Texas has passed some of the most
extreme anti-abortion laws in the country. Even before SB 8,
women were required to make multiple appointments, receive
medically unnecessary sonograms, and listen to false and
misleading anti-abortion propaganda. Because Texas bars any
insurance, public or private, from covering abortion care,
women must pay for this entire process out of their pocket
which can cost anywhere from $300-$1200.
All of this assumes that they can even reach an abortion
provider for more than 900,000 Texans of reproductive age live
more than 150 miles from an abortion provider.
None of these rules and restrictions are science based or
medically necessary. They are designed to stop women from
accessing abortion and to control women's lives, plain and
simple. Texas is not alone in enacting these restrictions.
States around the country have passed similar laws and many now
stand poised to pass copycat SB 8 laws as well.
These restrictions and laws make abortion almost completely
inaccessible. They hit communities of color and low-income
families the hardest. People who work hourly jobs, already have
children, or lives miles away from an abortion provider face
impossible decisions and often insurmountable obstacles in
finding the time, money, and support to access care.
These steps and decisions take time, pushing people later
into their pregnancy and making care more difficult to access
and more expensive.
SB 8 has only exacerbated this situation. The need for
abortion does not disappear in Texas under SB 8, even as the
number of abortions provided in Texas has dropped by an
estimated 50 percent. People are now seeking care out of State,
traveling more miles, taking more days off of work, and
spending much more money, all of this to get the care that they
need, the care that they have a constitutional right to access,
the care that is integral to their dignity and their
fundamental freedom to live their lives on their own terms
because ultimately the conversation about SB 8 and abortion
rights is not a theoretical one.
As we will hear today, SB 8 and similar abortion
restrictions are impacting real women and real families every
day. I will stand with these women and with their providers. I
will not stop fighting to protect the right to abortion and the
right of every American to live their lives with dignity.
I thank our Witnesses for being here. I look forward to
their testimony.
I now recognize the Ranking Member of the Judiciary
Committee, the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Jordan, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, life is
precious. Every single life is precious and worthy of
protection and that fundamental principle is what the Texas law
is about. It is what the pro-life movement is about. That is
not what Democrats are about in Congress. Democrats are now
trying to abandon the Hyde Amendment, language that has been in
our law, been in any appropriation measure for the last 45
years which says that Federal tax money, the American people's
tax money, will not be used to take the life of an unborn
child. Even with the Hyde Amendment in place, over half a
billion dollars in taxpayer funding is flowing to Planned
Parenthood annually. Now, if the Hyde Amendment is actually
repealed, as the Democrats seek to do, Planned Parenthood which
does over 350,000 abortions per year will stand to get even
more taxpayer money.
For decades, Democrats respected that those who oppose
abortion would not have their tax dollars used to fund it. Now,
they don't. Even President Biden changed his position. He used
to be for the Hyde Amendment language. Now, he is not. That is
how radical the Democrats' position has become on unborn
children.
Republicans have numerous bills that would protect the
unborn and it is our great hope that someday our colleagues on
the other side of the aisle would consider moving those pieces
of legislation. Let's be honest. Democrats aren't here to have
an honest debate about the sanctity of life or the role of
government protecting unborn children. Instead, they are here
to play politics with our institutions and advance a radical
leftist agenda. Right now, right now, there are three pro-life
cases, three life cases before the Supreme Court. In this very
week, the same week that the Chair chose to convene this
hearing, the court held oral arguments on two of those cases.
Let's be clear. The Democrats have convened this hearing as
a way to pressure the Supreme Court, to try to intimidate the
Supreme Court. It is the play the Democrats use when the court
was considering the census last Congress, sensationalize a
legal question to delegitimize the court's role in interpreting
the law.
Today, their focus is on this pro-life law in the State of
Texas. Last year, while the court heard oral arguments in the
case regarding a Louisiana pro-life law, Senator Schumer stood
in front of the Supreme Court and said this. ``I want to tell
you Gorsuch, I want to tell you Kavanaugh, you have released
the whirlwind and you will pay the price. You won't know what
hit you if you go forward with these awful decisions.''
If that is not threatening, if that is not trying to
intimidate, I don't know what is. He did that in front of the
Supreme Court that day. In April, Chair Nadler and other
Democrat Members of this Committee made good on Senator
Schumer's threat. They introduced legislation that would add
justices to the Supreme Court, four associate justices, not
one, not two, not three, but four. Why might they want four new
justices? Because four new justices appointed by President
Biden is the golden number for getting to a liberal majority on
the court.
Even President Biden's Bipartisan Commission criticized
this issue in their preliminary report last month. They wrote
``Court expansion is likely to undermine, rather than enhance
the Supreme Court's legitimacy and its role in the
constitutional system. There are significant reasons to be
skeptical that expansion would serve Democrat values.''
That didn't deter congressional Democrats. After the
release of the Commission's draft report, the Chair of this
Committee and other Democrats promptly issued a statement
condemning its finding, deriding President Trump, and doubling
down on their plan. ``We must pass legislation to expand the
Supreme Court.''
Just yesterday, Congressman Jeffries doubled down on
Democrats' attack on the court tweeting, ``The right wing
majority on the Supreme Court is completely illegitimate.''
That statement doesn't make sense. I mean I think Mr. Gorsuch,
Mr. Kavanaugh, Justice Coney Barrett, I think they were all
nominated by the President, confirmed by the Senate. I think
they are as legitimate as you can get under our constitutional
system. Somehow the Democrats view that as illegitimate simply
because they are pro-life.
Just so we are clear, the Chair of the House Judiciary
Committee, the Committee charged by the American people with
overseeing the judiciary and the Federal justice system in our
country has introduced legislation to upset the balance of the
Supreme Court all for political ends. This is just one branch
of the government that Democrats don't control, and they can't
stand it. The American people see through this all. The Texas
law again is focused on the sanctity of life and protecting
those who can't protect themselves. That's what the pro-life
movement is about. Life is previous and let's protect those who
can't protect themselves.
Democrats in Congress are focusing on pressuring the court,
intimidating the court, and packing the court, and the American
people see it for what it is.
I want to thank our Witnesses for being here, especially
Ms. Foster and for her work with Americans United for Life.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chair Nadler. Without objection, all other--thank you, Mr.
Jordan. Without objection, all other opening statements will be
included in the record.
I will now introduce today's Witnesses.
Dr. Ghazaleh Moayedi is a board-certified OB/GYN and
complex family specialist in Texas and Oklahoma. She is also
the Founder and Chief Medical Officer of Pegasus Health Justice
Center and serves as a board member of Physicians for
Reproductive Health. Dr. Moayedi received her undergraduate
degree from the University of Texas at Austin and completed her
medical training at Texas College of Osteopathic Medicine in
Fort Worth. She trained as an OB/GYN resident at Texas Tech
Health Science Center in El Paso and completed her fellowship
training in Complex Family Planning at the University of Hawaii
where she also received her Master of Public Health degree in
Health Policy and Management.
Khiara Bridges is Professor of Law at the University of
California, Berkeley School of law. She previously taught at
Boston University, Harvard Law School, Stanford Law School, and
Yale School--good trinity--and served as the Center for
Reproductive Rights Fellow at Columbia Law School. She received
her B.A. from Spelman College and earned both a J.D. and a
Ph.D. in Anthropology from Columbia University.
Catherine Glenn Foster is President and CEO of Americans
United for Life, as well as a Senior Fellow in Legal Policy at
the Charlotte Lozier Institute and a Fellow with the James
Wilson Institute on Natural Rights and the American Founding.
Previously, she spent seven years as litigation counsel with
the Alliance Defending Freedom. She then founded and managed a
law practice and led Euthanasia Prevention Coalition USA as
Executive Director. Ms. Foster earned her B.A. from Barry
College, a Master's degree in French from the University of
South Florida, and a J.D. from Georgetown University Law
Center.
Stephanie Loraine Pineiro is Co-Executive Director of the
Florida Access Network and abortion funds dedicated to
challenging abortion stigma and dismantling barriers to
abortion in Florida through financial and logistical support.
She received her B.A. from the University of North Florida and
a Masters of Social Work from the University of Central
Florida.
We welcome all our distinguished Witnesses and we thank
them for participating today. I will begin by swearing in our
Witnesses. I ask that our Witnesses in person, please rise and
raise your right hand. I ask that our remote witnesses please
turn on their audio and make sure I can see your face and your
raised right hand while I administer the oath.
Do you swear or affirm under penalty of perjury that the
testimony you are about to give is true and correct to the best
of your knowledge, information, and belief so help you God?
Let the record show that the Witnesses have answered in the
affirmative. Thank you and be seated.
Please note that each of your written statements will be
entered into the record in its entirety. Accordingly, I ask
that you summarize your testimony in five minutes. To help you
stay within that time, there is a timing light on your table.
When the light switches from green to yellow, you have one
minute to conclude your testimony. When the light turns red, it
signals your five minutes have expired.
For our Witnesses appearing virtually, there is a timer on
your screen to help you keep track of time.
Dr. Moayedi, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF GHAZALEH MOAYEDI

Dr. Moayedi. Good morning, Chair Nadler, Ranking Member
Jordan and distinguished Members of the Committee. My name is
Dr. Ghazaleh Moayedi and I use she/her pronouns. I am a Board-
Certified OB/GYN, the child of Iranian immigrants, a mom, a
Texan, and a proud abortion provider. I serve on the Board of
Physicians for Reproductive Health and the Texas Equal Access
Fund.
For over 60 days abortion care has been nearly inaccessible
in my home State of Texas due to Senate Bill 8. Texans have
been waiting for the courts, for Congress, for anyone to
intervene and halt this unconstitutional abortion ban. I am
here today because we are still waiting.
As dangerous and as cruel as this law is, access in life-
saving abortion care has always been a challenge in Texas even
before SB 8. Last month, when I testified to the House
Oversight Committee on this very issue, I asked the Committee
to spend a few minutes thinking about what it is like to be a
person needing abortion care in Texas or in this country, to
consider Marie, a 35-year-old, American citizen, Eighteen weeks
pregnant, working a minimum wage job, and living in Dallas,
Texas and seeking abortion care in August, prior to SB 8 even
being enacted. She, like most people who have abortions, is
already a parent and is resolute in her decision to end her
pregnancy. Although Marie is confident and informed about her
decision simply because she lives in Texas, Marie is forced to
endure multiple harmful restrictions when accessing abortion
care. Marie is forced to seek out this care at only one of two
specialty clinics in Dallas, not from her regular healthcare
provider because Texas has a law that requires abortion care
after 16 weeks to be provided at an ASC, an ambulatory surgical
center, a requirement that has been proven to be medically
unnecessary and has nothing to improve the quality or safety of
care.
If Marie is able to make her appointment at one of our two
ASCs in Dallas, she cannot have her abortion on the day of her
appointment. Marie is forced, by Texas law, to make an
appointment with a physician in advance of her procedure. As
her physician, I am then compelled by the State to force Marie
into a medically unnecessary ultrasound. I am compelled by the
State to force Marie to look at and listen to the ultrasound. I
am compelled by the State to force Marie to hear a description
of the ultrasound. I am compelled by the State to force Marie
to receive medically inaccurate, State-mandated scripts. After
all this, I am still compelled by the State to force Marie to
wait at least 24 hours to receive her desired healthcare.
Now, if Marie were 16 instead of 35, her abortion care
would be even further delayed by the need for parental consent
or judicial bypass. If Marie were undocumented and living in El
Paso instead of Dallas, she would be completely denied access
to abortion because even before SB 8 a lack of abortion
providers and the internal border checkpoints within Texas and
New Mexico prevent Marie from accessing the next closest
clinic.
Now, that the Committee has heard how bad it was in Texas
even before SB 8 I want to bring our story of Marie to today,
right now. Today, Marie cannot get her abortion in Dallas and
because of the influx of Texas patients, the next closest
clinic in Oklahoma City where I also provide care has a week's
long waiting list for an appointment. I should not be forced to
travel hours and hours away from my home to care for patients
or my neighbors who traveled hours and hours to see me. By the
time Marie is able to schedule an appointment in Oklahoma she
will be 22 weeks pregnant and unable to get her care because of
Oklahoma's medically unnecessary abortion restrictions.
So, now we are moving in concentric circles further and
further away from her home, further and further away from hope.
An abortion ban in Texas creates a ripple effect of injustice
impacting all of us. The influx of Texas patients is straining
our neighboring States, pushing Oklahomans to need abortion
care out of their communities to other States, like Arkansas
and Kansas. This is what SB 8 intends to do, deny people both
in and out of Texas the ability to have abortions.
Today abortion care is almost completely stopped in our
State and the health and safety of all pregnant people in Texas
is in jeopardy. We know chronic conditions can worsen in
pregnancy, but not worsen enough to warrant an exception under
this law.
OB/GYNs and other prenatal healthcare providers are
confused about how to comply and care for their patients. Right
now, today, physicians and hospitals in Texas are delaying
life-saving care for critically ill pregnant people because
their pregnancy still have fetal cardiac activity. As a
physician, I know firsthand that abortion saves lives. For the
thousands of people I have cared for, abortion is a blessing.
Abortion is an act of love. Abortion is freedom.
I want to end by imploring this Committee to help our
communities right now. We need Federal protection of abortion
care and most of care, we need you to not forget about us, the
people of Texas and in other heavily restricted States and our
families and our communities.
Thank you for hearing me today and holding this important
hearing.
[The statement of Dr. Moayedi follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chair Nadler. Thank you for your testimony. Professor
Bridges, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF KHIARA M. BRIDGES

Dr. Bridges. Chair Nadler, Ranking Member Jordan, and
Members of the House Committee on the Judiciary, thank you for
the opportunity to testify before you today. My name is Khiara
Bridges, and I am a Professor of Law at the University of
California, Berkeley, School of Law, where I teach Criminal
Law, Family Law, and Reproductive Rights and Justice. I also
serve as the Faculty Director of the Berkeley Center on
Reproductive Rights and Justice.
I am here today to explain how abortion restrictions and
bans, like Texas Senate Bill 8, disproportionately impact
pregnant people of color--especially Black women.
For decades, the Supreme Court has reaffirmed the central
holding of Roe v. Wade. The court has affirmed that a person
has a right ``to choose to have an abortion before viability
and to obtain it without undue interference from the State.''
The Court in Planned Parenthood v. Casey made clear that a
``woman's right to terminate her pregnancy before viability is
the most central principle of Roe. It is a rule of law and a
component of liberty we cannot renounce.'' Texas Senate Bill 8,
SB 8, which bans abortion after six weeks of pregnancy,
violates this central principle of Roe. The law constitutes a
near-total ban on abortion banning abortion far before
viability and before many people even know they are pregnant.
Consequently, SB 8 is unconstitutional.
Nevertheless, SB 8 is currently in effect and has been
harming Texans in need of abortion care for over two months.
This is solely because the law leaves enforcement of its
prohibition on abortion to private citizens instead of State
actors, a feature of the law that its architects hoped would
permit the law to evade judicial review. The United States
Supreme Court cited these ``complex and novel antecedent
procedural questions'' as a reason for not enjoining the law.
It is important to reiterate that the sole reason that SB 8
contains these ``procedural questions'' is that its authors
wanted to give receptive Federal courts the opportunity to
leave the law in place.
The Fifth Circuit and the Supreme Court took advantage of
the opportunity that SB 8's authors gave them. The Fifth
Circuit and the Supreme Court left the law in place. In the
words of Justice Sotomayor ``The State's gambit has worked.''
The law is in effect. For two months abortion providers in
Texas have been unable to provide care to scores of patients
who desperately need it.
Because Texans seeking to exercise their constitutional
rights to abortion must now travel outside of the State to do
so, the burdens imposed by SB 8 are tremendous. The greatest
harms have fallen and will continue to fall on the most
marginalized people in Texas. Indeed, for the poorest people in
Texas, these burdens are insurmountable.
Crucially, because there is a close relationship between
socio-economic status and race, Black people disproportionately
living in poverty burdens to poor people constitute burdens to
Black people. The result is that disproportionate numbers of
Black people will be among those who are coerced to continue
pregnancies and have children against their will to seek unsafe
methods of abortion or to risk exposure to criminal prosecution
for attempting to self-manage abortion.
Further, Black people receive abortion care at higher rates
than their counterparts of other races. This is true in large
part because Black people experience unintended pregnancies at
higher rates than their counterparts of other races. Because
Black people rely on abortion care more frequently than their
non-Black counterparts, various abortions like SB 8 inflicts
greater harms on Black people than other races. Essentially,
abortion restrictions do not have race-neutral effects.
Feminists of color have long recognized the importance of
ensuring that Black women and other Black people who can become
pregnant are able to decide whether or not they will become
parents. They have understood that there are forces that would
coerce Black people into parenthood like the forces that
wrongly assert that abortion is Black genocide. They have also
understood that there are forces that would deny Black people
parenthood like the forces that subjected tens of thousands of
Black women to forced sterilizations from the 1950-1980s and
beyond.
Because feminists of color have realized that controlling
Black people's reproduction has been a tool of racial
oppression, they have identified Black people's ability to
control their own reproduction as a tool for racial justice.
Because of the ability to terminate a pregnancy enables Black
people to control their reproduction, Feminists of color, like
myself consider abortion access to be essential to racial
justice. Thus, SB 8 and other regulations that make abortion
inaccessible are tools of racial subordination. Thank you.
[The statement of Dr. Bridges follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT OF CATHERINE GLENN FOSTER

Ms. Foster. Thank you. Chair Nadler, Ranking Member Jordan,
and Members of the Committee, I speak today on behalf of the
constitutional and human right to life.
I speak today on behalf of Texas and every community's
right to protect our most vulnerable brothers and sisters--
White, Black, indigenous, and all people--from extermination.
Let me tell you what the others here on today's panel
won't. It's not our many degrees, our Master's degrees, juris
doctorates, and medical degrees, that distinguish us. These are
all fine accomplishments. None of them, ultimately, matter.
What matters is what we share, our common humanity, and
what is at stake is the same, our humanity. I have committed my
life to advocating for America's common interest in life and I
am committed to opposing the special interests that,
tragically, advance killing as a public policy solution.
If you asked most Americans on the street and told them
that very serious people were convening hearings to call for
more abortions to take place, they'd rightly be speechless.
Yet, that is what is happening here today. We're hearing
incredible stories, testimony--marketing, really--for Texas,
for America to embrace more abortions.
What's true about abortion is this:

(1)  Abortion is the violent tearing apart of helpless
children, limb from limb.
(2)  Abortion is the wounding and scarring of women and
families for the benefit of multibillion-dollar financial
interests.
(3)  Abortion is a cancer upon America. Abortion must end.

I keep hearing the word devastating today--it's in the name
of today's hearing--and pro-abortion activists are repeating it
ad nauseam. Devastating.
You know what's devastating? Cancer and natural disasters.
Sixty-two million dead babies. That is what is devastating.
Sixty-two million dead babies, killed in history's first for-
profit corporate sponsored genocide.
It's time for us to move on. As a constitutional attorney,
I implore the Supreme Court and every Federal and State
lawmaker to act to restore the human right to life.
We're hearing a lot about Texas, but all this got its start
because seven men on the U.S. Supreme Court decided to do a
terrible thing, to use Roe to nullify the democratic consensus
against abortion and impose abortion violence upon our people.
The American people have never accepted the injustice of
abortion culture. Americans United For Life advocates for the
human right to life in culture, law, and policy.
We have been fighting since 1971 from the beginning of the
abortion wars for those who govern in our Executive,
Congressional, and Judicial branches to simply to their jobs
and to protect human life.
There is nothing more alien to America's constitutional way
of life than the toleration of abortion and its imposition on
women who deserve better choices.
Since Texas Heartbeat Act went into effect earlier this
year, there are now literally thousands of human persons alive
and thousands of mothers, fathers, families, and communities
who will have the joyful chance at building a life together.
A world with fewer abortions is a good world, a future with
more Americans is a good future, and families and communities
who are offered hope rather than sorrow are powerful Witnesses
to the importance of laws that serve justice and the good of
all persons.
I am here to remind you of a truth that you already know. A
world with fewer abortions is a good world, a better world.
In a few years, the children who are alive today, thanks to
Texas Heartbeat Act, will be old enough to understand that you
think that it is devastating that they are alive, and their
parents can hear you now, by the way.
I celebrate them and I celebrate every heartbeat protected
and every life saved. We should be asking ourselves how we can
support mothers and fathers from the moment of conception, as
Texas does, in every city and in every county through pregnancy
resource centers and alternatives, and we should be asking how
America can transcend the abortion debate, how America can
enact and embrace robust national family policies that support
the growth and the thriving of every life, family, and
community.
We all have something priceless to contribute. We must
first be allowed to live. We can restore America's greatness by
choosing to live joyfully together.
We must offer one another our best choices rather than our
worst and then we can embrace what comes when abortion is no
more--a lifetime of joyful possibilities.
Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Foster follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chair Nadler. Thank you.
Ms. Pineiro, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF STEPHANIE LORAINE PINEIRO

Ms. Pineiro. Good afternoon, Members of the Committee.
Thank you for the generous invitation to speak to you about the
State of abortion access in Florida.
My name is Stephanie Loraine Pineiro and I work as the Co-
Executive Director of the Abortion Fund, Florida Access
Network.
I'm a storyteller with We Testify, a Puerto Rican poderosa,
a survivor of sexual assault, [speaking foreign language], a
bisexual woman who has had two abortions and as a social worker
with a Master's degree from the University of Central Florida.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chair Nadler. Yes? Oh. I'm sorry, Ms. Pineiro.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Okay. Am I on now?
Chair Nadler. The clerk will restart the clock and, Ms.
Pineiro, you may start again.
Ms. Pineiro. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Members of the Committee. Thank you for the
generous invitation to speak to you about the State of abortion
access in Florida.
My name is Stephanie Loraine Pineiro and I work as the Co-
Executive Director of the Abortion Fund, Florida Access
Network. I'm a storyteller with We Testify, a Puerto Rican
poderosa, a survivor of sexual assault, [speaking foreign
language], a bisexual woman who has had two abortions and a
social worker with a Master's degree from the University of
Central Florida.
As proud as I am to testify today, I am dismayed that I'm
here to explain why we must continue to defend our
constitutionally-protected right to abortion.
As a result of the Supreme Court's inaction, SB 8 was
allowed to go into effect, adding yet another burden for people
who want abortions. This emboldened States like my home State
of Florida, who wasted no time in introducing an almost
identical six-week ban.
I am worried about our future and what it means for people
who need abortions today, tomorrow, and for years to come. I
know what it is like to want an abortion only to be tripped up
by medically unnecessary restrictions and financial barriers.
When I was a teenager, I became pregnant twice, once as a
result of a rape, and again during a relationship when I was 17
years old. Both times I knew I wanted an abortion.
After my rape, I felt ashamed, and I blamed myself. I know
now that being raped was not my fault, and wanting an abortion
is nothing to be ashamed of regardless of how someone becomes
pregnant.
Before my second abortion when I was 16, my Catholic
pediatrician refused to prescribe me birth control against my
request. A year later, when my then boyfriend tried to purchase
Plan B, the pharmacist refused to sell it.
After I was denied Plan B, I spent weeks waiting for my
period and searching the internet for clues about how I could
self-manage my own abortion. I was afraid of violence
escalating in my already unsteady home and about what could
happen if I told my very strict parents that I needed another
abortion.
Like 72 million Americans, my family was enrolled in
Medicaid. Because of the Hyde Amendment, my abortions were not
eligible for coverage. When I had my abortions, I was a high
school student working as a waitress and helping my family
during the recession, earning $2.17 an hour as my base pay,
which is still the Federal minimum wage for tipped restaurant
workers.
I had to pick up extra shifts just to afford the $450 for
my appointment. I shouldn't have been forced to choose
supporting my family--between supporting my family and paying
for my abortion.
Because Florida has a parental involvement law, I had to
skip class to go to court and ask a judge, a complete stranger,
for permission to end my pregnancy through a process called
judicial bypass. With the help of my lawyer, I presented myself
in a five-page essay as mature enough not to parent a child
when I didn't want to.
Between the appointments with my attorney, the whole ordeal
took several weeks and delayed my abortion even more. A decade
after my experience, I co-authored a groundbreaking report
entitled, ``The Judicial Waiver Process in Florida Courts,''
If/When/How, Lawyering for Reproductive Justice, which analyzed
whether Florida courts could offer clear and unbiased
information about the judicial bypass process.
We found that over half of Florida's 67 counties could
offer little or no information about the process, and one
county clerk even tried to talk a caller out of their abortion
decision.
This is what I see every day at the Florida Access Network.
We take calls from people who need help getting to a clinic and
paying for their abortions. We help people with rides or gas
money to get to their appointments.
We help coordinate their childcare. We help people with
lodging when they have to travel long distances, and we help
young people navigate the judicial bypass process.
Since 2015, we have supported nearly 2,000 people offering
an average of $100 to help people meet the financial gap for
their abortions, which cost on average $600 without insurance
coverage.
We fund abortion because low wages, abortion restrictions,
like SB 8, and policies like the Hyde Amendment make abortion
unattainable. Without the communities of support, we have
created to relieve the burdens people face trying to access
healthcare, no one should be turned away from healthcare that
they want because they can't afford it.
As I close, I want to remind the Committee Members of your
responsibility to protect our right to have abortions free from
undue burdens, shame, and stigma.
You have the power to change the lives of millions of
people in this country by enacting legislation that stands up
for the dignity of every person who seeks an abortion.
As we say at We Testify, everyone loves someone who has had
an abortion and that includes every single one of you. To the
people listening who have had or will have abortions, you are
supported, you are loved, and I will never stop fighting for
you.
Thank you for listening to my story and I hope you remember
that the actions you take impact your constituents and your
loved ones who have had abortions.
Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Pineiro follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chair Nadler. Thank you all for your testimony. We will now
proceed under the five-minute rule with questions. I will
recognize myself for five minutes.
Dr. Moayedi, how has SB 8 impacted abortion care in the
communities you care for in Texas?
Dr. Moayedi. Thank you for that question, Representative.
SB 8 has completely decimated abortion access in my State
and in the communities that I take care of. I every day almost
am getting calls from my colleagues in the Dallas/Fort Worth
area asking how to take care of the patients that they serve.
People with devastating pregnancy diagnoses, whether it's
for the pregnancy itself or for them unable to get care in our
State, people with very severe chronic medical conditions with
no other options, and just my neighbors, my colleagues and
friends that have unintended pregnancies and have nowhere to
turn to.
We are working tirelessly to get people out of State, to
help coordinate their care out of State. It's a nightmare. I
have never thought that medical care would come to this.
Chair Nadler. Ms. Pineiro, SB 8 has had ripple effects
across the country. Can you give us a brief overview of what it
looks like for someone in Florida, especially someone who's
struggling to make ends meet, to seek an abortion? If SB 8 in
Texas remains in effect, what does this mean for Floridians and
people in other States seeking abortions?
Ms. Pineiro. Abortion restrictions in Florida look like
people like me on a Saturday morning sitting in my client's car
babysitting her child because she didn't have access to
childcare because she was busy working to try to support her
family.
It's interesting hearing the Committee talk about people's
lives like they're so frivolous. Abortion restrictions impact
people who are lied to by anti-abortion pregnancy centers about
the gestational age.
Abortion patients in clinics and providers are moving
targets for harassment and clinics are targeted by the State
and forced to endure unnecessary regulatory restrictions in
having an abortion.
Thank you.
Chair Nadler. Thank you.
Professor Bridges, during this hearing, I expect we will
hear false claims, comparing abortion to eugenics and our
country's history of slavery. Can you share your perspective on
those claims?
Dr. Bridges. Absolutely. Thank you so much for that
question.
Those claims proceed from a misunderstanding of what
eugenics was about. Eugenics was about State control of
reproductive decisions. Eugenics was about the State deciding
who could and could not become parents, who would and would not
be a good parent.
That's not at all what abortion is about today. Abortion is
about people exacting a modicum of control over their lives,
deciding to terminate a pregnancy because it is in their best
interest. It is in the best interest of their children, meaning
that many of the people who have abortions are already parents.
So, the comparison to eugenics is not that abortion today
is eugenics. In fact, abortion restrictions today are
comparable to eugenics in as much as abortion restrictions
consists of the State determining what people will and will not
do with their reproductive life. It's the State deciding who
will become a parent, even though those people do not desire to
become a parent themselves.
So, again, the comparison isn't apt. Abortion is not
eugenics. Abortion restrictions are more akin to eugenics.
Thank you.
Chair Nadler. Thank you very much.
Ms. Fischbach?
Ms. Fischbach. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I am just a bit curious what the purpose of today's hearing
is. We're talking about a State law that is currently under
review by the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court will decide
if the law is constitutional and only the Supreme Court, not
the House Judiciary Committee.
That being said, we are here with a Texas State law in
front of us. This law is currently in effect, and it is saving
lives. It is saving the lives of unborn babies.
Women and babies deserve better than being told that their
only option is abortion. Many pro-life groups and individuals
across the country reach out to pregnant women to help with
support, diapers, housing, and with love.
Abortion does not help women.
After saying that, I have a couple of questions for Ms.
Foster.
Ms. Foster, first, thank you for being here. I appreciate
the time you took and in sharing the information with us.
In your experience, is it accurate to characterize elective
abortion as healthcare?
Ms. Foster. It is not.
Ms. Fischbach. Thank you. Does that term accurately reflect
what happens to a baby?
Ms. Foster. Healthcare?
Ms. Fischbach. Yes, during abortion.
Ms. Foster. Absolutely not. Absolutely not.
Ms. Fischbach. Maybe I should go back. Many of the Members
and Witnesses present today have vigorously objected to the
Heartbeat Law recently passed by Texas.
The people of Texas chose through their duly-elected
officials to protect unborn babies at that point, when a
beating heart can be detected. How early can the fetal
heartbeat be detected?
Ms. Foster. Frequently, as early as 6-8 weeks.
Ms. Fischbach. Are there any other things you can tell us
about a baby that is going on at that gestational age?
Ms. Foster. Absolutely. At that point, you can see the
beginnings of their arms, hands, legs, feet, hearing the
heartbeat, and seeing the formation of their head and their
features.
We're talking about a human being. Life is not frivolous.
That's the entire point here, and that child in the womb who is
developing, who generally by the time that you hear that
heartbeat that child will be viable--that pregnancy will be
viable, and so the chances that she or he will grow to full
term are very good at that point.
Ms. Fischbach. Ms. Foster, I wasn't necessarily going to do
it, but I did bring along a 10-week model and just to show that
it's got--you can't see it, but he's got fingers and toes and
it looks a lot like a little baby to me. It saddens me when we
cheapen life through abortion and just in general.
Just one final question Ms. Foster. You've written about
providing alternatives to abortion, real alternatives, and it's
necessary to really create a culture that allows for an
understanding of motherhood and that is inclusive of women's
hopes and dreams.
Let's support women and not push them towards the violence
and neglect of abortion. How can we as a nation better provide
for women facing those unexpected pregnancies with real
choices?
Ms. Foster. Yes. There are so many ways that we can really
stand with women in need and partners in need and support them.
That involves governmental methods and nonprofits that are
actively working in communities throughout our nation,
outnumbering abortion facilities in the hundreds to thousands
and are providing real alternatives or providing material
resources like diapers, clothing, formula, and car seats, you
name it--that are providing things like career training,
parenting training, and are just providing that hope and
support, encouraging women that--of course, as we know, the
primary three reasons why women seek abortion, whether we're
talking about first trimester or late term--from the abortion
industry's own published studies--there are financial concerns,
relationship issues, and not feeling ready to be a parent.
All three of those areas are areas where we can come
alongside women and stand with women and be there for them, and
that is what pregnancy resource centers are doing in the
thousands in communities throughout our nation, and that's what
even we have government resources for. It's to stand with the
disenfranchised and with the vulnerable and provide hope and
support.
Ms. Fischbach. Thank you very much.
I would just say in closing, I think that would be a much
better use of the Committee's time to be looking at what we can
do to help instead of going through a law that is sitting in
front of the Supreme Court and they will make the determination
of its constitutionality.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentlelady yields back.
Ms. Jackson Lee?
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the Chair very much.
I have the Constitution in my hand. I just want to quickly
read the Ninth Amendment. The enumeration in the Constitution
of certain rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage
others retained by the people. We clarify and characterize that
as the right to privacy, which has not been undermined.
Professor Bridges, my time is short, so very carefully, is
any law that you know dealing with abortion rights, Roe v.
Wade, and others forcing women to get an abortion? Is this
required? Are they hauled into a physician's office? Or is this
protection for their choice and their right to privacy?
Professor Bridges?
Dr. Bridges. Thank you for the question. No, no one's being
coerced into an abortion.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So, today, I want to focus on legislation
that I have that I'm very grateful that many Members of the
Judiciary Committee have decided to join and we hope more will,
the Preventing Vigilante Stalking That Stops Women's Access to
Health Care and Abortion Rights. Again, H.R. 5710, Preventing
Vigilante Stalking That Stops Women's Access to Health Care and
Abortion Rights.
Doctor, a new study by Dr. David Eisenberg, a board-
certified obstetrician/gynecologist, and I think this has an
overall impact, estimates the Texas SB 8's new restrictions on
women's health could cause increases in maternal mortality,
already high, of up to 15 percent overall and up to 33 percent
for Black women.
Can you focus on the outright horror of what it means to
have a private citizen, even if you don't know the particulars,
a private citizen to have the capacity to stalk you and to
receive money on your bounty in terms of the provider and/or
the woman?
Dr. Moayedi?
Dr. Moayedi. Thank you so much for the question,
Representative.
I don't have to imagine what it's like to have violent
people stalking me because that is actually my life every
single day as an abortion provider in Texas.
I am followed into my job. I am screamed at. My child is
screamed at by people that purport to love children. I get hate
messages and death threats to my home simply for caring for my
community.
So, it's very disturbing for me personally to hear people
proclaim to be pro-life while they actively threaten my life
and my child's life. This law--yes, ma'am?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Would Federal law to prevent this kind of
stalking, at least give you a sense that the Federal government
understands how criminal that behavior is, even though it's a
private citizen? Would a Federal law prevent that?
Dr. Moayedi. I'm not a politician and so I don't really
understand the ins and outs of a policy like that. I know that
there are Federal laws right now that should prevent these
people from blocking access to our clinics and harassing our
patients, but it does not.
So, I welcome any opportunity to make our clinics more
secure from violent protesters and to make my life safer from
violent people. I'm just not sure what the right answer is.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, the stalking law is different. It
stops people from stalking you under the Federal stalking law.
Would that help you?
Dr. Moayedi. I hope it would. I'm not sure. What I
understand from stalking is that it has to be very persistent
and routine, and so it is often very hard for us now even to
get the FBI or local police departments to care about the
current harassment that we get.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I appreciate it. That would change.
Professor Bridges, the same. As you well know, not since
the fugitive slave law have, we had this independent bounty
hunting going on.
Very briefly, would a modification of the Federal statute
on stalking to stop people who are stalking you to prevent you
to get health information on abortions, would that help? The
whole bill needs to be eliminated, but would that help overall?
Dr. Bridges. I would have to see the text of the bill that
addresses stalking for me to offer a formal opinion and for me
to determine whether it will, in fact, help.
I welcome any effort that will help people in Texas and
people across this country exercise their constitutionally-
protected right to terminate a pregnancy before viability.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Let me say to Stephanie, let me thank you for your courage.
You should not have faced what you faced. I would simply raise
the question, being in Florida as well, what do you think of a
law that now is being promoted in other States that gives a
private citizen, in addition to what you had to go to, expose
yourself in court, but a private citizen the right to stalk you
and get a bounty? What does that do to your privacy?
Ms. Pineiro. It scares me. It scares the people that I
support every day to get an abortion. I also welcome any
legislation that would support with protecting clinic
entrances.
I will say that, unfortunately, people break the law every
day, right, so enacting a law that would criminalize this
behavior would be great. It wouldn't eliminate stalking from
happening.
Chair Nadler. The time of the gentlelady has expired.
Mr. Chabot?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you for your answer.
Mr. Chabot. Mr. Chair, nearly 50 years ago, the Supreme
Court handed down one of its most controversial ever decisions,
Roe v. Wade. Since that ruling, there have been over 60 million
abortions in this country, 60 million innocent lives ended
before they even had a chance. That's over a million abortions
each year since this slaughter was legalized back in 1973 on
January 22nd, which happens to be my birthday.
Planned Parenthood alone performs over 320,000 abortions
each year. That is approximately the population of my hometown,
Cincinnati, Ohio. So, Planned Parenthood, essentially, wipes
out the equivalent of the population of Cincinnati every year,
year after year.
Mr. Chair, life is precious, and we should do all we can to
protect it. Since I was elected here, I have been involved in a
whole range of pieces of legislation. I introduced the ban on
partial birth abortion, for example, which President Bush
signed into law. It went all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court.
They upheld it and it is now the law of the land. There are
still far too many abortions in this country.
The legislation that we are discussing today is Texas law
SB 8, and it would effectively, of course, ban abortions after
a heartbeat is detected in the womb. This legislation has been
described by many in the media as ``extreme and
unprecedented.'' In reality, we have been discussing a ban on
abortions after a heartbeat for years. In fact, 13 States,
including my home State of Ohio, have enacted some form of
legislation which prohibits abortions if a heartbeat is
detected. There is the Federal Heartbeat Protection Act, which
Mike Kelly, a member of this institution has cosponsored, along
with many of us, and a number on this Committee. Mr. Chair,
banning abortions after a baby's heartbeat is detected is
neither extreme nor unprecedented.
I will tell you something that is extreme, and that is
allowing a massive abortion outfit, like Planned Parenthood, to
kill the equivalent of Cincinnati's population every year.
Something else that is extreme is witnessing Members on the
other side of the aisle abandoning the Hyde Amendment, which
has enjoyed bipartisan support for 40 years now and has saved
nearly 2.5 million lives. Getting rid of the Hyde Amendment
will force American taxpayers to pay for other people's
abortions.
Even though the radical left is fully in control in the
House and in the Senate and in the White House, States and
local governments are fighting back. In addition to the
heartbeat bills that we have already mentioned, earlier this
year, two cities in my Congressional District, Lebanon, and
Mason, became the first cities in Ohio to pass an ordinance
making them pro-life sanctuary cities and forbidding abortions
within their city limits. I applaud the leaders in both of
those communities for taking that brave stance. I hope others
will follow that example.
Mr. Chair, we need to be direct and honest about what is
being discussed here today. Abortion is not healthcare. It is a
barbaric procedure that ends the life of an unborn baby. By 10
weeks, an unborn baby has arms and legs and fingers and toes,
and among other things, he or she can such their thumb,
stretch, jump when startled. In short, these babies are alive,
and they deserve our protection.
Ms. Glenn Foster, let me ask you this: One of our other
Witnesses has already, quite astonishingly, said that abortion
is an act of love. Is that your opinion?
Ms. Foster. It is not. Life is not frivolous. Abortion is
not healthcare. That is the whole point.
I never thought that I would hear an OB/GYN tell this
Committee that dismembering a fellow human being is an act of
love, an act of freedom. We can and we must do better.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you.
You mentioned the dismemberment abortion. When we passed
the Partial Birth Abortion Ban Act, we knew we were stopping
thousands of abortions each year, but we knew there were other
forms. I know it is pretty horrific, but could you describe,
essentially, what a dismemberment abortion is, which is still
legal in this country?
Ms. Foster. Certainly. It involves inserting tools into the
uterus, into the womb, to literally rip a child apart limb from
limb. That is really the crux of it.
Mr. Chabot. Pretty horrific stuff. These babies,
oftentimes, are capable of feeling pain, is that correct?
Ms. Foster. Absolutely. If you are doing prenatal surgery,
then, not only do you provide anesthesia to the mother, but you
also treat the baby's potential pain.
Mr. Chabot. One last question. I am almost out of time. We
are trying to protect both the health of the woman and the
baby, is that right? We are trying to protect both?
Ms. Foster. Yes, and the majority of Americans understand
that, when we pass pro-life laws, that is what we are doing. We
are protecting both mother and child.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Johnson?
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chair, for holding
this hearing.
Professor Bridges, let's start with the obvious. Texas' law
known as SB 8 bans abortion at, roughly, six weeks of
pregnancy. Isn't SB 8 a clear violation of the right to
abortion prior to fetal viability, that right having been
established under Roe v. Wade and reaffirmed in Planned
Parenthood v. Casey, and most recently, in 2018, in June
Medical Services v. Russo?
Dr. Bridges. Absolutely. In the words of Justice
Sotomayor, SB 8 is ``flagrantly unconstitutional.''
Nevertheless, it is in effect.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. So, it would be fair to say that SB
8 is actually blatantly constitutional--blatantly
unconstitutional? Sorry.
Dr. Bridges. Absolutely. Every superlative I have for you,
blatantly, flagrantly, obviously, undeniably, all of them.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Well, Professor Bridges, what do
you make of the United States Supreme Court's decision to allow
the blatantly unconstitutional SB 8 to remain in effect while
its constitutionality is challenged in the lower courts?
Dr. Bridges. I take that to be a sign that the Supreme
Court has backed away from its role as the apolitical branch of
government. While the Executive and Legislative branches are
supposed to be the political branches, the Judiciary is
supposed to be the apolitical branch. Nevertheless, the Supreme
Court is making decisions that reveal that it is being
motivated by raw political will, raw political power.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Well, Professor Bridges, was it
extraordinary for the Supreme Court, without full briefing,
without oral argument, and without even the dignity of a
reasoned opinion, to use its shadow docket to temporarily allow
the State of Texas to deny a recognized constitutional right to
nearly 1 out of every 10 women of reproductive age in this
country?
Dr. Bridges. Absolutely. It was extraordinary, it was
egregious, and it was extreme. I would note that, prior to
September 1, very few people would have imagined that the
Supreme Court would let a flagrantly constitutional law go into
effect, when it had the power to enjoin it.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. In fact, Professor Bridges, by
allowing SB 8 to remain in effect during the pendency of the
challenge to its constitutionality, the Supreme Court itself
ignored stare decisis and denied every woman in the entire
State of Texas a fundamental constitutional right, isn't that
correct?
Dr. Bridges. That is correct. The Supreme Court backed away
from its own established precedents, its own established
precedents even regarding the shadow docket, which is to
preserve the status quo. The Supreme Court allowed the status
quo to change, and in allowing the status quo to change, it
allowed for the infringement of a Texan's right to terminate a
pregnancy before viability.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. You have touched on this, Professor
Bridges. Does the Supreme Court's decision to allow SB 8 to
remain in effect indicate how this ultraconservative majority
will approach future abortion cases?
Dr. Bridges. Oh, it sends the strongest signal I can
imagine about how the Supreme Court feels about abortion
rights, which are still fundamental rights under the U.S.
Constitution. The Supreme Court's holding in Whole Woman's
Health v. Jackson, its decision to let that flagrantly
unconstitutional law go into effect, reveals that the Supreme
Court does not care much for the abortion right; they will not
protect the abortion right in the same way that it will protect
other rights that it favors.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Professor.
SB 8 is touted as protecting women, when, in fact, it is
doing nothing more than attempting to control, criminalize, and
dehumanize women and their ability to exercise control over
their reproductive health.
Ms. Pineiro, thank you for sharing your story here with us
today. Based on your experiences, what substantive effects
would the outcome that Professor Bridges just discussed have on
individuals in your State?
Ms. Pineiro. People in the State of Florida are already
facing restrictions to abortions. Florida has a 24-week
gestational ban already in place, and any delay in abortion
care should be and remain unconstitutional.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you. With that, I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Gohmert?
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you to the Witnesses for testifying today.
Dr. Moayedi, as I understood from your testimony, you have
done late-term abortions, correct?
Dr. Moayedi. Sir, that is not a medical term, but I provide
abortion care, yes.
Mr. Gohmert. Even past 22 weeks at times, when it is
allowed, right?
Dr. Moayedi. Depending on the jurisdiction in which I'm
providing care, yes, sir.
Mr. Gohmert. Right. Yes.
We had some years back--some of you all may remember--a
person who had provided late-term abortions. It is interesting,
yes, in the medical field, there are terms; in the legal field,
there are terms.
He described in detail--I think he said he had done over a
thousand late-term abortions, or if you would prefer,
dismemberment abortions--and he described in much greater
detail, Ms. Foster, about the instrument that was used to
insert into the womb. He described how he would feel around for
something linear, and the longer linear, he knew was a leg. He
would clamp on, and he described in detail how he would pull
that leg out of socket and pull it from the body, and then, how
he would find another linear object about the same length, rip
that off of the body, and then, look for, feel around for two
shorter linear items, knowing those were the two arms; rip them
out from the body.
Once they were removed, he said in his words he ``would
feel for something bulbous,'' and you know that was the skull.
You would clamp onto the skull and crush it, because the
child's head would not come through the uterus that was at that
point not dilated. It would be easier, once you had crushed the
skull--yanked it away from the body, then pull the body out.
For some of us, that is considered--and I know Dr. Moayedi
used the term ``hateful and cruel'' with regard to the Texas
law--but some of us would describe that procedure of ripping
arms and legs and the head off of a baby as being a bit hateful
and cruel.
We have also heard reference to your position being
somewhat hateful and cruel. Ms. Foster, do you disagree that
mothers who are carrying a child that they didn't expect or did
not deserve to be loved?
Ms. Foster. Of course. Absolutely.
Mr. Gohmert. Have you provided help to mothers in that
condition?
Ms. Foster. I have, and in a variety of ways. First, I was
myself in that position when I was 19 years old. I needed that
help and love. I did not find it. So, I have spent the years
since trying to be that hope and help and love to other women
and other families.
I served as chair of the board of a pregnancy center for a
number of years. I still continue to serve on that board. I
have volunteered with numerous other pregnancy centers. I have
sidewalk counseled. I have reached out to women and families in
my communities and simply served as a safe space and a sounding
board and a resource. So, when people found themselves in an
unexpected situation, they would be able to find out more and
get information about where to go.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you.
Dr. Moayedi, when you have done abortions, is there another
physician there or are you the only medical doctor involved in
the abortion?
Dr. Moayedi. I'm a Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine.
Mr. Gohmert. Okay.
Dr. Moayedi. Depending on where I provide abortion care,
there might be another physician in the room or not.
Mr. Gohmert. Yes. I was just curious because when my wife
had my first daughter--she is amazing--when she was born very
prematurely, we had the OB/GYN, and we also had a pediatrician
there whose sole goal and job was to protect the entrance of
our child. He did an amazing job. It required hospitalization
and intubation, and all kinds of things. I'm so thankful we had
a pediatrician there looking out for the interest of the child
and an OB/GYN looking out for the mother. I commend that to
everyone else.
I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Bass
Ms. Bass, you should unmute yourself.
Ms. Bass. I'm so sorry. Sorry about that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for conducting this important
hearing, and to the Witnesses, for your testimony here today.
It is not lost on me that we are here discussing a bill
that empowers, essentially, vigilantes to circumvent the rights
of others. I really wanted to ask one of the Witnesses,
Professor Bridges, if you could talk about that, that aspect of
the bill. Then, also, put it in its historical context in terms
of that type policing and the impact that that is going to
have, and how you imagine that is going to play out in the
State of Texas.
Dr. Bridges. Yeah. Thank you so much for that question.
So, what--and the term that you use, ``vigilante justice,''
is precisely what I would use to describe what's going on in
Texas. Essentially, the State is allowing--the Supreme Court
has allowed the State to allow private citizens to police, to
terrorize, and to control the bodies of other private citizens.
That is precisely how we would describe chattel slavery in
this country, for example. The State was permitted to allow
private citizens to police, terrorize, control the bodies of
the other human beings who they considered to be property.
I will also note that the analogy is not an epithet at all
because part and parcel of chattel slavery was the control of
people's reproductive lives. It was because humans were
property, it was an incentive of the people who purported to
own that property to coerce the birth of more property. So, the
State allowed private citizens to coerce birth from people.
That's precisely what's happening in Texas.
Ms. Bass. Well, but let me just ask you, because that
doesn't apply to everyone.
Dr. Bridges. Uh-hum.
Ms. Bass. I don't think it applied to everyone back in the
days of enslavement, and I don't know of the vigilantism that
is okay in this bill applies to everyone, either. For example,
I don't know to the extent that would apply to a woman who was
particularly affluent. I don't exactly know, and maybe you can
describe a little bit about that.
I also think it is ironic because, right now, they just
finished picking the jury in the Ahmaud Arbery trial, and that
as, to me, exactly that type of vigilantism. The young man was
jogging, and he was, essentially, gunned down because they
assumed that he had done something wrong.
So, how does it even work in the bill? How is somebody
supposed to know the woman in that car, where she is going?
Dr. Bridges. Right. You've just got to guess. The thing is
that the bill incentivizes people to guess, to attempt to reap
the monetary rewards of a successful lawsuit.
One thing that I just want to mention, thank you for
bringing up Ahmaud Aubrey. It's such a tragedy, but at least
his family has the ability to try to seek justice in the court.
What the Supreme Court has done--up until right now, we're
still in a world in which the Supreme Court has boxed
individuals out of the Federal judiciary. There's nowhere where
we can seek recourse. So, that is why Congress has to act.
Ms. Bass. Well, I wanted to know, also, if you could talk
about maybe other aspects of this history in the criminal
justice system. I mean, you mentioned the period of
enslavement, but I want to know if you could describe other
times. If you could also speak about how abortion bans and
restrictions are already used to criminalize people accessing
abortion, and how it could get worse, if Roe is overturned?
Dr. Bridges. Right. I mean, so I spoke about chattel
slavery, but we know that that history extends well beyond
chattel slavery throughout reconstruction. It took a civil
rights movement before people of color were granted formal
citizenship. So, private actors were permitted to control their
lives.
I want to spend some time, though, talking about how bans
and regulations like SB 8 move abortion access out of the hands
of the most marginalized people. What that means is those with
privilege, as you gestured to before, are able to travel to
Kansas; they're able to travel to Oklahoma, and they're able to
travel to my State of California. They are exercising their
constitutional rights, albeit burdened. The most marginalized
aren't able to do that. What that means is that they're
resorting to methods that have been criminalized, especially in
Texas.
Ms. Bass. Well, I actually wonder whether an affluent woman
would have to leave the State. Because I would imagine that a
woman of affluence could have that type of care right there in
the State of Texas.
Dr. Bridges. Absolutely. We know that in the pre-Roe era
people were able to get abortions from their obstetrician.
Ms. Bass. All right. Thank you. I'm out of time.
Dr. Bridges. Thank you.
Chair Nadler. The gentlelady yields back.
Mr. Issa?
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Professor Bridges, you are familiar with a great deal of
constitutional law. Would you say that the decisions decided by
the Supreme Court against President Trump were appropriate in
deciding the questions of the election?
Dr. Bridges. I am a constitutional law scholar, but I do
not do--my expertise is not in election law.
Mr. Issa. I understand, but you are at UC Berkeley. You are
a professor. You did note those decisions, didn't you? Did you
think that they were reasoned? Did you have any objections to
them?
Dr. Bridges. I could speak about how I felt about them from
a layperson's perspective. Because I'm not an election law
scholar, I can't speak on the well-reasoned nature or not of
those decisions.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Ms. Foster, do you find it interesting that everyone seems
to have an opinion that the Supreme Court is extreme and biased
when it comes to one issue, but this would be no exception.
Anytime the Court seems to rule against what conservatives
would like, I hear nothing that they are well-reasoned and
balanced. Do you find that humorous, even from your position,
not as a scholar in that area?
Ms. Foster. It certainly is interesting. As we heard
earlier, Chuck Schumer stood on the steps of the Supreme Court
on March 4, 2020, and threatened Justices Gorsuch and
Kavanaugh, prompting a rare public response from the Chief
Justice who called the remarks ``inappropriate and dangerous.''
We see these transparent efforts to bully the Supreme Court
into issuing opinions that serve certain policy goals, rather
than interpreting the Constitution. I believe we should all be
raising our sights. We know that too much of life in Washington
can feel like political theater. They need not be that way. We
can all care about women here today, and we do, but truth here
must start with the stopping of abortion.
Mr. Issa. To that extent, it is interesting to me that the
Associated Press and the University of Chicago found that 65
percent of Americans said abortion during the second trimester
was wrong, and 80 percent in the third trimester. It's
interesting that more than half of the Witnesses and more than
half of the people here on this dais have the exact opposite
opinion as 80 percent of Americans, including President Biden
who, unlike the Chair, has expressed skepticism in court
packing as a solution.
I want to play something for the record here very quickly.

[Audio played: ``Our vision should be of an America where
abortion is safe and legal, but rare.'']

Mr. Issa. Did you hear anything today from the majority
that implied that they agreed with President Clinton on the
``rare'' part of abortion?
Ms. Foster. It seems like today the focus is on making
abortion legal and ubiquitous, but certainly not rare, and as
we all too often see, not safe. We need a Court that is
concerned with justice.
Mr. Issa. Well, in speaking of justice, look, I'm from a
State where even trying to provide abortion alternatives, even
making young pregnant in need aware of families who would adopt
their child and give them a good home, is discouraged and
sometimes prohibited. So, I'm not from a State that is like
Texas.
Looking at Texas and Florida for a moment, did Texas and
Florida--Florida, for example, at 22 weeks, is it consistent
with the Roe decision? Is Florida in that part of its law
looking at viability and setting a number which is certainly
viable with today's science?
Ms. Foster. Absolutely. Florida--Florida's law regarding
late-term abortions is completely in line with the
Constitution. It's completely in line with viability and the
limits set by Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey, and
it is in line with the opinion of the vast majority of
Americans, including Democrats and self-described pro-choice
Americans.
Mr. Issa. So, today, we are hearing something that is
inconsistent with 80 percent of Americans; we are hearing
testimony, except for yours, that implies extreme by a Court
that has been well-balanced, and we are hearing that somehow it
is extreme to set 22 weeks, a point at which babies are
regularly born alive and well, is somehow wrong. Isn't that
what we are hearing here today?
Ms. Foster. That is what we're hearing, and there is
nothing more tragic than abortion killing when a child can
already definitively survive. There is no medical basis for
killing a child at 22 weeks or later, absolutely none, and you
don't need to be a doctor to make that decision or judgment.
You simply need to be a human being.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I rest my case.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman's time has expired.
There is a series of Floor votes. A series of votes have
started on the Floor. So, the Committee will be in--do you
think we can do one more? Okay, we will do one more.
Mr. Jeffries?
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, for convening
this incredibly important hearing.
Ms. Foster, the Texas law doesn't start at 22 weeks, is
that correct, in terms of its restriction?
Ms. Foster. That is correct.
Mr. Jeffries. It starts at six weeks, is that true?
Ms. Foster. It does.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. So, I'm not really certain what the
prior conversation was about.
Mr. Issa. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Jeffries. No, I won't.
Under the Texas abortion ban, someone who misses that six-
week window would be forced to carry their pregnancy to term,
even if they were raped, is that correct?
Ms. Foster. Under the Texas law, that, the protections for
the mother and for the child start with that detection of the
heartbeat at six weeks, yes.
Mr. Jeffries. All right. So, there is no exception beyond
the six-week period for rape, correct?
Ms. Foster. When we are talking about rape, it is a
horrible tragedy, period. There are no ifs, ands, or buts about
that, and we need to rid the world of those kinds of actions.
Nowhere in our justice system is there ever a time when the
innocent has to pay for the crime of another, for the crime of
the father. The killing of a baby for the crimes of his or her
father is never justice. In fact, that's injustice.
Mr. Jeffries. All right. The question is, is there a rape
exception? The answer is no. The question, that is interesting
because you with my former colleagues about public sentiment.
Are the actions of rape exception popular among the American
people or even the people in the great State of Texas?
Ms. Foster. Yes, 55 percent of Texans support the heartbeat
law, let alone something as far along as 22 weeks. So, yes,
most Americans and most Texans do support this heartbeat law.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. That is very inconsistent, and that
wasn't an answer to the question that I asked.
Let's go to another particular issue. If someone misses
this six-week window, and the pregnancy resulted from incest,
would they still be forced to carry that baby to term?
Ms. Foster. Again, I would simply say the child does not
deserve the death penalty for the father's crime. So, the
heartbeat bill is protecting children from the moment that that
heartbeat is detected.
Mr. Jeffries. Right. So, there is no incest exception in
the Texas so-called statute, is that correct?
Ms. Foster. Wouldn't that fall under rape as well?
Mr. Jeffries. It is a yes-or-no question.
Ms. Foster. Correct.
Mr. Jeffries. Is there an incest exception, yes or no?
Ms. Foster. There is no specific incest exception, but the
child does not deserve to die because of the crime of a father.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. Professor Bridges, let me ask you a
question, picking up on a theme that my colleague Karen Bass
was pursuing with you in terms of criminalization. Would the
outlawing of abortion and restricting the reproductive freedom
of women, as is being done in a very extreme and Draconian way
in Texas, would that have a disproportionately adverse impact
on Black women?
Dr. Bridges. Absolutely. This is true for a number of
reasons.
(1) Black people disproportionately bear the burdens of
poverty. So, that means, (2) that they proportionately--they
have higher rates of unintended pregnancy, which is the main
reason why people choose to exercise their constitutional right
to terminate a pregnancy.
Moreover, if they do not have the right to legally
terminate a pregnancy, that means that people will resort to
things that have been criminalized. We know--just look across
the country--that even though we have race-neutral criminal
statutes, statutes that are supposed to apply to everyone
equally, people of color are those who are disproportionately
arrested, indicted, convicted, incarcerated under our criminal
laws. So, any criminal law, at least, can expect to have a
disproportionate impact on people of color.
Mr. Jeffries. Well, thank you very much.
Just in closing, I know my colleague talked about the
issues in terms of the Supreme Court. I respect all my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle, as we debate and discuss
all these issues. Part of the challenge that many of us have
with this current extreme, right-wing Supreme Court is that,
engineered by Mitch McConnell, he stole, not one, but two
Supreme Court Justices--one from President Obama and the other
from President Biden--explicitly, to jam these types of extreme
laws down the throats of the American people.
Mr. Issa. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you very much, and I yield back, Mr.
Chair, Jerry Nadler.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
A series of votes have been called on the House Floor.
Therefore, the Committee will take a recess and we will return
immediately after the conclusion of these votes.
The Committee stands in recess.
[Recess.]
Chair Nadler. The Committee will come to order.
Before we begin, I want to apologize to our Witnesses for
the lengthy and unexpected break for votes. We appreciate your
staying with us so we can continue this important hearing.
Mr. Jeffries was the last--so Mr. Johnson of Louisiana.
Mr. Jordan. Mr. Chair?
Chair Nadler. Mr. Jordan?
Mr. Jordan. Yes, Mr. Chair, our Witness was unable to stay.
Frankly if we had started this Committee on time, we would have
got to hear from her. She was doing an amazing job. Started two
hours late and then the Democrats add votes during the vote
series that weren't scheduled and now we have no Witness.
Chair Nadler. Well, your staff indicated that was fine at
the time.
Mr. Jordan. Indicated what was fine at the time? You
starting the Committee two hours late?
Chair Nadler. Yes, we had a Democratic caucus, and we
informed your staff, and they indicated it was fine.
Mr. Jordan. Not aware of any indication to that effect at
all. All I know is our Witness can't be here. She had family
commitments she had to get back home for.
Chair Nadler. I am sorry. I don't know what the--we have
three Witnesses here.
Mr. Jordan. No, the point is--
Chair Nadler. I don't know what the alternative is.
Mr. Jordan. --when you schedule a hearing, it is not the
Republican's fault or the Republican-invited Witness's fault
that you guys don't have the votes for this package that is
going to harm the country. That is not our problem.
Chair Nadler. I am not going to get into the merits--
Mr. Jordan. Now, we don't have a Witness.
Chair Nadler. I am not going to get into the merits of
whatever we are doing other than the Committee right now. We
have no alternative but to continue the hearing because when
would we reconvene it?
Mr. Jordan. Well, that is up to you. I don't get to
schedule things, which again--
Chair Nadler. We are going--
Mr. Jordan. If I get to schedule things, we would have
started at 10:00 a.m.
Chair Nadler. Yes. Well, I didn't have that choice.
Mr. Jordan. What do you mean? You are the Chair. Of course,
you had that choice.
Chair Nadler. The hearing will continue.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana?
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Today our
Democratic colleagues brought us here. We heard this morning
before we had to break a lot of grandstanding about abortion
rights, and we came here so they could criticize a State law
rather than hold a hearing on several important legislative
items that have long been-awaiting a hearing in this Committee
on this very topic of abortion. We have a number of bills we
would love to have heard.
My questions are for Ms. Moayedi, who boasted on her
Twitter feed on October 26, complete with a dancing Egyptian
princess meme, the following: Here it is. She said, ``Some days
I leave clinic and think damn, I really was put on this earth
to be the best damn abortion provider this side of the
Mississippi. Not a humble brag. That is a full on brag brag. I
am that good. Three hearts.''
Well, with those credentials, ma'am, I am really glad you
are here, at least on video. I really wish I had a full day to
ask you some questions, but let's start with the written
testimony you submitted for this hearing. I have highlighted
some of the truly incredible statements you made there.
The stunning irony of the opening of your fourth paragraph
struck me. You wrote, ``I want this Committee to spend a few
moments thinking about what it's like to be a person needing
abortion care in this country.'' So, just so I have this
straight, you want us to, quote, ``think about what it's like
to be a person,'' really. What about those thousands of
innocent pre-born children that you have been involved in the
abortion of? What about them?
As the National Right to Life Committee summarized it so
well, when a woman is pregnant science tells us that the new
life she carries is a completely separate and fully new human
being from the moment of fertilization. By the time most
abortions can be performed the baby already has a beating heart
and identifiable brain waves.
The baby living in her mother is as distinct and unique, a
separate person, human being as I am from you. This human being
like all of us has the unalienable right to life and deserves
the full protection under the law. The baby that every mother
carries as she faces life and death decisions has a beating
heart at 22 days after fertilization, brain waves as early as
six weeks after fertilization. Most abortions are not performed
until at least after--on or after nine weeks of the pregnancy.
This is a model of a 10-week pre-born child. It obviously
is a child. If you look at it at this stage, he or she has
fingers and toes. They begin to practice breathing and facial
expressions, even smiling. That is a very tiny person, ma'am.
That is what we are talking about. So, yes, let's consider what
it means to be a person.
Your written testimony goes on to describe the Texas
Heartbeat Law as, quote, ``incredibly wrong, hateful, and
cruel, and dehumanizing'' to the clients you serve. Again I
would just ask--I would say really? Really? What about the
brutal violence and the murder that is committed upon the pre-
born child? That is the ultimate violation of human rights, the
ultimate hateful and cruel act, the ultimate dehumanizing act.
It is as if the world is upside-down.
I was particularly stunned to read the conclusion of your
written testimony, ma'am, where you quoted--you said, quote,
``Abortion is love. Abortion is a blessing.'' What a twisted
thing it is to suggest that the murder of 62 million innocent
pre-born children in this country is a blessing.
Whether you or your friends acknowledge it or not, abortion
is the horrible violation of the most essential truths and
commands of our Creator. Scripture clearly teaches and our
Declaration of Independence plainly affirms a self-evident
truth, not an opinion, but a self-evident truth that we are all
created by God and given by Him the same inalienable rights
beginning with the right to life.
Congress has a duty to protect these fundamental rights and
the lives of the pre-born because they are unable to protect
themselves. To put it bluntly, our duty is to protect these
innocent children from the unimaginable callousness and
barbaric violence that is done at the hands of the industry you
represent.
All life is precious. Because we are all made in God's
image every single one of us has inestimable dignity and value,
and our value is not related in any way to the color of our
skin, the ZIP Code we live in, how good looking we are, where
we went to school. Our value is inherent because it is given to
us by God. It is a biological reality that a pre-born child is
a member of the human family and more and more the American
people understand that.
On October 9, Ms. Moayedi, you tweeted, ``It's okay and
healthy to have sex for pleasure. Birth is punishment for
pleasure.'' I want to make sure everybody knows the credentials
of our Witnesses here.
Here is another one: October 13 somebody tweeted, ``Was
your abortion experience funny? If so, direct mail or email me
at'' their email address. You shared that tweet and you said,
``I can't wait to read this piece,'' with three hearts.
Look, I think that says enough about the credentials and
about the arguments that are being made here. I think the
American people make the judgment for their self. Abortion is
not funny. It is an unspeakable tragedy. I think this hearing
is a mockery of it. I think the challenge to the Texas State
law is wrong. I am out of time. I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Cicilline?
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Chair Nadler for convening this
important hearing and thank you to our Witnesses for being here
today.
I am glad that this Committee is making clear the dire
consequences of SB 8 for American women, women in Texas and the
surrounding states, and across the country.
To be honest it is sort of disappointing that we need to
convene this hearing at all or to have this debate because so
many of us thought that this issue was well-settled law in the
United States by the decision by the United States Supreme
Court in Roe v. Wade. In fact, I am not alone in that
conclusion. Fifty-eight percent of Americans are opposed to
overturning Roe v. Wade, and 8 in 10 Americans support legal
abortion. So, lots of people thought this was settled law.
I note that in her written testimony Ms. Foster says that
the Supreme Court, and I quote, ``can and should take the
opportunity to recognize the unsettled nature of Roe v. Wade
and Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey.''
So, my first question is for you, Professor Bridges. Are
Roe and Casey unsettled law in any way?
Dr. Bridges. Absolutely not. Roe v. Wade is half a century
old. It is completely workable. The undue standard that Casey
established for reviewing the constitutionality of abortion
regulations that burden the abortion right, the fundamental
right to abortion has been workable. We've been working it for
30 years. There's nothing unsettled about Roe or Casey.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Dr. Moayedi, I hope I am pronouncing that correctly, we
have heard a lot of misinformation about abortion care from the
other side during this hearing today. Let me be clear: Abortion
care is critical, often lifesaving healthcare. To start, is
there any scientific or medical justification for a six-week
ban on abortion?
Dr. Moayedi. There's no medical or scientific explanation
or justification for any restrictions on abortion care.
Abortion is exceedingly safe. It is lifesaving and it is
critical to the health and safety of our families and
communities.
Mr. Cicilline. Is there any other misinformation about
abortion care that you would like to correct for the record
today?
Dr. Moayedi. Yes, most everything that has been spoke about
abortion care. Especially I'm troubled by asking a lawyer
earlier to answer questions about healthcare. I think that
really speaks to how some Members of this Committee feel about
science and medicine in general.
I'll say that you cannot have birth and health [inaudible]
without access to abortion care. It is not possible. Abortion
care is lifesaving. The people I take care of trust me to
listen to them and I trust them to make the best decisions for
themselves and for their families.
When people come to see me, I offer them nonjudgmental,
unbiased, nondirective information and education so that they
can make decisions for themselves, and I trust them to make the
right decisions for themselves.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you very much, doctor.
Ms. Pineiro, thank you so much for your very powerful
testimony and for being here today. Ms. Foster cited a number
of justifications for the lack of a rape exception in SB 8, and
as a sexual assault survivor I can only imagine how difficult
it was to hear those answers and I would like to give you the
opportunity to respond to anything Ms. Foster said with respect
to this legislation having no rape exception. To be clear to
require victims of sexual assault/rape, to compel them to give
birth to the child of their assailant.
Ms. Pineiro. Thank you for the question, Congressman, and
I'm really glad that I'll have the opportunity to respond to
it.
I as a survivor firmly feel both appalled and worried that
elected officials would affirm that forcing survivors of incest
and rape to remain pregnant is okay. I'm worried for many
people in this country who need abortion care. I'm worried for
the millions of survivors of incest and sexual assault that
suffer every day at the hands of abusers, at the hands of
stigma.
As I sat here listening to that, I think about all the
women in my life I love who are also survivors who called to
thank me today for sharing my testimony. Thank you.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you so much.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Biggs?
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
This hearing today is another attempt by Democrats to
promote and glorify abortion, and as Ms. Foster said, it is
also to increase the number of abortions in this country.
Earlier this year President Biden sent a budget request to
Congress that did not contain any pro-life protections and
every President since Jimmy Carter has either requested pro-
life protections or signed appropriations bills into law that
contained pro-life protections. Senator Biden supported the
Hyde Amendment, but President Biden has bowed to pressure and
renounced the Hyde Amendment.
In June, House Democrats passed several appropriations
bills that did not include any pro-life protections,
protections that have historically received bipartisan support.
In September, House Democrats passed the Women's Health
Protection Act of 2021, a misnomer as health protection
inherently does not involve the taking of a life, which would
codify into Federal law abortion on demand.
In fact, we have heard the abortion providers and
supporters testify today that this is a safe medical procedure,
and yet a safe medical procedure that has two healthy lives go
into that procedure and yet only one comes out alive is not
really healthcare, nor is it safe medical care. If the Women's
Health Protection Act of 2021 were enacted, States would be
prohibited from protecting unborn children at any stage of
development. Only one Democrat voted against the bill. That is
how far the Democrat Party has moved on this issue.
We heard a statement in OGR by a Witness; she said it again
today that abortion is a blessing, an act of love. It is
freedom. Unless you happen to be the baby in the womb. Then it
is not so much of a blessing. Really?
Yet, that same Witness said that she has been stalked and
she wants to make, quote, ``I want to make my life safer from
dangerous people,'' close quote. She should be safer from
dangerous people. I agree with that. Just like the baby in the
womb should be safe from her and dangerous people just like
her.
So, ending the life of an unborn child should never be the
easiest decision you make. Abortion is not a blessing; it is
not an act of love or freedom. We should all reflect on Mother
Teresa's words from her address at the National Prayer
Breakfast. She said, quote, ``I feel that the greatest
destroyer of peace today is abortion. It is really a war
against the child, a direct killing of the innocent child,
murder by the mother herself. And if we accept that the mother
can kill even her own child, how can we tell other people not
to kill one another?'' close quote.
The Democrat majority in this House is obsessed with
abortion. It is obsessed with ensuring that States are unable
to pass laws to protect the unborn. Well, we concede--not just
concede, we champion, we shout from the rooftops that every
life is precious and should be cherished.
In fact, the Declaration of Independence says, ``We hold
these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created
equal. They are endowed by the Creator with certain unalienable
rights, that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness.'' You cannot have liberty unless you are alive, and
you cannot pursue happiness unless you are alive. We must
protect life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, and
abortion does not protect any of these rights. It destroys
these rights.
At the same Oversight Hearing one of the Witnesses referred
to pro-life protections such as the Hyde Amendment as
discriminatory, classist, and racist. A Member of this House
stated that abortion restrictions are part of the intertwined
systems of oppression that deny Black, Indigenous, and people
of color of their constitutional rights.
Gloria Steinem claimed, quote, ``I think there is a
profoundly racist resistance to the continuation of the right
to safe and legal abortion and we see that in the nature of the
resistors and the nature of their politics,'' close quote.
Nothing could be further from the truth. The Hyde Amendment and
other pro-life protections are not racist; they actually save
lives.
However, Margaret Sanger, the founder Planned Parenthood
was a racist once saying, ``We don't want the word to go out
that we want to exterminate the African-American population.''
I will submit into the record the document where she said that.
Yet, Democrats cannot stop defending Planned Parenthood.
Instead of celebrating abortion we should all be united in
working to preserve life.
I would ask Ms. Foster if she was here, but after eight
hours of delays today our Witness is not here for me to ask
certain questions. I can conclude, as I am sure she would,
that--are we as a nation worse off because there are fewer
abortions? The answer would be indeed yes. We are a stronger
nation when we protect those that cannot protect themselves
such as the unborn.
Mr. Chair, I submit to the record the following articles:
One entitled, ``Margaret Sanger Founded of Planned of
Parenthood on Racism,'' another called, ``Margaret Sanger's
Racist Legacy Lives On at Planned Parenthood,'' and the third
is, ``Remove Statues of Margaret Sanger, Planned Parenthood
Founder, Tied to Eugenics and Racism.'' I will yield back.
Chair Nadler. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

MR. BIGGS FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Raskin?
Mr. Raskin. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate it. I am
hoping that I could use my few minutes here to cut through the
thick fog of political rhetoric we have been hearing to try to
identify what is really at stake in the discussion right now. I
want to thank our GOP colleagues for inviting Ms. Foster to
come in to testify because her testimony was [audio
malfunction] of this Committee is at this point in the debate.
[Audio malfunction] with her husband, her partner, her
physician, her family she can make the decision that she needs
originally according to a trimester framework, but then for an
abortion in the event of--that the abortion takes place pre-
viability; that is, before a fetus could live outside the body
of the mother. That is the Supreme Court's jurisprudence today
and that is where we are in America.
I think it corresponds to the views of the vast majority of
the American people that within the early period where you have
a nonviable fetus that it is within the woman's right to choose
under substantive due process liberty. It is part of the
freedom of Americans to make that decision.
Now, Ms. Foster referred to abortions as murder of children
and the murder of 20 million. I think we just heard from our
distinguished colleague from Louisiana it is 22 million people
who were killed, or children who were killed. She referred to
it as a genocide. So, I want to be clear--
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Sixty-two million.
Mr. Raskin. I am sorry. Sixty-two million. Okay. So, it is
10 times--and I have heard this also in anti-abortion rhetoric,
10 times the Holocaust that took place in Europe against the
Jews. Sixty-two million, what she described as our fellow human
beings and children have been killed through abortion. Okay?
I appreciate the moral clarity of her position. She says
that under the Declaration; and we just heard another colleague
invoke the Declaration, and of the Constitution that a fetus is
a person within the meaning of Fifth Amendment and 14th
Amendment due process. I confirmed that with her right after
her testimony. She is from Maryland. I said, I just wanted to
make sure that it is your position that a fetus is a person
within the meaning of the Constitution. She said absolutely.
Now, the reason this is so important is this: We have seen
what the Texas law, which of course bans abortion in the vast
majority of cases--it bans it for cases of rape, and she was
very enthusiastic and proud of that fact. It bans in the case
of incest, and it converts everything into this system of
bounty hunting where people are essentially turned into
vigilantes, and they can go and sue a doctor, nurse, or family
Members who help a woman exercise her constitutional rights.
So, what has happened in Texas, of course, is that people
are flowing to Oklahoma, or they are going to Louisiana, or
they are going to other parts of the country where they can get
an abortion. I think some people feel well, that is okay. You
will have this sort of checkerboard thing. Some States that
will be like the Handmaid's Tale, but you will be able to flee
to another State.
If you listen to what Ms. Foster is saying and what a
number of our colleagues are saying today is they want a
situation where abortion at any point is considered murder
under the Constitution of the United States. So, if you follow
the logic of her argument, abortion could not be allowed in any
case, in any State for rape or incest, or anything else because
it would be like allowing a State government to permit the mass
murder of a subpart of the population.
I appreciate the honesty of that view. It is an extremist
view, way outside of where the vast majority of the American
people are. If you listen to the rhetoric of our colleagues, if
you listen to the rhetoric of Ms. Foster, all of them seem to
be saying that a fetus is a person within the meaning of our
Constitution. Not only is it okay for Texas essentially to make
it impossible for a woman to get an abortion, which is why they
are all trying to get out on the Greyhound buses or whatever to
Louisiana, Oklahoma, or California, but in every State it
should be banned. If they do not believe that, then I think
they should explain why they think it is okay for abortion to
take place in some States and it is not murder, but in other
States it is. If some of them are saying what certain people
are saying, just let the States decide, I would like them to
announce that they think it should be a right in the States
that want to make it a right. It sounds to me like the new
position of the Republican Party is that we should have a
blanket ban on abortion across the land it is murder
everywhere. That is the logic of the moral and constitutional
position that they have advanced today.
If I have got--
Chair Nadler. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Roy?
Mr. Roy. I thank the Chair.
The one word that has been consistently missing from my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle today is heartbeat,
because my colleagues on the other side of the aisle do not
want to start with the concept of heartbeat. That is what this
law is titled. That is what drove and motivated the people of
Texas was to protect life when there was a heartbeat that was
able to be identified.
Every one of us in this room has a heartbeat. Every one of
us knows the tie of a heartbeat to life. That is what is at the
center of this whole conversation, but my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle do not want to start with that.
If you look at--listen to what my colleague from Maryland
just said, when he was starting from the proposition of what it
means in terms of banning certain abortions at certain times
or, as he was saying, a national ban, as he was hypothesizing.
He is starting from the premise not from the starting place of
life and trying to defend life, but from the standpoint of law
with respect to our current abortion law. That is because my
colleagues do not want to start with the concept of life
because it is a messy business.
As my colleague from Texas Mr. Gohmert described earlier,
it is a messy business. There has been a lot of misinformation
floating around about the Texas bill, right, saying that it is
a flat-out ban on abortion, yet there have been still 2,000-
plus abortions in September after the law took effect. I do not
think we have the data for October, yet. Two thousand-plus
abortions. Now, I will acknowledge that it is an over a 50-
percent drop from the five-thousand-and-something abortions in
August.
The question I was going to ask of our Witness, who
obviously is no longer here because we did not meet for two
hours this morning, and now we are meeting at night and she was
not able to be here--but what I was going to ask her is what
conversation would she like to have with the 2,000-3,000 lives
that will be walking this planet in September alone, the 2,000-
3,000 lives that will be walking this planet because of this
bill?
Now, I know my opponents on the other side of the aisle
want to fixate on Roe or Casey. That is fine. We can have those
legal debates. What we are talking about here are human beings
and life. That is what is at the center of all this. The
question becomes--and as my learned friend from Maryland talked
about, he said the vast majority of--I think--the exact
phrasing, but a nonviable fetus in the first trimester in the
context of abortion law. Okay? Texans decided through their
elected body in the State legislature to say that if there is a
heartbeat detected, that life should be protected. That is what
the people of Texas decided.
Then, I hear all this sort of wailing and gnashing of teeth
about the construct of the law, about how it is novel, yet this
construct is very similar, for example, to a State law, say
Colorado, telling a cake baker to bake a cake under Colorado
law despite conflicting with a deeply-held religious belief of
the baker, and then forcing the cake baker to decide whether to
proceed in the face of possible private litigation, challenging
his or her decision, and whatever that means in terms of cost
and impact, and then find a way to litigate his or her First
Amendment rights in State or Federal court. We act like this is
some sort of novel concept, but it is not. This is a debate.
This is the kind of thing you litigate, but you have got people
in Texas saying hey, we think life is worth protecting.
I would note, as I said before, that there were 2,000
abortions in September. In Texas in 2020, 49,000, almost 49,000
of the 54,000 roughly; I am rounding, abortions were less than
10 weeks. What we are talking about here is saying that if
there is a heartbeat, that we do everything we can to protect
that living being.
When you talk about vigilante justice, what we are talking
about is the ability to go bring suit in defense of a life.
That is what we are talking about. Nothing more; nothing less.
It is everything.
Again, I would reiterate, my colleagues on the other side
of the aisle will not want to, have not wanted to talk about
the heartbeat because they know it undermines their position. I
yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Jayapal?
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I think some of you know that I am one of the one in four
women in America who has had an abortion. I testified about
that recently. I first told my story two years ago when this
rash of bills was starting to come up, and I told it after more
than a decade. I actually had not even told my mother about it
before I wrote an op-ed in the paper. For me it was actually a
very difficult decision to make. It is not for everybody, and I
do not think it should have to be.
So, Mr. Roy, you are right. We have different starting
places. I start with the Constitution. I start with the
Constitution, and I start with the Constitutional right that I
have to make choices about my own body. I, also, am very
offended by the idea that anybody on your side would call me a
murderer for making a choice about my health and my body that
you cannot even begin to understand or know what I was dealing
with. So, please do not be paternalistic towards us as we make
choices that are our choices.
Nobody knows the circumstances we go through. Nobody
understands what we have to think about. By the way, nobody
except us is actually--the pregnant person is actually the
person that is affected along with anybody that we choose to
bring in. You know what, I would like to leave protecting my
health to my doctor and to me. I do not think that Ms. Pineiro,
or I, or any other person who makes this constitutionally-
protected choice should be traumatized by being called a
murderer. That is just outrageous in my mind.
Professor Bridges, in your testimony and your answers to my
colleagues you have spoken about the intersections of abortion,
race, and poverty and how bans on the Constitutional right to
abortion disproportionately affect women of color. Are these
intersections part of the reason a pregnant person's
Constitutional right to an abortion is treated as different and
inferior to other Constitutional rights?
Dr. Bridges. Absolutely. We live in a country of abortion
exceptionalism where the fundamental right to terminate a
pregnancy before viability is treated dramatically differently
than the other fundamental rights that are found in the
Constitution. The most glaring example of that, that abortion
rights are treated differently, is the fact that SB 8 is in
effect right now. The Supreme Court let a flagrantly
unconstitutional law go into effect and two months later we're
still dealing with the fallout from that.
Ms. Jayapal. Ms. Pineiro, thank you for your testimony.
Thank you for being here. I think it is probably impossibly
difficult to listen to what has been said today, and I thank
you for your courage and for your grace.
Another issue that often overlaps with reproductive justice
is health coverage. You highlighted in your powerful testimony
that, because of the Hyde Amendment, your abortion care was not
covered. Thinking about the patients that your fund serves and
your personal experience, how are communities of color, in
particular, disproportionately impacted by restrictions on
abortion funding by health insurance programs such as Medicaid?
Ms. Pineiro. Thank you for your question, Congresswoman,
and I appreciate the solidarity here. It is not easy to hear
the inflammatory rhetoric. As a survivor, as someone who has
had an abortion here, I am consistently offended.
This is not new. This is what people who have abortions
deal with. This is what, quote ``sidewalk counselors'' unquote,
are yelling at patients who are going in to get healthcare.
Just on the Hyde Amendment, I think it's ironic that we
spent the day talking about abortion restrictions alleging
supporting women and their families. If we were to end the Hyde
Amendment, I would hope that a priority could be to fund
programs for women and their families, so that clients like the
ones I see don't have to choose between feeding their family
and having an abortion.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Ms. Pineiro.
Dr. Moayedi, as an abortion provider in Texas, you see
firsthand the medical harms of these abortion bans. What new
challenges will patients and providers face now that Texas has
authorized private people to become vigilantes and patrol
reproductive health-care?
Dr. Moayedi. Well, I'm seeing it right now. We have people
that are critically ill and pregnant and need an abortion to
save their life, and we are having delayed care. We are going
to see a dramatic increase in maternal mortality in our State,
as people are forced to continue pregnancy. We know that
pregnancy is at least 10 times--childbirth is at least 10 times
more dangerous than abortion care, and you are more likely to
die. That is even more true in Texas with our maternal
morbidity and mortality rate. So, I am already seeing the
devastating effects in my community, and I expect that this
will be getting worse.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I just would ask that my colleagues stop calling
us murderers. I do not appreciate that.
I yield back.
Chair Nadler. I agree with you.
The gentlelady yields back.
Mr. Bishop?
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
This is a most extraordinary hearing about something that
it is unclear to me why this body, this Committee, is taking it
up. It seems inappropriate in the week that the United States
Supreme Court is undertaking solemn judicial, independent
consideration of the law in Texas.
I think I can't fail to comment on one aspect of where we
are. I would submit that there are two reasons that Texas'
Senate Bill 8 is so impactful, unusually impactful. First, is
that the exercise of the right to abortion depends upon at all
times a huge moneymaking industry carrying it out that will put
its financial interests first. Second, that industry knows that
it can never rest secure in the proclamation of a right to kill
another utterly innocent human being. It is simply an untenable
claim. It is as untenable as when the Supreme Court of the
United States in Scott v. Sandford that freed slaves of African
heritage could not become citizens of the United States or
enjoy the rights, privileges, and immunities thereof.
It will never be a settled issue until the humanity of the
unborn child is recognized and protected. This is a picture of
a child 12-weeks gestation. Her fist is clenched. It is a
little girl. It is not just some anonymous picture. She now is
a thriving child. Her hand and arm is visible. She is a human.
She cannot be disregarded. It is not possible for us to pretend
that she does not exist. She exists.
Dred Scott was settled law at one point, and it awaited the
turn of history for that to be vindicated. That is exactly the
situation here.
I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Demings?
Ms. Demings. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
First, as a Member from Florida, Ms. Pineiro, I want to
thank you so much--first, welcome to this hearing--but, also, I
thank you so much for your testimony today. People may think
they know your story, but today you have been able to tell it.
They may not care about your story, but I care. I thank you for
being an advocate on behalf of women and girls around this
nation.
I spent 27 years in law enforcement, and I want to talk
about constitutional rights. Today, I not only speak as a
Member of Congress, I also want to speak as a police officer,
as a police chief.
As an enforcer of the law, I took an oath that I would
protect and defend the Constitution of the United States. In my
law enforcement career, you can imagine I have seen and
experienced much--the joys and pains of life. I have worked
rallies and demonstrations by the Ku Klux Klan, the Neo-Nazis,
and other extremist groups. I have heard names and been called
names, like coon, savage, and I've heard the ``N'' word more
times than I care to acknowledge.
As these extremists hurled their racial slurs and insults,
as I worked the rally to provide security for them, as a law
enforcement officer who remembered the oath that I took, I
would have risked my life to stop anyone who tried to do them
harm. Of course, I did not agree with what they were saying or
why they were demonstrating, but I took an oath to protect
their right to say it and to demonstrate.
The United States Constitution is a stubborn document.
Rights are stubborn, too, even the rights of women. Roe v. Wade
is clearly established and well-settled law, and its violation
is blatantly unconstitutional.
I have also, as I end my remarks--I don't have any
questions today--but, I have also worked and seen, as a law
enforcement officer, the threats and harassment of women and
teenage girls and providers. We have certainly had to work
cases of providers who gave their lives as they were trying to
provide the service.
So, I don't know how much longer this debate is going to go
on, but we live in the United States of America. The supreme
law of the land is the U.S. Constitution. As long as I am here,
I will continue to protect and defend it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentlelady yields back.
Ms. Spartz?
Ms. Spartz. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Interesting to me how far we are drifting apart. As my
colleagues, and my Democratic colleagues used to say, abortion
should be rare; supported the Hyde Amendment on a bipartisan
basis, but take very more extreme pro-abortion ideologies, and
we can see it in some of the laws like the State of New York.
I wanted to share just a little bit. I have a unique
experience. I grew up in the Soviet Union. Actually, the Soviet
Union was the first country in Europe that in the 1920s
legalized abortion under Lenin, and it was a country where life
didn't matter; individual life didn't matter. It was all
collective, all for them, collective responsibility. Everything
is just collective as a group, not as individuals.
So, when I came here, I was very inspired and impressed by
such an intrinsically valuable value of human life that is
really embedded, including in our fine documents. Our
Declaration of Independence talks about God-given rights, and
rights to life is the first one and it is the most important,
where you matter as an individual. It is very deep with the
respect for life, all rights to life for born and unborn. It is
so American, and I just very differentiate it from a lot of
other countries around the world.
Since we don't have a Witness--I just generally was very
surprised at the timing of this hearing. I might just ask,
since we have another scholar, Ms. Bridges, here. So, as a
scholar, you point out, actually, in your testimony that Texas
law disproportionately impacts Black women, women of color. If
we are going to talk about racial injustice and Black Lives
Matter/All Lives Matter, then it seems like some issues of this
bill are not only for the community, but this I'm not going to
ask you because you and I have different disagreements on that,
and we will never agree.
My question would be for you, we have a State legislature
that has an ability to regulate abortions. We have a Supreme
Court that can rule on that and can decide if something is
unconstitutional. We actually have three cases that the Supreme
Court is going to review. One of them just was heard on Monday.
So, is it in your views or there any reason why this body
should hold this hearing for any reason than just exert
improper political influence over an independent branch of
government, our Judicial branch? So, I would have a question
for you. Do you see any reason why we should be even doing it
right at this moment?
Dr. Bridges. Yeah. Thank you for your question. I really
appreciate it.
First, it's Professor Bridges or Dr. Bridges.
Second, you said that State legislatures have enacted this
law; this is a democratically elected law. I think we should
drop a footnote next to that because it is unclear whether this
is a democratically elected law. Texas has the most
restrictive, one of the most restrictive voting rights, voting
regulations. So, I would be skeptical that all the people were
represented in this law.
Third, you're absolutely right that the judiciary is called
upon to interpret the Constitution and protect rights. We are
here today--thank you for asking that question--we are here
today because the judiciary did not do that. The judiciary did
not follow its own established precedents. Its own established
precedents would have led it to enjoin a flagrantly
unconstitutional law. It did not do that. In fact, its own
established precedence would lead it to preserve the status
quo. It did not do that. Its own established precedence--
Ms. Spartz. I think that--yes, I don't think this was a
precedent.
Dr. Bridges. Its own established precedence--
Ms. Spartz. Yes, because, actually, they are reviewing the
procedure and they are going to rule on the procedures.
Dr. Bridges. Its own established precedence--absolutely.
Ms. Spartz. They have three cases right now. They are going
to look at the procedures of the law, because it was,
actually--there is not much precedent. It was very different
law. The Supreme Court two cases to look at Texas, and it has a
Mississippi case. There are a whole lot of cases in the Supreme
Court. So, why we should be discussing this now? Is there any
reason you see to discuss it now, except to influence the
decision of the Judicial branch, which is an independent branch
and equal to us?
Dr. Bridges. We should be talking about this case because
procedural rules have substantive consequences.
Ms. Spartz. All right. They didn't rule on that.
Dr. Bridges. Second, the concept--
Ms. Spartz. That is what the problem is. They just convened
that, right?
Dr. Bridges. The mere failure to rule on the procedure--
Ms. Spartz. They are going to have two cases. They are
going to rule on procedures. Two cases they are going to
decide. They just had arguments on Monday.
Dr. Bridges. In the meantime, the rights of Texans are
being infringed. A flagrantly unconstitutional law is in
effect.
Ms. Spartz. The Court hasn't made any decisions.
So, I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The time of the gentlelady has expired.
Ms. Scanlon?
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It is rather bizarre that at this late date, 40-some-odd
years after Roe v. Wade that we have to have a hearing on this,
and that the harmful effects of SB 8 have almost immediately
manifested themselves in completely halting access to abortion
for women in Texas who are not like wealthy or connected.
It has also burdened the reproductive healthcare systems of
other States that have chosen not to violate the Constitution.
In doing so, this law has created a framework that deliberately
seeks to violate a women's constitutional freedom to decide
when and whether to become a parent, based on her own unique
circum-stances.
SB 8 does so by creating a tortured legal fiction to avoid
judicial review, and in the process, threatens other
constitutional rights. Just as a baseline, the decision to have
an abortion is deeply personal. We, as legislators, must ensure
that anyone who becomes pregnant can access a full range of
safe medical care, free from fear, coercion, or lawmakers who
want to insert themselves into a medical practice.
We have heard several stories of why people may choose to
access abortion care. In my professional life, I have had two
clients who faced the choice of whether to carry a pregnancy to
term or not. Both were young women who had a first child when
they were in their teens and had suffered abuse at the hands of
family Members. They struggled to keep themselves and their
children housed and fed, and when they were victimized by much
older men, became pregnant again. They each had their own
personal reasons for choosing not to have another child,
including compelling medical, financial, and emotional reasons.
One lived in Pennsylvania and was able to make the best
decision for her circumstances. She chose not to have another
child at that time, and as a result, was able to leave the
abusive relationship which had caused the pregnancy, finish
school, get a good job, marry, and have two more children with
her husband.
The other lived in Texas, and this was before SB 8 took
effect, but not before the State had imposed some of the most
restrictive anti-abortion laws in the country. She couldn't
afford to travel or pay for an abortion, and she was forced to
bear a child, although she and the child suffered preventable
physical injury and great economic harm.
So, these are just two of the stories. We have heard other
stories. It pains me that we need to share personal stories
with private reasons to demonstrate the endless array of
reasons why someone might choose not to avail themselves of
having another child. These stories shouldn't have to be told
over and over again.
Professor Bridges, I just wanted to dig a little bit into
some of the legal basis for this crazy SB 8 law. So, as I
understand it, the Texas legislature has decided to make having
an abortion illegal in Texas but has outsourced enforcement of
that from the State to private citizens who can sue anyone who
has an abortion or helps someone to have an abortion, and get
$10,000 from them.
This seems really tortured, and it also seems to implicate
other rights. So, for example, if we were to have a State that
decided to outlaw evangelical Christians--I think practicing
your First Amendment religious rights is a pretty clear
constitutional rule. So, if the State of Georgia, say, said no
more evangelical Christians; it is illegal to practice that
religion in the State of Georgia, and the State is not going to
do anything about it, but anyone anywhere--it doesn't matter if
you are in Georgia or anywhere else--you can sue anyone who is
a practicing Christian in Georgia for a million dollars. Isn't
that what this law is trying to do in Texas, and what is the
problem with that?
Dr. Bridges. Absolutely. So, we're here today because the
Supreme Court has allowed Texas to offer all the States a
blueprint for violating constitutional rights. No
constitutional right is safe. This begins at abortion, but who
knows where it will end? The First Amendment free exercise
right; the 14th Amendment right to same sex marriage; the 14th
Amendment right to consensual sexual contact; the Second
Amendment right to bear arms--no constitutional right is safe,
and that is why we're here today.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you.
I think the very structure of this law should give people
pause and be more than solid grounds for why it should never
have taken effect, should not be a model for other states, and
should be promptly overturned.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentlelady yields back.
Mr. Bentz?
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I join Mr. Roy, Mr. Johnson of Louisiana, and Ranking
Member Jordan in expressing my regret that Ms. Foster is not
here to elaborate upon her remarks regarding additional options
for women who find themselves with an unplanned pregnancy. I
regret that she is not here to speak to the offerings of the
thousands of resource centers across this United States. I
regret that she is not here to further elaborate and emphasize
that life is not frivolous. She is not here.
So, with that, Mr. Chair, I yield the balance of my time to
Mr. Johnson from Louisiana.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. I thank the gentleman from
Oregon.
Ms. Pineiro, you are a board member of the Central Florida
Women's Emergency Fund, which strongly supports legalized
abortion, right?
Ms. Pineiro. That is incorrect.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Okay. What does that organization
do?
Ms. Pineiro. I'm the Co-Executive Director of Florida
Access Network.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Okay. Well, our hearing outline
said other. So, the Action Network strongly supports legalized
abortion, right?
Ms. Pineiro. Correct.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Help me understand the position
of your organization. These are simple yes-or-no questions.
Is it okay to murder a 10-year-old child?
Ms. Pineiro. No one should be forced to remain pregnant if
they don't want to.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Is it okay to murder a 10-year-
old child, yes or no?
Ms. Pineiro. I am deeply offended that you would call me a
murderer.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. I'm not calling you a murderer,
ma'am. I'm asking you a question. Is it okay to murder a 10-
year-old child? This is about your organization's position.
Would they say yes or no?
Ms. Pineiro. My organization's position is that no one
should be forced to remain pregnant if they don't want to. Any
abortion restrictions are--
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Okay, okay. Let me answer the
question for you. I'm assuming that you do not advocate for the
murder of children. Okay. What about a toddler? I assume you
would say it is not okay to murder a toddler, either, a 2-year-
old. What about a newborn. Let me ask you this: Is it the
position of the organization, are you for partial birth
abortion? Is that the position of the organization? Would you
support that?
Ms. Pineiro. What my organization is for is to support the
people who need abortion care who are lied to when they are
sent to alleged pregnancy resource centers that lie to the
patients--
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Okay. Would that--excuse me just
a second. Just a second. Would that apply--
Ms. Pineiro. --and tell them--
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Would that apply to a woman who
is nine months pregnant?
Ms. Pineiro. I disagree with the premise of your question.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Would you support the abortion of
a late-term unborn child?
Ms. Pineiro. Anybody should have, should have the right to
have an abortion at any time for any reason.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Anytime? Okay. That's what I
need. So, here's the thing. I'm just trying to understand the
logical fallacy. So, if we would not support--and I mean this
sincerely and this is not for you personally; I'm talking about
the organization. You support an advocacy organization.
If it is not okay to take the life of a small child outside
the womb, why is it okay to take the life of a small child nine
inches up the birth canal inside the womb? What is the
distinction? Help me understand the distinction of that.
Ms. Pineiro. I don't understand the question.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. You would not support the murder
of a small child, right? No one would. No civilized person
would. Why do we support the taking of a life of a child right
before they are delivered?
Ms. Pineiro. No civilized person should support forced
pregnancy.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Does abortion take the life of
something that is alive?
Ms. Pineiro. No one should be forced to remain pregnant
against their will.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Ma'am, you are not answering my
questions.
Let me ask the doctor on this screen. Is it okay--or let me
ask you this: Does abortion kill something that is alive, take
the life of something that is alive?
Dr. Moayedi. Sir, the way that you are asking these
questions actually intentionally invite violence and harassment
to both of us, to all of us.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. I'm sorry, that is an absurd
response. You are a medical doctor. Tell me if there is an
unborn child in the womb or not. Are we killing something that
is alive? When you dismember something in the womb, is that a
human being or not? It is living being, yes or no?
Dr. Moayedi. I am here to talk about medical care.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Yes, this is a direct question
about medical care, ma'am. You positioned yourself as an expert
on the issue. Are we taking a life or not? Is it a life, yes or
no?
Dr. Moayedi. What you are discussing is not the reality of
how abortion care is delivered in this country.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. If we were in a courtroom, I
would say that is nonresponsive. I think we all know why you
don't want to respond to that, because the obvious fact here is
that you are taking a human life. It is a small human life. It
is a human being.
Let me ask you, Doctor, should abortion be allowed because
of the sex of the pre-born child, in your medical opinion?
Dr. Moayedi. I do not believe that there should be any
restrictions on the bodily autonomy of--
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Okay. All right. Hold on. So, if
someone gets a pregnancy test and they say it is a little girl,
and I want a little boy, it is okay to abort that child?
Dr. Moayedi. I have never seen a pregnancy test that tells
you the sex.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Would it be okay or not?
Dr. Moayedi. I have never--
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. If someone has an ultrasound and
they know they have one sex and they want to abort it, is that
okay?
Chair Nadler. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Ms. Garcia?
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. I will just note that no one
answered the questions.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chair Nadler. Ms. Garcia?
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you to all the Witnesses here today. I know that it
has been a long day and thank you for your patience and thank
you for allowing yourselves to be questioned by all of us.
Especially to you, Ms. Pineiro, for just sharing your
deeply personal story. I know it still breaks your heart to
have gone through both of those abortions and the reasons that
you had to. So, thank you for sharing.
Women's freedom to choose is under attack in our country.
Simply put, politicians and the government have no place
controlling women's freedom to choose their reproductive care.
They should not be in the business of controlling women's
bodies, period.
The Texas law--and just for the record, I am a native
Texas, and I am also Catholic--the Texas law has already had
devastating effects on Texas women, especially women with low
income, Black and Latino women suffering the most. Many have
crossed State lines to access abortion. In a sense, some of
these women are fortunate because they have the resources and
the logistical knowhow to seek an abortion outside of Texas.
Consider, for instance, a woman living in my district who
would have to drive 10 hours to get to a State where she could
access reproductive healthcare. She would have to make the
drive alone or risk a loved one being sued for helping her.
According to a filed amicus brief by Planned Parenthood
with the U.S. Circuit of Appeals for the 5th Circuit, one woman
said she is concerned with taking time off work to travel for
the abortion because it could affect her job. She said she
struggles to cover expenses and lives paycheck to paycheck. She
considered using a ride service taxi, but the idea is scary
because she knows she would be in a car alone with a stranger,
as she is coming off anesthesia. This is appalling that women
have to have these considerations.
In South Texas, where I grew up, many Latinas and
immigrants already fear deportation and face huge barriers to
abortion due to long distance and travel restrictions. Another
woman in Houston who only speaks Spanish shared her concern
that she had not been to another State and could not understand
why, still cannot understand why, they have to leave Texas for
an abortion or what would be required when they get to another
State. This is heartbreaking.
Just a few weeks ago, I visited my local Planned Parenthood
health center and heard countless other stories about Texas
women who are resorting to self-help, including drinking
abortion tea that they found on the internet. Dare we say that
many of these results, may end up in backroom-alley abortions
and maybe even the use of hangers, as we saw in the past.
This is totally unacceptable. We trust women to know what
they need and how they come to this decision with their
families, their faith, and their future in mind and Americans
agree.
Mr. Chair, I have an exhibit here that I ask unanimous
consent to be entered into the record.
Chair Nadler. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

MS. GARCIA FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Garcia. It is the results of a Gallup poll which says
Americans still oppose overturning Roe v. Wade. Nearly 6 in 10
Americans do not want Roe v. Wade overturned. Texans, too,
agree.
Chair Nadler. Without objection.
Ms. Garcia. A recent poll in April of 2021 says that a
majority of Texans are against new abortion restrictions or
oppose provisions in SB 8--again, a majority of Texans, April,
just a few months ago.
So, the fact remains that this bill has had devastating
effects on women and will continue to do that.
So, I want to start with the doctor. Again, thank you for
going through all the other things that Texas does to restrict
abortions.
Are you seeing more and more women going out of State,
particularly minority women? Have you seen any impact or
effects of any self-help that they may have done on their own?
Dr. Moayedi. I am. I travel to Oklahoma to provide abortion
care as well. Prior to SB 8, maybe about 10-15 percent of my
patients in Oklahoma would be from North Texas; last week, 80
percent--80 percent. Some as far as Galveston and Texas City
drove to get to Oklahoma City. So, I'm already seeing the
devastating effects.
Thankfully, we have options to self-manage abortion with
mife-pristone and misoprostol that can be safe, but the option
is limited for many people.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you. I see I just have eight seconds, and
I wanted to ask you, Ms. Pineiro, is there anything else you
wanted to add about your experiences?
Ms. Jackson Lee. [Presiding.] The gentlelady's time--the
gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman from Utah is recognized, Mr.
Owens.
Mr. Owens. Thank you, Ms. Chair and Witnesses who are
appearing before our Committee today.
I, first, want to take a moment to say that my constituents
from Utah have some serious concerns about the Department of
Justice suing Texas because the Biden Administration doesn't
like one of its laws. Utah signed an amicus brief in United
States v. Texas. I would like to request unanimous consent to
enter that brief into the record.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

MR. OWENS FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Owens. I would like to share my perspective on the
devastating impact abortion has had on my community. In June of
this year, I wrote an op-ed on why Planned Parenthood is the
greatest threat to Black lives in America. I would like to
request unanimous consent to enter that full piece into the
record.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

MR. OWENS FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Owens. Here's a few highlights. A highlight in a recent
weekend edition of The New York Times was stark, on the head of
Planned Parenthood, ``We're done making excuses for our
founder.''
The author of this article, Alexis Miguel Johnson, said
that her organization, the largest provider of abortion in the
United States and perhaps the world, would have to reckon with
Margaret Sanger and her association with the White supremacist
groups and eugenics.
It's important to acknowledge Sanger's views on Planned
Parenthood's use of birth control to eliminate those she
considered nothing but human weeds.
What does targeting race as human weeds look like? Black
women represent six percent of America's population yet make up
40 percent of women who end up on the operation table of a
wealthy abortionist.
Twenty million Black babies have been exterminated over the
last 40 years, represents 40 percent of my race as viewed by
the left as nothing but human weeds.
In a civilized country, the death of 40 million Black
innocent babies in combination with over 60 million babies of
all race and colors would be considered genocide.
The left considers this medical care, and the death of all
these innocents is love and blessings. The left preaches us
about equity. Where's the equity when the lowest percentage of
Americans are killed at a higher rate than the majority race?
Today in the U.S., the abortion rate of African American
women is over three times that of White women. From 2000-2010,
African Americans as a percentage of the total U.S. population
dropped one-seventh percent. We have a party that actually
believes that stopping the killing of Black babies at a rate
three times more than White babies is not fair to Black
mothers.
No, my friends, Black babies are not human weeds, and our
communities should celebrate--should not celebrate throwing
them away. Black mothers would love their children as much as
White mothers if they were only taught at a young age that it's
not cool to abort them, if they were taught that it is not
liberation and should not go--liberating them from going
through the hassle and innocence of being a mother.
Twenty million children destroyed in 40 years, how many of
them if allowed to live would have solved our climate crisis?
Been the next Martin Luther King to unite all races? Another
Ben Carson, leading our nation against the fight of cancer and
heart disease? What a crushing loss to our national community
and well-being.
No, losing our precious babies for billions in profit to an
abortion industry is not love and blessings to the mother and
lives, to the lives of millions that have been destroyed,
mothers and babies.
Justice Clarence Thomas may have put it best when he wrote
that, ``technological advances have only heightened the
eugenics potential for abortion, as abortion now can be used to
eliminate children with unwanted characteristics.''
This law and other laws like it promote the State's
compelling interest of preventing abortion from becoming a tool
of modern-day eugenics.
I'm the father of six children and 15 grandchildren. My
life has been one, like everyone in here, has gone up and down,
from being a Super Bowl champion to losing everything, going
through bankruptcy, living in a one-bedroom basement apartment
in Brooklyn with four kids.
We chose to have another two because we believe in the
blessings of the eternal life of families. I'm going to give a
message to those who are listening. Do not listen to the dark
message of hopelessness. The tough times you might go through
are temporary.
The life that you give to your children, which you build as
a family, is eternal. There is nothing like the memories I now
share and believe that it's not playing on a football field
that makes a difference today.
It's watching my six kids, my 15 grandkids, how tight and
how close we are, how much enjoy our company and the pride I
have in what they've done to raise their kids. That's the
legacy of moms and dads.
That's the legacy that many moms will never ever have
because they've been taught that killing a baby is cool. Many
dads will not have because they've been taught it's better to
go to an abortion center than man up and take care of their
child.
Vote for life. Live your life. I give back my time.
Ms. McBath. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to you
for being here today for such a lengthy bit of time to just
really discuss this serious attack on our constitutional
rights. I can't tell you how much this means to me.
Generations of women have fought for their place in
society. They fought for the right to vote. They fought for a
seat in the university classroom, a seat in the boardroom and a
seat in our own government, and they fought for the freedom to
make our own decisions about our bodies, health, and families.
Generations of women secured these gains so that we could
build on their efforts toward a just and equitable society. We
cannot allow the work to be undone. We've seen attempts to
legislate away women's personal decisions time and time again.
These efforts always caused the greatest harm to women of
color and those without resources, as we've discussed over and
over again today, those who face the greatest obstacles to
traveling long distances just to get the care that they need.
This attack also poses a grave new risk that any of our
constitutional rights could become the focus of a strange
system of vigilante justice, a system in which a neighbor is
pitted against neighbor, eroding the sacred trust that binds
our communities, and I am deeply troubled by what this law
could mean for the constitutional right to abortion and all our
constitutional rights if this vigilante scheme is allowed to
continue and be replicated.
I'm so pleased today that we are able to shed light on the
experiences of people in Texas that are already--this is
already happening to them right now, and that we will continue
to see this spread throughout the country if our courts are not
going to uphold the Constitution.
Before we get started today, I just want to know, Professor
Bridges, is there anything that you would like to respond to?
Dr. Bridges. Oh, my God, thank you so much for the
opportunity to respond. I would love to respond to some of the
comments that were just made by Representative Owens.
He speaks about the higher rates of abortion among Black
people. He doesn't mention the reasons for that. The reasons
for the higher rates of abortion are not because Black people
have been taught that abortion is cool.
The reason for the higher rates of abortion is due to
poverty, is due to the lack of access to contraception. It's
due to the fact that people are not being educated about sex
and pregnancy in public schools.
It's due to the inaccessibility of healthcare. So those are
the reasons for the higher rates of abortion among Black
people. The suggestion that Black people are terminating
pregnancies because we think it's cool suggests that he thinks
that Black women are stupid.
I assure you, Black people are not stupid. They're using
abortion care to exact some modicum of control over their
lives, especially when they're mired in structural conditions
that make it impossible for them to control their lives
otherwise.
He didn't mention at all what happens when we restrict
abortion. We force birth. People are ignoring that throughout
this entire hearing. We're forcing birth.
Particularly, we need to pay attention to the fact that
we're forcing Black people to give birth in a country in which
we have terrible rates of maternal mortality compared to our
peers and we have racial disparities in maternal mortality,
meaning that three to four times as many Black people should
expect to die during pregnancy, childbirth, or shortly
thereafter.
So, we're forcing Black people to engage in a task that is
dangerous to their lives.
Finally, we live in a country in which poverty is defined
as neglect and that Black people can expect to have their
children taken away from them by the child welfare system, by
the family regulation system.
This is a cruel set of circumstances that we're creating
where we force birth, we force people to engage in a task that
it's dangerous to them--Black people to engage in a task that
is dangerous to them, and then we have them create families
that we so easily dissolve through the family regulation
system.
So, I think it's important to understand all that context
and not to attribute the rates of abortion among Black people
to we think it's cool.
Ms. McBath. I want to thank you very much for expanding
upon that and telling us the truth of the nature of what's
really happening in the country.
Dr. Moayedi, your testimony notes that SB 8 will have
consequences for people with highly desired pregnancies who
have pregnancy complications. Can you expand on those
complications that might lead a doctor to discuss the option of
abortion even when a pregnancy is wanted?
Dr. Moayedi. Yes. So, even at maybe 15-16 weeks, a bag of
water can break the amniotic fluid. This is a condition where
the treatment is--
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. McClintock is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I've spent 35 years either in the California State
legislature or here in the Congress, and this is a debate that
is very familiar. It's been going on without resolution on
either side all those years.
I've always been pro-life. I've always voted that way. I
think with respect to the Texas bill, I'd prefer a standard be
the heartbeat and brain activity. At least the Texas standard
gives us a rational and science-based standard to begin
discussing.
That said, my personal opinion is the Texas law is bad law.
I think it's very dangerous to enforce criminal law and civil
courts to replace public prosecutors with freelance litigators.
Criminal courts are there for a reason. They require a
higher standard of proof than the civil courts. They require
unanimous jury verdicts. That's to assure that if we are going
to use government power to injure someone, either to deprive
them of their freedom or their property, it has to be done with
these standards and safeguards.
So, I'm not entirely unsympathetic to the opponents of the
bill. The enforcement mechanisms of this law are, to my eye,
too clever by half. That is the matter that the Supreme Court
is considering right now, and rightly so.
We may like their decision. We may not like their decision.
If we don't like it, we are the Congress. It's our job to
produce legislation to address our objections.
It is not clear to me what we're doing here today except
trying to bring inappropriate pressure to the court or to
politicize its deliberations.
I, frankly, don't have any questions of the Witnesses
before us because they appear to be incapable of responding in
any other fashion other than repeating predetermined sound
bites.
If Mr. Owens would like to have another crack at it, I'll
be happy to yield the balance of my time to him.
Mr. Owens. Thank you so much. Just wanted to make a couple
comments.
This is the first time in my lifetime heard that Black
people having a family is dangerous. I have a feeling all races
deal with the same issues when having babies and overcoming
obstacles. It's called life. I've never heard that it's
dangerous to have a baby.
I think part of this is the low expectations that so many
people have of my race. It bothers me tremendously.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Owens. No. I'm sorry. Let me just finish up. I'm sorry.
I want to continue to repeat because I know people have not
heard this, I lived in a time when my race was literally one of
the best, most progressive and productive races of our country.
We led our country in the growth of the middle class, men
matriculating from college, men committed to marriage. A Black
woman could expect to be married before--in higher rates than
White women until 1970. That's the environment. Believe me, in
those days abortion was not prevalent in my race because it was
expected men to take care of their families.
That's right, it was not prevalent in my race in the 1960s.
I was there. I know that. Okay. Anyway, so I'm sorry, I didn't
mean to have this exchange. It's interesting when we have
facts, we have experience, and people who have no clue are
experts.
So, I just want to say this, my friends. We have options.
When it's being hopeful that we overcome obstacles, having a
belief that our kids are precious, that our legacy be put in
place and in a way that our name will be a good name, we can be
proud of our kids.
I'll tell you something I find interesting is how very
wealthy people do not even consider abortion. Very wealthy
people love their kids, and they will have their kids as they
tell the rest of the society--the poor--how they should stay
hopeless and kill their kids.
Let me just say this. If we're going to ever get our family
back, it comes down to loving the family unit. It comes down to
us deciding that it's worth the price to do whatever we can to
save, to work, to sacrifice, like every other race has done
before now, and realize that those kids growing up will love
themselves because they learned--they see what it is to be
loved in their household.
We are having problems in our family right now, the Black
family, because kids are growing up realizing they have no
wealth--they have no worth. They're told early how easy it is
and how cool it is to have abortions. If they don't want to
really deal with it, Planned Parenthood, they'll take that
issue off your shoulders in a heartbeat, of course, full price.
Let's back to understanding that our children are gifts
from God, period, and if we are given the opportunity to work
our very best to help them, support them to raise them, we'll
get help from God to do just that, and our country will come
back in a big, big way.
I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman yields back.
I yield myself just a moment to indicate that the highest
maternal mortality is among women of color, particularly
African Americans.
Mr. McClintock. A point of order. A point of order, Madam
Chair. On whose time is the Chair speaking?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mine, to correct the record. I'd like to
yield to the gentleman, Mr. Stanton, for five minutes.
Mr. McClintock. You don't have time, Madam Chair.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Stanton. I want to thank our Witnesses for joining us
here today and your patience with a long day up here on Capitol
Hill. Your testimony today is crucial for the work of this
Committee and for our Congress.
Every person deserves access to reproductive healthcare
that is safe and affordable. It is a fundamental constitutional
right recognized by the United States Supreme Court now for
nearly 50 years.
Unfortunately, since Roe v. Wade was decided, too many
State governments across our nation have set their sights on
eliminating this constitutional right. In States like mine, in
Arizona, legislatures and governors have chipped away at it,
inserting their own personal views into conversations between a
woman and her doctor and setting up roadblock after roadblock.
In Arizona, to obtain an abortion the State law requires
people to visit their doctor twice 24 hours apart to be read a
government-mandated script and obtain an ultrasound, all
obstacles that do not prioritize health or safety.
What's more, Arizona is one of nine States that still has
pre-Roe abortion ban on the books. Now, emboldened by justices
appointed to the Supreme Court by the previous Administration,
some States have gone even further, attempting to effectively
ban abortion completely.
That's what happened in Texas where Senate Bill 8 has
sought to see these fundamental rights stripped away and in
Mississippi where the legislature has passed a facially
unconstitutional law with the expressed intent of challenging
Roe.
These are laws that affect every State because I have grave
concerns that the protections of Roe and its progeny may be
erased by the Supreme Court. It's one of the reasons that I
cosponsored and voted for the Women's Health Protection Act,
which would enshrine a woman's right to choose in Federal
statute.
What we know is that these anti-choice laws
disproportionately affect low-income communities and
communities of color. If Roe were overturned, Arizona would
become one of several States where abortion was outlawed and my
constituents would no longer have access to the reproductive
healthcare that is their right.
I have a question for Dr. Moayedi.
Doctor, how do excessive restrictions force providers to go
against their expert medical judgment and prevent them from
providing the very best care possible to their patients?
Dr. Moayedi. Thank you so much for that question. I have so
many examples of how these restrictions impact evidence-based
care.
So, in Texas we have a law that requires that I provide
medication abortion per the FDA label. There is no other area
of medicine where a State law requires following the FDA label.
This becomes problematic because the second medication used in
medication abortion, misoprostol, can be taken in different
ways.
The FDA label says that it has to be placed in the sides of
the cheeks, but that medication can actually be swallowed, it
can be placed under the tongue, or can be placed in the vagina
and also works in the process.
Because of that law, when I have patients with unique
medical conditions that might prevent them from taking that
medication orally, ordinarily, I would recommend that they take
that medication vaginally, and when I practiced in Hawaii
that's what I would do. I would tell them to take the
medication vaginally.
So, for example, if someone has Crohn's disease or IBS,
they might not want to take it orally. They would take it
vaginally. In Texas, I can't tell them to do the best thing for
their health in that process because the State restricts
evidence-based care. So, that's one example right there.
The State has just passed or the Fifth Circuit has upheld a
ban on second trimester procedures, and so now we--once,
hopefully, SB 8 is overturned, the State actually tells me how
to operate.
So, there's nowhere else in my gynecologic practice where
the State would tell me that you need to do the hysterectomy
like this, that you should put the clamp here and you should do
the incision there.
That's not how we practice medicine at all. Now, I'm at
risk for a criminal penalty for doing a procedure in the wrong
way, the way that the State doesn't want me to do. This doesn't
make any sense.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you. I really appreciate that answer. I
have 30 seconds left.
Professor Bridges, I do want to give you one additional
opportunity to respond to anything one of my colleagues may
have said earlier that you would like to respond to.
Dr. Bridges. Yes. Thank you again for the opportunity.
I would just encourage Representative Owens to Google
racial disparities in maternal mortality and morbidity. I've
actually written an article about that. It's in the NYU Law
Review. It gives you a lot of information about how it's
dangerous to undergo childbirth.
I would just like to just note for the record that there
were a lot of fact-free claims that Representative Owens made--
wealthier people don't have abortions because wealthier people
love their children. So, it's just the fact-free level of these
claims were remarkable.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you, Professor. I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentlelady from Pennsylvania is
recognized for--
Ms. Dean. Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to thank all our
testifiers today. What patience you have shown for a very long
day with a very difficult topic, but we really appreciate your
personal experience, your expertise, and the value you bring to
this conversation. So, thank you.
Ms. Pineiro, I would like to particularly thank you for
your personal story and for the advocacy that you bring and the
courage that you show.
In reflecting on SB 8--and I told you this--I am reminded
of a story of which is a story of my mother-in-law, Joan
Canaan. She was the youngest of six children growing up in 1930
Scranton. Her mother became pregnant with a seventh child, and
the doctors discovered that the child would be stillborn. They
also knew that the mother would likely die in childbirth.
It was the 1930s. It was Scranton. It was a Catholic
community. So, her family did not have a choice; the choice was
with the government and with the church. Maybe the outcome
would have been the same. Perhaps she would have chosen to go
forward with that pregnancy. We don't know.
We will never know because she and her family had no
choice. The baby was stillborn, and Joan's mother died in
labor, forfeiting six young children. May we never go back to
that.
This was the 1930s, some 90 years ago, and yet we are still
discussing the merits or the right of a woman to choose. While
we should all be alarmed at Texas' SB 8, the bill follows a
long list of restrictions in Texas.
In fact, before this de facto ban, Texas had enacted 26
abortion restrictions to a woman's right to choose. These
restrictions, or rules, on abortions include, but not limited
to, State-mandated counseling to discourage women from having
an abortion, a 24-hour waiting period, banning telehealth,
requiring women to physically visit their healthcare provider.
Due to waiting periods and scheduling, we know the delays that
causes; prevention of health insurance, and also, as the doctor
told us, the offering of bad information to patients.
We can no longer say Roe v. Wade is the law of the land.
So, Dr. Moayedi, could you elaborate on the impact some of
these barriers have had on women in your practice? I would like
to pick up on a question that my friend and colleague asked
you. Can you expand on some of the complications, perhaps like
the one I told you about my mother-in-law's mom, some of the
complications that might lead a doctor to discuss the option of
abortion even when a pregnancy is wanted?
Dr. Moayedi. Thank you so much for allowing me to continue.
So, yes, at any point in pregnancy, for example, at 15 weeks,
someone's bag of water can break. When that happens, there is
no intervention that can help continue that pregnancy. There is
no intervention that can assure life for that pregnancy, and so
the recommendation at that point is delivery or a procedure, an
abortion, to prevent death in that person.
This law, SB 8, prevents us from being able to do that, and
we have to actually wait until the person is critically ill
before we can intervene. So, that situation comes up quite a
bit, where someone has pregnancy complication and a very highly
described pregnancy, but the bag of water breaks, or they start
hemorrhaging or bleeding very heavily, and we need to
intervene.
There are also conditions that the fetus, the pregnancy
itself, can develop that actually mirror a condition in the
pregnant person. So, if a fetus develops severe what is called
Hydrops, or takes on fluid in its body, there is a condition
called mirror syndrome, and that can happen in a pregnant
person, too, and cause death in them as well.
So, these are just a few examples, but there are literally
hundreds and thousands of things that can go wrong during
pregnancy. So, every pregnant person needs the option, the
availability, to swift, expert abortion care to save their
lives when they need it.
Ms. Dean. Did any patient ever come to you saying, ``I
would like an abortion because it is cool?''
Dr. Moayedi. Never.
Ms. Dean. I wouldn't think so. It is quite serious.
Dr. Moayedi. I find it incredibly insulting to hear that
about women, but particularly about Black women. I trust Black
women to make the best decisions for their families, and that
includes abortion care.
Ms. Dean. In the remaining--I have no time left. In any
event, I would love to have had more conversation with you,
Professor. I apologize. I will submit my question to you
privately.
I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Expired, and the gentlelady yields back.
I recognize the gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Escobar, for
five minutes.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you, Madam Chair. I first want to thank
our panelists for sticking it out, being with us for a very,
very long day here in our nation's capital. I also want to
apologize for the incredibly shocking and disrespectful
comments that have come from some of my Republican colleagues.
As a native and lifelong Texan, it has been heartbreaking
to see my State lead the way in eroding decades of gains in
voting rights, civil rights, human rights, and women's rights.
We have talked at great length, and rightfully so, about the
dangerous impact Texas SB 8's law has on women and on Texans.
It also has a dangerous impact on providers.
Dr. Moayedi, throughout today's hearing, my colleagues
across the aisle have cut you off and asked you questions in
very bad faith. One of my colleagues just went so far as to
dismiss your concerns about how the language that he uses
endangers you and the rest of the Witnesses on this panel.
I would like for you to please explain to the public, and
explain to our Committee, the danger that this rhetoric puts
you and other abortion service providers and advocates in.
Dr. Moayedi. Thank you so much for that question,
Representative, and thank you for your service to our State.
Anytime there is a hearing like this, Federally or locally in
our legislature, we see an increase in protesting and
harassment outside of our clinics. I see personally an increase
in letters, threats, harassment online, and by mail.
When the Representatives engage in this sort of conduct
where they equate me or my colleagues here as murderers, right
now, I have been receiving messages on Instagram and on Twitter
saying that I am evil person, that I deserve to die. Right?
I am a mom, too. I am a person, too. I deeply care for my
community. I am not in DC today, because last night I was
delivering babies here in my community. So, I find it deeply
troubling as a mom, as an OB/GYN, and a servant to my community
that people would speak about me in this way and put me in
danger. Put me in danger.
These people have yelled in my face before, but also yelled
in my child's face before. That is not something who cares
about children at all.
Ms. Escobar. I think representing a community--El Paso,
Texas--that understands the power of words and the consequences
of words, I think what we have seen here on this Committee
coming from the dais is the use of words that are intended to
fuel anger and possibly very dangerous consequences. So, I
thank you for sharing that with me.
I have a follow-up question for you. Throughout the
hearing, you have been interrupted. Things have been said that
you have wanted to respond to but have not been able to respond
to. Is there anything that you heard here today about
pregnancy, abortion care, or the impacts of SB 8 that you would
like to clarify for the record using the remainder of my time?
Dr. Moayedi. Yes, I would love to. I want to start by
saying that abortion has always existed. As long as people have
given birth, they have had abortions. Abortion is a necessary
part of our reproductive lives. Without access to abortion
care, maternal health, and mortality is extremely in danger.
I also want to clarify that abortion is not always a tragic
decision, that many people are resolute in their decisions. It
is okay to have one abortion. It is okay to have more than one
abortion. Abortion is not dangerous. It is incredibly safe. In
a State like Texas, it is 10-13 times safer than childbirth.
Every single person in our State deserves the right to
become pregnant. They deserve the right to not be pregnant.
They deserve the right to parent their children in safe and
healthy environments.
If the Representatives here truly care about children and
families, I would love to work with them on policies that truly
elevate our communities. Right now, we are talking about paid
parental leave, and so many Representatives here don't want to
support parents after they give birth. That is one of the best
things you can do to prevent infant mortality. It is one of the
best things you can do to prevent postpartum depression.
I don't understand at all why they don't care about us and
why they don't care about our families.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much. There is clearly a
difference between being pro-life and being pro-birth. Thank
you for your testimony.
Madam Chair, I ask unanimous--or, Mr. Chair, I ask
unanimous consent to submit into the record testimony from the
Texas House Women's Health Caucus that was submitted to the
Texas House.
[The information follows:]

MS. ESCOBAR FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chair Nadler. [Presiding] Without objection.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you.
Chair Nadler. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Ross.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and thank you so
much to the Witnesses for their patience and for your
dedication to the women of Texas and the women of this country.
I want to start with a couple of quotes from Justice Ginsburg I
know our Chair started, but I think it is a nice way to remind
us of why we are here today and why this Texas law is so
pernicious.
I want to remind the Committee of what Justice Ruth Bader
Ginsburg wrote in her 2007 dissent in Gonzalez v. Carhart:

Legal challenges to undue restrictions on abortion procedures
do not seek to vindicate some generalized notion of privacy.
Rather, they center on a woman's autonomy to determine her
life's course and, thus, to enjoy equal citizenship statute.

Justice Ginsburg argued this point in her 1993 Senate
confirmation hearing as well, explaining that the decision
whether or not to bear a child is central to a woman's life,
well-being, and dignity. It is a decision she must make for
herself. When the Government controls that decision for her,
she is being treated less than as a fully adult human
responsible for her own choices.
This holds true today, and these same issues are under
threat and women are under threat. Senate Bill 8 is appalling
for many reasons, including its unconstitutionality and the
deputization of private citizens as bounty hunters. Our focus
must be on the simple fact that this is a law that hurts women.
In the end, that is the only thing that matters. Forced
parenthood threatens a woman's physical and mental health. It
restricts our economic freedom. It makes women of color poorer,
and, in particular, second-class citizens. There is plenty of
data that you have shared with us that support these findings.
The only proof we really need that these laws--this law
hurts women--come from the stories you have shared today. I
want to go back to what we just heard from Dr. Moayedi, and I
love the point that you were making, that if we are truly,
truly pro-family, then we need to enact policies that make it
easier for people who have children to give those children a
good life.
That involves the health and healthcare of women. In Texas,
like in my home State of North Carolina, there has not been
Medicaid expansion. That means that women are not able to get
critical healthcare preconception and take care of themselves,
and not able to get health services postpartum when they are
trying to care for a new baby.
So, Doctor, please share with us how Texas' decision to
deputize people to prevent abortions runs contrary to a woman's
health when Texas cannot find it in its heart to provide
Medicaid to poor women.
Dr. Moayedi. Thank you for that question, Representative
Ross. It brings to mind a story of a patient I took care of
several years ago. This person was a mother of five or six
children--I can't remember at this point--but had several
children and had recently had a child as well. She developed
severe heart failure after that pregnancy and was just told,
``Don't become pregnant again; you will die.''
Well, in Texas, prior to this last session, your Medicaid
expired at six weeks. So, there was no way for her to get her
cardiac drugs. There was no way for her to get birth control
afterwards to keep herself healthy. Of course, she became
pregnant again, and continuing that pregnancy would have killed
her.
So, this person, a mother of many children, struggling to
be a good mom, had to scrape together everything to be able to
get abortion care so she wouldn't die and leave her children
without a
parent.
I deal with those situations every single week in Texas. We
need better healthcare in our State desperately, and that
includes removing restrictions to abortion care and expanding
Medicaid.
Ms. Ross. Thank you so much for helping women.
I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentlelady from Texas is recognized for a unanimous
consent statement.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chair, I would like to ask unanimous
consent to submit into the record articles, ``These Texas women
got abortions from a California doctor after the State's ban.
Here are their stories.'' The San Francisco Chronicle; ``Texas
Abortion Law Could Worsen the State's Maternal Mortality
Rate,'' New York Times; September 22, 2021; ``Texas abortion:
Doctor sued in first-known challenges of new law,'' BBC News,
September 21, 2021; `` `My body is not their property': Texas
woman's journey across state lines for an abortion,'' October
15, 2021; and finally, ``Opinion | Why I violated Texas's
extreme abortion law,'' Washington Post, September 18, 2021.
I ask unanimous consent to submit these into the record.
[The information follows:]

MS. JACKSON LEE FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chair Nadler. Without objection.
Ms. Bush.
Ms. Bush. St. Louis and I thank you, Chair, for convening
this hearing today. My plea today is with my colleagues on this
Committee and with the American public watching.
Take a walk in the shoes of an 18-year-old girl from St.
Louis, a Black girl, a girl who is uninsured and suffering from
asthma, a health condition she likely got from the burning of
fossil fuels in her community. She can't afford rent. She works
a minimum wage job, and her friends consider her fortunate
because at least she has a job.
Even in this job, she is making less than her White
counterparts. She is also nine weeks pregnant, feeling alone
and afraid. That girl is me. We don't live in a world that
nurtures and cares for Black girls like me. If the world
doesn't care about a Black girl like me, then what will happen
to our Black babies who grow up to be Black--grow up to become
Black children and Black adults.
Professor Bridges, you talk about the high mortality rates
among Black pregnant people. In a world in which Roe is
overturned, what harms do abortion bans pose for Black pregnant
people?
Dr. Bridges. It would be coercing them to give birth, which
is a dangerous proposition, which is something that should be
embarrassing to the United States. The United States is one of
the--it is actually the only industrialized nation that has an
infant mortality rate that is increasing.
The racial disparities in maternal mortality mean that
three to four times as many Black people should expect to die
while attempting a birth. So, to coerce birth, which is what
abortion bans and regulations do, is to coerce Black people to
engage in a task that is dangerous to them.
Ms. Bush. Thank you, Professor Bridges. May I ask you
another question? Some scholars have compared this bounty
system to the Fugitive Slave Acts, laws that offered a bounty
for capturing and returning fugitive slaves and provided for
fines up to $1,000 against anyone who helped a fugitive
enslaved person. I agree.
Can you describe the White supremacist roots that link SB 8
and the Fugitive Slave Acts?
Dr. Bridges. Absolutely. So, the Fugitive Slave Act is an
effort to ensure that people of color--Black people
specifically--were human property, and that slavery as an
institution would be perpetuated and that the people who
purported to own those Black people would not lose their
property.
So, essentially, the Fugitive Slave Act allowed others to
control their bodies. Private actors, right, to control the
bodies of other human beings. That is precisely what is
happening in Texas today. In deputizing private citizens to
seek a bounty on other private citizens, we are allowing
private citizens to control, terrorize, regulate, the bodies of
other human beings.
Ms. Bush. Thank you. Thank you for explaining that
Professor Bridges.
Dr. Moayedi, SB 8 has been law for 64 days, and in those 64
days clinics have closed and certain resources have been
permanently erased. What are the permanent impacts of SB 8 on
people of color and people living in poverty?
Dr. Moayedi. Thank you for that question. Representative
Bush, thank you again for sharing your story. It moves me every
single time, and it is the core of why I provide this care.
When I first started working in abortion care and realized
the desperate need for women of color to take care of other
women of color, that is what inspired me to become a physician
and to provide abortion care in Texas. So, this issue is very
dear to my heart.
This ban is disastrous for communities of color, especially
the ones that I serve. Many of the people I take care of have
never left the North Texas area, so traveling to Oklahoma City
even is very challenging for them.
Last week, I took care of someone from the coast area in
Texas that was coming to Oklahoma City. Because they had never
left the State either, their friend made them a reservation in
a hotel in Tulsa instead of Oklahoma City because they didn't
really understand where to go. So, that is just one small story
of how challenging and insurmountable getting out of the State
for care can be.
What is truly frightening for me is what we are going to
see in the next 7-8 months as far as maternal mortality in the
communities that I serve. The people--yes.
Ms. Bush. Thank you. Thank you for sharing that.
What I want to make clear here today, as the first Black
woman and nurse to serve the people of Missouri in Congress, is
that the path to overturning Roe will be devastating for all
people, especially Black people. Abortion care would still
exist, like it did before this landmark decision, but it will
be deadly in a world where Black pregnant people die four times
more often than White pregnant people during childbirth.
In a world where Black women are disproportionately evicted
from their homes, in a world where Black trans-women are more
likely to turn to sex for survival, failing to legislative
reproductive justice is a death sentence for our neighbors, co-
workers, and families.
We cannot afford to go back on our reproductive rights. We
must legislate love. We must legislative justice for Black
girls and non-binary folks and guarantee reproductive rights
for everyone.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentlelady yields back.
This concludes today's hearing. We thank the Witnesses for
participating and for their patience for a very long day.
Without objection, all Members will have five legislative
days to submit additional written questions for the Witnesses,
or additional materials for the record.
Without objection, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 8:01 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
