- EXAMINING THE HISTORY AND IMPORTANCE OF ``LIFT EVERY VOICE AND SING''

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE HISTORY AND IMPORTANCE OF ``LIFT EVERY VOICE AND SING''

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CONSTITUTION, CIVIL RIGHTS, AND CIVIL LIBERTIES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 4, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-54

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-283                  WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JERROLD NADLER, New York, Chair
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania, Vice-Chair

ZOE LOFGREN, California              JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Ranking Member
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas            STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,      DARRELL ISSA, California
Georgia                          KEN BUCK, Colorado
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          MATT GAETZ, Florida
KAREN BASS, California               MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York         ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island     TOM McCLINTOCK, California
ERIC SWALWELL, California            W. GREG STEUBE, Florida
TED LIEU, California                 TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington          CHIP ROY, Texas
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida          DAN BISHOP, North Carolina
J. LUIS CORREA, California           MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
SYLVIA R. GARCIA, Texas              SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 BURGESS OWENS, Utah
GREG STANTON, Arizona
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
MONDAIRE JONES, New York
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
CORI BUSH, Missouri

AMY RUTKIN, Majority Staff Director & Chief of Staff
CHRISTOPHER HIXON, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CONSTITUTION, CIVIL RIGHTS,
AND CIVIL LIBERTIES

STEVE COHEN, Tennessee, Chair
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina, Vice-Chair

JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana, Ranking
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,          Member
Georgia                          TOM McCLINTOCK, California
SYLVIA R. GARCIA, Texas              CHIP ROY, Texas
CORI BUSH, Missouri                  MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas            BURGESS OWENS, Utah

JAMES PARK, Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

Friday, February 4, 2022

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Steve Cohen, Chair of the Subcommittee on the
Constitution, Civil Rights, and Civil Liberties from the State
of Tennessee...................................................     1
The Honorable Mike Johnson, Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on
the Constitution, Civil Rights, and Civil Liberties from the
State of Louisiana.............................................     2
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Chair of the Committee on the
Judiciary from the State of New York...........................     3

WITNESSES
Panel I

The Honorable James E. Clyburn, House Majority Whip, House of
Representatives
Oral Testimony.................................................     5
Prepared Testimony.............................................     7

Panel II

Mr. Leon W. Russell, Chair, National Board of Directors, NAACP
Oral Testimony.................................................    12
Prepared Testimony.............................................    15
Dr. Dwandalyn R. Reece, Associate Director for Curatorial
Affairs, National Museum of African American History and
Culture, Smithsonian Institution
Oral Testimony.................................................    20
Prepared Testimony.............................................    22
Dr. Naomi Andre, Professor, Arts and Ideas in the Humanities
Program, Department of Afroamerican and African Studies, and
Women's Studies, University of Michigan
Oral Testimony.................................................    24
Prepared Testimony.............................................    26
Mr. Clarence Henderson, President, Frederick Douglass Foundation
of North Carolina
Oral Testimony.................................................    31
Prepared Testimony.............................................    33
Dr. Shana L. Redmond, Professor of English and Comparative
Literature, Columbia University
Oral Testimony.................................................    36
Prepared Testimony.............................................    39
Mr. Lloyd Washington, President, Durkeeville Historical Society
Museum
Oral Testimony.................................................    41
Prepared Testimony.............................................    42
Ms. Melanie Edwards, Office of Government and Community Affairs,
Columbia University
Oral Testimony.................................................    62
Prepared Testimony.............................................    64

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Lyrics to ``Lift Every Voice and Sing,'' submitted by the
Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Member of the Subcommittee on
the Constitution, Civil Rights, and Civil Liberties from the
State of Texas, for the record.................................    74

EXAMINING THE HISTORY AND IMPORTANCE OF ``LIFT EVERY VOICE AND SING''

----------

Friday, February 4, 2022

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on the Constitution, Civil Rights,

and Civil Liberties

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:05 a.m., via
Zoom, Hon. Steve Cohen [Chair of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Nadler, Cohen, Raskin,
Ross, Johnson of Georgia, Garcia, Jackson Lee, McBath, Jordan,
Johnson of Louisiana, Fischbach, and Owens.
Staff present: John Doty, Senior Advisor and Deputy Staff
Director; Moh Sharma, Director of Member Services and Outreach
& Policy Advisor; Cierra Fontenot, Chief Clerk; John Williams,
Parliamentarian and Senior Counsel; Keenan Keller, Senior
Counsel; Gabriel Barnett, Staff Assistant; Merrick Nelson,
Digital Director; Kayla Hamedi, Deputy Communications Director;
James Park, Chief Counsel for Constitution; Will Emmons,
Professional Staff Member/Legislative Aide for Constitution;
Abbie Petty, Counsel for Constitution; Matt Morgan, Counsel for
Constitution; Betsy Ferguson, Minority Senior Counsel; Caroline
Nabity, Minority Counsel; James Lesinski, Minority Counsel;
Andrea Woodard, Minority Professional Staff Member; and Kiley
Bidelman, Minority Clerk.
Mr. Cohen. The Committee on the Judiciary Subcommittee on
the Constitution, Civil Rights, and Civil Liberties will come
to order. Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recesses at any time.
Welcome, everyone, to today's hearing on Examining the
History and Significance of ``Lift Every Voice and Sing.''
Before we continue, we have established an email address,
previously shared distribution to be used through that line for
today's hearing. Members mute your microphone when you are not
speaking unless at any time you seek recognition.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.
``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' is an inspiring and moving
hymn, one that increasingly has gained a central and important
place in American culture. As the Nation begins its
commemoration of Black History Month, it is worth the
Subcommittee's time to consider the history and continued
cultural importance of this iconic song. The origins of the
historical context of African Americans' struggles against the
racism and inequality that undergirded slavery. It was later
repeated and enforced by Jim Crow laws and racist social norms,
as well as its universally human nature, the whole perseverance
and face of extreme adversary, a very inspiring song.
We will also learn about H.R. 301, a bill that designates
this particular song or hymn, ``Lift Every Voice,'' as the
national hymn. The proposal would not displace ``The Star-
Spangled Banner'' as the national anthem or rather add ``Lift
Every Voice'' to an official repertoire of national songs. I
know in Tennessee we have five or six different songs.
Indeed, today, we find ourselves going through the latest
round of fierce and ongoing national debate about what it means
to be an ``American'' and who counts as part of our national
story. This meta-debate overlays many of the policies, specific
debates that this Committee has engaged in recent years on
issues raised on voting rights to policing reform to hate
crimes. Perhaps understandably this debate can become very
heated and take on some rough edges. It has even threatened to
pull our nation apart.
This is all the more reason why it is perfect for us to
embrace inclusive national symbols and patriotic customs and
make people understand what they are about. It is not just a
song for a particular group of Americans. It is a song that
could be and should be for every American.
We have national symbols and customs, history, creativity,
and ingenuity and the American people is much broader and
deeper with these symbols and customs embodied. Adding ``Lift
Every Voice and Sing'' to our nation's canon of official music
could be just the thing that serves as a form of healing,
brings this country together. That is what Majority Whip
Clyburn said. Its purpose is to bring this country together.
Perhaps our Witnesses will be able to successfully make
that case today. I thank Representative Clyburn and all our
Witnesses for being here today. I very much look forward to the
testimony.
Now, I would like to recognize the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee, the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Johnson, for
his opening statement.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to
thank our Witnesses for being here this morning. This is a
hearing, as you noted, that is focused on the song ``Lift Every
Voice and Sing,'' for the United States to make it a national
hymn.
As one scholar wrote, this song is ``an omnipresent part of
African American worship traditions and an enduring refrain.''
The song's first public performance was during the celebration
of Abraham Lincoln's birthday in 1900 and it has been since
sung by many notable people on many notable occasions over the
last 120 years. The song honors the fact that each of us is
made in God's image and every single person has an estimable
dignity and value that is not related in any way to the color
of our skin, or where we live, or what we do for a living. All
of us are created equally in God's image. That is part of the
DNA of America. It is what we believe. Racism and racial
violence violate the most fundamental principles of our great
nation and the will of our Creator and we all acknowledge it.
America is not perfect, but it is an exceptional country,
and we are always growing. We are always learning. We are
always striving toward a more perfect union and that is our
charge and that is our calling. So, at this hearing, we will
consider and explore our history. We will learn from it, and it
will show us in the end how exceptional our country truly is.
In recent years, we have seen the lowest unemployment rate
for African Americans in history. Thankfully, we have seen
historic criminal justice reform. We've seen expanded
educational opportunities for all children in the country and
there is much more work to do as you know. We have to unite and
empower all communities in America, and I love what Mr. Clyburn
said. We have to bring this country together. So, any measure
that will help do that we think is worthy of our time and
discussion.
So, I thank the Witnesses for being here. I look forward to
hearing from you and thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Johnson, for your statement and
the spirit contained therein.
Mr. Nadler, you are now recognized for up to five minutes.
Chair Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chair. The song ``Lift Every
Voice and Sing'' has been a beacon of hope to generations of
Americans. Its message, while rooted it and shaped by the
experience of African Americans and their struggles against
racial oppression is universal, offering hope and faith in the
face of darkness.
I appreciate the opportunity today to examine the origins
and the historical context in which ``Lift Every Voice and
Sing'' was written, as well as its continuing importance to
American culture and values. I am also pleased that we will be
able to hear from our colleagues, the distinguished House
Majority Whip, Congressman James Clyburn, about his
legislation, H.R. 301 which would designate ``Lift Every Voice
and Sing'' as our country's national hymn.
The song, which was first sung by school children in 1900
to commemorate Abraham Lincoln's birthday, has persisted in
influence over the past 120 years. The brothers, James Weldon
Johnson and J. Rosamond Johnson, wrote ``Lift Every Voice and
Sing'' at the turn of the 20th century. This was a period in
which the promises of racial equality made by the nation to
African Americans during Reconstruction were betrayed. Previous
advances towards equality were being dismantled. Segregation
had been codified through Plessy v. Ferguson and the Jim Crow
reign of terror was gaining its foothold. All the while, the Ku
Klux Klan wreaked havoc against African Americans, initiating a
campaign of racist terror, violence, and murder.
Through all this, African Americans continue to risk their
lives for their own visions of what freedom could be in the
aftermath of slavery. Even in the face of horrific violence,
they never ceased in their struggle for freedom.
``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' is a song about transcending
those difficulties and maintaining hope for the future. To sing
this song is not only to acknowledge the suffering in the past,
but also to look ahead to a brighter future. It is a reminder
that while the journey ahead may be arduous, obstacles are
surmountable if we join together in the fight for equality.
Although ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' is a song that
recognizes the history and progress of African Americans, its
influence and appeal extends beyond the boundaries of race.
From its inception to today, ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' has
and continues to unify individuals of all cultures. It is a
song of uplift and solidarity. It speaks to the universal human
condition of struggle and triumph and connects us to a common
purpose, equality for all.
The song's sermonic quality, coupled with powerful lyrics
of hope and perseverance, has resonated at key gatherings such
as presidential inaugurations of both political parties and at
civil rights demonstrations. It was endorsed by Booker T.
Washington in 1905 and later adopted by the NAACP becoming a
rallying cry during the civil rights movements of the 1950s and
1960s.
``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' is a reminder of how far we
have progressed as a country, while simultaneously calling upon
us to continue our work towards a better future. The song
represents patriotism in the best possible sense. It commands
us to be dedicated to our nation and to honor the sacrifices of
the generations that came before us by continuing to work
towards the full promise of freedom for all Americans.
I want to thank Congressman Clyburn for bringing forth this
bill. I also welcome all our Witnesses. I look forward to their
testimony and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Nadler. I don't know if Mr.
Jordan is present or not. I don't see on my screen.
Mr. Jordan, do you want to be recognized for an opening
statement? If Mr. Jordan is not with us, we will go right into
the opening remarks that I will make. Thank you.
We welcome our Witnesses on both panels. Thank you for
participating in today's hearing. I warn you that we have votes
around 9:30 a.m. or so and might have to break up during your
testimony and come back.
I will now introduce each of the Witnesses and after each
introduction, will recognize that Witness for his or her oral
testimony. Please note, each of your written statements will be
entered into the record. If you say anything that is false, you
could be subject to penalties under section 1001 of title 18 of
the U.S. Code.
There is a five-minute--please limit your remarks to five
minutes. The timer is on the screen that has all the different
folks on it. I don't know what you call that, but it is the
screen where everybody's picture comes up. The feed, I guess.
The sole Witness on the first panel is the distinguished
House Majority Whip, the Honorable James E. Clyburn.
Congressman Clyburn represents the Sixth Congressional District
of South Carolina, having served in Congress since 1993. In
2007, he was first elected the Majority Whip, the third ranking
position in the House, and served in that position from 2007-
2011. Once again, elected Majority Whip when we came into the
majority in 2019 and has served in that position since.
During the times we were in the minority, 2011-2019, he was
the Assistant House Democratic Leader. He has proudly served as
Chair and Vice Chair of the House Democratic Caucus and as
Chair of the Congressional Black Caucus and the recipient of
the ``I AM A MAN'' Award.
One of his many accomplishments, his introduction of H.R.
301, to designate ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' as the national
hymn.
Whip Clyburn, I welcome you to today's hearing and I
recognize you for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JAMES E. CLYBURN,
HOUSE MAJORITY WHIP

Mr. Clyburn. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and thanks to
all of you who are joining here today, most especially our
Witnesses this day who will be giving testimony.
I particularly want to welcome my long-time friend, Leon
Russell. Leon and I enjoyed almost three decades of a
professional relationship before I came to Congress and both of
us are still hanging in here. He is the Chair of the National
Board of the NAACP and I welcome him and the others here today.
I want to thank you, Mr. Chair, and the Ranking Member, Mr.
Johnson, for calling this hearing, and I particularly want to
associate myself with the comments made by Ranking Member
Johnson. They were very prolific, and I did really appreciate
them so much so that I am going to be skipping through some of
what I had to say because he said it all for me.
Chair Nadler, thank you, so much as well, my classmate. You
have risen to elevated heights, and I enjoy being here with you
today.
So, recently, I have been reflecting on this whole notion
of what Benjamin Franklin reported to have said when he was
asked what he and the Founding Fathers had wrought. He is
reported to have replied ``a Republic, if you can keep it.''
Later, Franklin, joining with John Adams, and Thomas
Jefferson to propose that the Latin phrase E pluribus unum, out
of many, one, be placed on our currency as the nation's motto.
Our nation continues to struggle with the issues of race
and equity. The threads of our fragile democracy are frayed. As
the people's representatives, it is incumbent upon us to make
every effort to heed Franklin's words of concern and his and
Adams' and Jefferson's expression of unity. It is our
responsibility to demonstrate not only with our words, but by
our actions that we can and will keep this republic intact and
its people unified.
That is why I introduced H.R. 301 to designate the iconic
hymn, ``Lift Every Voice and Sing,'' the national hymn for the
United States of America. Designating ``Lift Every Voice and
Sing'' as our national hymn will be one such substantive step
forward.
``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' was written by James Weldon
Johnson as a poem and set to music by his brother, John
Rosamond Johnson. The hymn was first performed as you heard on
February 12, 1900, by a choir of 500 school children from the
segregated Stanton School in Jacksonville, Florida. In 1905,
Booker T. Washington recognized the hymn, and it became popular
throughout the Black community across the United States.
In 1919, the NAACP designated ``Lift Every Voice and Sing''
as its official song and it was dubbed the Black national
anthem. I and scores of people with whom I have interacted have
never been comfortable with that designation. We believe that
out of many backgrounds and experiences there should be but one
national anthem. We believe ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' is a
hymn that is so cherished by so many people of all faiths,
creeds, backgrounds, and experiences that designated it as our
national hymn would be very fitting and proper.
Its wide appeal is no accident. It is currently produced
and distributed by approximately 40 religious publishing houses
throughout the United States. It is sung by all faiths and
persuasions. Recent renditions have proven just how wide its
appeal is from Alicia Keys' performance at the Super Bowl to
Beyonce's rendition in 2018 Coachella.
The lyrics of ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' are applicable
to the experience of nearly every ethnic background in America.
We also acknowledge the challenges of our future.
Just consider the words, ``sing a song full of the faith
that the dark past has taught us, sing a song full of the hope
that the present has brought us, facing the rising sun of our
new day begun, let us march on till victory is won.''
I thank the Committee for holding this hearing and look
forward to hearing from today's Witnesses. I am hopeful that
this hearing and this legislation will help us more fully
realize our nation's motto as we continue our pursuit of a more
perfect union. I thank you for having me.
[The statement of Mr. Clyburn follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Clyburn, as always, well
delivered.
Now, the second panel, if the Witnesses will come forward
and we will recognize as our first, Leon Russell. Mr. Russell
is the Chair of the National Board of Directors of the NAACP, a
position he has held since 2017 after having served in various
other roles on the Board. He previously served as President of
NAACP Florida State Conference of Branches, and was for 35
years the Director of the Office of Human Rights in Pinellas
County, Florida. Mr. Russell, you are recognized for five
minutes.

STATEMENTS OF LEON W. RUSSELL

Mr. Russell. Thank you. Good morning, Chair Cohen, Ranking
Member Johnson, and Members of the House Judiciary Subcommittee
on the Constitution, Civil Rights, and Civil Liberties.
Founded on February 12, 1909, the 100th birthday of Abraham
Lincoln, the National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People, the NAACP, is our nation's oldest, largest, and
most widely recognized grassroots civil rights organization.
Our membership consists of hundreds of thousands of card-
carrying individuals representing diverse racial, ethnic,
social, and economic backgrounds, participating in more than
52,200 units throughout the nation. We have active units on
college and university campuses and even units behind prison
walls. Units are supported by millions of digital followers and
military members serving in units throughout the world.
I am Leon Russell, Chair of the 64-member National Board of
Directors of the NAACP, the governing body of our national
organization. In this capacity, I am responsible for overseeing
the development of the Association's policies and strategy
implementation and monitoring.
I was delighted to receive your invitation to testify with
respect to H.R. 301, ``Lift Every Voice and Sing.'' So, allow
me to first thank my longtime friend who keeps changing the
number of years we have known each other, James Clyburn, for
introducing the bill and let me at the outset indicate that the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
fully support adoption of ``Lift Every Voice'' as a national
hymn.
I will address the history and significance of the song and
why we at the NAACP believe it should be designated as the
national hymn. Let me recognize that we do not call for this
great hymn to supplant or replace the national anthem. The
composers never intended for that to happen. It is clear that
they wrote a song that spoke reverently to the lived experience
of a people who were here from the beginning of this great
experiment in democracy and that they intended through the
words and its triumphal music to ensure that our nation be ever
mindful of that people's role in the development of our
democracy. The fact that this song has been sung continuously
for more than 122 years since it was first performed in venues
large and small, by children in school, by civil rights
activists in mass meetings in the midst of the civil rights
struggle, by college choirs, by the Tabernacle Choir at Temple
Square, and even lately by crowds at National Football League
stadiums is a testament the spiritual impact and meaning for
millions of Americans.
The song was written by James Weldon Johnson and set to
music by his brother, John Rosamond Johnson, from Jacksonville
Florida. The inspiration for the song was a request that James
Weldon Johnson provide a poem to be included in a community
celebration of the birthday of the Great Emancipator, Abraham
Lincoln, in February of 1900.
It is important to note that James Weldon Johnson was
principal of Stanton School in Jacksonville. The school was the
primary school serving the Black community of Jacksonville when
Johnson became the principal, however, it added high school
classes under his leadership. Johnson's life experience was
reflective of the lived experience of Black folks that is so
eloquently described in the words of the song. Facing the
threats posed by racism in his hometown, Johnson and his
brother would move North to New York City where he would become
a historically recognized civil rights activist, diplomat,
author, politician, journalist, poet, educator, lawyer,
songwriter, and one of the prime movers of the Harlem
Renaissance.
He was indeed the embodiment of many early African American
trail blazers. Most people recognize Johnson as the author of
``Lift Every Voice and Sing,'' however, few are aware of his
hard work and dedication to the cause of civil rights and
social justice advocacy exemplified by his fight against racism
and his fight for equality during the ten years that he served
as the Executive Secretary of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People.
I need to note here that James Weldon Johnson succeeded
John Shillady, a White man, who had served in the position
until he was beaten nearly to death by a White mob in Texas
where he had gone to investigate a lynching in 1919. Johnson
had been hired as Field Secretary by the Association in 1916.
When Shillady resigned, Johnson became the first Negro to hold
the senior staff position at the Association in 1920. For
context, I remind you that the Association was founded in 1909.
Johnson's personal story is emblematic of much of the spiritual
meaning that I recognize in the song. I commend it to you for
further study.
Asked to speak at the 1900 Abraham Lincoln birthday
celebration, Johnson wrote a poem for the occasion. While
reflecting on what he had written, he decided to change the
poem to a song, so he asked his brother, music professor John
Rosamond Johnson, to write the music. There is much speculation
about what the Johnsons intended ``Lift Every Voice and Sing''
to be. What is clear is that a song written as part of that
celebration has become synonymous with, if not the very theme
for, the modern civil rights movement.
Although ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' was written to be
sung as part of a program in tribute to Lincoln, Lincoln's name
never appears in the song. What is clear, is that the
invitation to participate in the Lincoln Day Celebration
inspired the creation of the song. Also, clear is the fact that
the children who sang the song were so inspired that they
carried it with them the rest of their lives. The celebration
included the students from across the city, 500 voices.
After that, the song has been sung in public meetings in
Florida and across the country. It would not be forgotten, but
I cannot find any indication that it was promoted.
The song became the National NAACP Hymn, and let's be
clear, during Johnson's tenure as Executive Secretary. He
served from 1920-1930. The Board adopted the Song in 1923 as
the NAACP's hymn. Let me also say--
Mr. Cohen. Mr. Russell, let me ask you to conclude your
remarks. We have gone fairly long.
Mr. Russell. Okay. Just let me make it clear that the NAACP
fully endorses ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' as a national hymn
because we feel it brings this country together. It speaks to
oppression of any people. Let me add that we strongly urge you
to adopt this song.
Mr. Cohen, I would say that Maxine Smith would have loved
your rendition, even though--
[The statement of Mr. Russell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cohen. Thank you. That means a lot to me. Maxine Smith
was my friend, and her picture is on my wall outside, along
with Ben Hooks and Julian Bond and others. She was a wonderful
woman and a treasure of the NAACP, a national treasure for
many, many years. Thank you for remembering her today at this
hearing.
Our next Witness is Dr. Dwandalyn Reece. Dr. Reece is
Associate Director of Curatorial Affairs, Smithsonian's
National Museum of African American History and Culture. She
brings more than 30 years of knowledge and experience to the
field of museum works and more than 10 years as Curator of
Music at Performing Arts in the National Museum of African
American History. In that role, she built a collection of 4,000
objects and curated the museum's inaugural permanent exhibit,
Musical Crossroads, for which she received the Secretary's
Research Price in 2017. She curated the museum's grand opening
music festival, Freedom Sounds, and served as Executive
Committee Chair of the pan-institutional group of Smithsonian
Music and co-curated the Smithsonian Year of Music Initiative
in 2019. She received her Ph.D. from NYU, Master's at the
University of Michigan, and an undergraduate degree from
Scripps College.
Dr. Reece, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DWANDALYN R. REECE

Dr. Reece. Thank you. Chair Nadler, Ranking Member Jordan,
Chair Cohen, Ranking Member Johnson, and Members of the
Committee, I want to thank you today for giving me the
opportunity to testify on H.R. 301.
As was introduced, my name is Dwandalyn R. Reece and I have
the pleasure of serving as the Smithsonian's National Museum of
African American History and Culture's Associate Director for
Curatorial Affairs.
In ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' the Johnson Brothers
captured the full story of the African American experience,
acknowledging the emotional and physical toll of enslavement
and the strength and faith it took to survive it and persevere.
The poignant lyrics and majestic accompaniment galvanized the
Black community and quickly began to make its way through
communities across the country. By 1919, the NAACP had
designated ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' as its official song.
It wasn't long before you could find copies of the hymn
inserted or pasted into the hymnals of Black churches across
the country.
``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' is the perfect fusion of
poetry and music. The lyrics trace the experience of Black
people through slavery and freedom using visual metaphors that
capture the emotion and significance of each line. J. Rosamond
Johnson's arrangement amplifies these lyrics. The shift from
major to minor keys in each verse mirrors the highs and lows of
that experience that are embodied merely through the Act of
singing. The plodding speech-like setting of the first three
words in each refrain provide the direct connection to the
emotional gravity of the text.
Johnson was steadfast in describing ``Lift Every Voice and
Sing'' as a hymn. Hymns are used in a variety of religious
traditions and are written to foster a shared experience as
voices come together in song. The text can focus solely on
religious themes or focus on universal themes that speak to the
moral, spiritual, and emotional concerns that are part of the
human condition. ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' is a combination
of both. The language is largely universal, but there are also
words and phrases that invoke the presence of God and a higher
power.
Johnson took great pride in the way his hymn served the
Black community. He was also inspired in a way people across
the world identified with his core message and embraced it as
their own. Since its publication, ``Lift Every Voice and Sing''
has been sung at community meetings, public events,
conventions, conferences, schools, official gatherings, and
ceremonial occasions. The hymn has served this nation much in
the same way Julia Ward Howe's ``Battle Hymn of the Republic''
did in the Civil War.
``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' has been in the hymnals of
Black denominations for more than a century. However, it wasn't
until the 1980s when the song started to show up in the hymnals
of larger, main-line denominations. The Episcopal Church was
one of the first to respond when it included the hymn in the
publication of its standard 1982 hymnal. Today, the count is 44
hymnals where ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' appear.
James Weldon Johnson's poem honored Lincoln's legacy by
reflecting on the symbolic meaning of his presidency and what
it meant for African Americans and the nation overall. ``Lift
Every Voice and Sing's'' legacy is a source of pride and
inspiration and a meditation on the transformative power that
resilience, hope, and a collective sense of purpose have in the
pursuant of liberty for all.
Thank you again for giving me the opportunity to testify
before you today about the historical importance of ``Lift
Every Voice and Sing''. I am happy to answer questions you
might have.
[The statement of Ms. Reece follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cohen. Thank you very much, Dr. Reece. Since this is
Black History Month, I should clarify Ms. Smith was not the
National Treasurer. That was Jesse Turner who was part of her
team with Russell Sugarmon. She was the Executive Director of
the local NAACP in Memphis for like 40 years.
Our next Witness is Dr. Naomi Andre. Dr. Andre is Professor
of Women Studies, Department of African American and African
Studies in the Residential College of Arts, Ideas, and
Humanities Program at the University of Michigan. Her research
focuses on opera and issues surrounding race, voice and race
and gender. Her publications include topics on Italian opera,
Schoenberg, women composers, and teaching opera in prisons. She
recently published Black Opera: History, Power, and Engagement.
In 2019, she was named the Inaugural Scholar in Residence at
the Seattle Opera. She has a Ph.D. and an M.A. from Harvard and
a B.A. from Barnard College.
Professor Andre, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. NAOMI ANDRE

Dr. Andre. Thank you, Chair Cohen, Chair Nadler, Ranking
Member Johnson, and Members of the Subcommittee. I am happy and
very honored to have my voice included in this hearing
supporting ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' to become a national
hymn. My entrance in this discussion gets to the core of what I
want to emphasize: The sense of belonging. While belonging
might be a birthright of citizenship, it is not always
experienced in the happenings of daily life. Belonging is not
proven by statistics or enforced through surveys and in person
and online workshops. Belonging should not be an aspiration;
instead, it is a feeling we have when we are seen as being
fully human.
As a musicologist, I want to spend a moment unpacking the
musical term, hymn. Going back to the ancient Greeks, with
discussions by Pindar, Bacchylides, and in Homeric poems, the
Grove Music Dictionary, and this is the gold standard for
scholar music reference, the Grove Music Dictionary describes
the hymn and its ability ``to weave or to combine words
artfully.'' The Oxford English Dictionary traces its history
from Latin, Greek, and Hebrew words with hymn being ``a
metrical composition adapted to be sung in a religious service;
sometimes distinguished from psalm or anthem, as not being part
of the text of the Bible.'' In the second listing from OED,
there is a broadening away from the religious connotations with
the hymn being ``an ode or song of praise in honor of a deity,
a country,'' et cetera.
I like this term ``hymn'' because it has a long-continued
history up through the present. In addition to the Jewish,
Greek, and Roman uses, there are also medieval Christian and
Byzantine versions of the hymn as a poetic object. The hymn was
a genre that was later adapted by Protestant faiths to support
congregational singing and worship. This is important for the
unity it can create for belonging in a community. In the mid-
twentieth century, the hymn has a special use in the civil
rights movement and linked the themes of devotion, praise,
liberty, and protest all together. Hence, since antiquity and
up to the present, as a genre, the hymn has spiritual,
religious, political, and social capacities that center it in
articulations of culture and community.
``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' was written by a Black
compositional team, James Weldon Johnson and his brother, John
Rosamond Johnson. There is nothing in the three stanzas of the
text that exclusively refers to African Americans. The Black
experience is embodied while also referencing the triumph,
struggles, and strength that all humans encounter. The text
refers to the hard work, aspiration, motivation, and moving
towards victory.
National songs that have connections to a country's
heterogeneous population present the opportunity to elevate
voices from its larger community. When South Africa dismantled
apartheid and created a new national anthem, the Committee was
chaired by its most prominent Black South African composer,
Mzilikazi Khumalo. The National Anthem of South Africa, adopted
in 1997, brings together the five most widely spoken of South
Africa's eleven official languages: IsiXhosa, isiZulu, Sesotho,
Afrikaans, and English. Sections of the anthem contain previous
national anthems from South Africa's White and Black
populations. The intended result was for the national music,
their national anthem, to voice the sound through language and
music of its diverse communities.
A nation has the potential to create its own sonic
landscapes. Such power comes from the connectedness its people
feel; how are their experiences embraced in emblems of national
representation? Sounds can generate belonging. As a national
hymn, ``Live Every Voice and Sing'' will engage familiar
audiences while embracing new communities.
Thank you for allowing me to testify on today's important
topic. I will be happy to answer any questions at the
appropriate time.
[The statement of Ms. Naomi Andre follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Professor Andre. We have had the bell
go off, but we will hear from our Witnesses for a few more
minutes and then we will see what we can do.
Our next Witness is Mr. Clarence Henderson, President of
the Frederick Douglass Foundation of the State of North
Carolina, a participant of the sit-ins at Woolworth's lunch
counters in Greensboro, North Carolina during the 1960s, served
on the Advisory Board of Black Voices for Trump. You are now
recognized for five minutes, Mr. Henderson.

STATEMENT OF CLARENCE HENDERSON

Mr. Henderson. Good morning to all the Members of the
Subcommittee. ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' will forever have a
powerful place in American history and will be a continual
reminder that equality and justice must be defended.
It was written in the time of Jim Crow which was a dark
time in our history of which I lived in and had the opportunity
to put Jim Crow on trial when I participated in the 1960
Woolworth Sit-in in Greensboro, North Carolina.
The song was first performed in public to celebrate the
birthday of President Abraham Lincoln which reminds me of the
resiliency that we exhibited when we came up out of slavery and
continued until we eventually broke the back of Jim Crow.
One of my concerns is that this great inspirational song is
not used out of context as a racial divide to take us back to
times that were and no longer are, that those who may vote
against this measure are not viewed as racist for having a
difference of opinion.
History shows us the unifying progress that America has
made since then. One of the examples of progress are the
elections of Black Americans in some of the highest political
positions in the land such as electing President Obama as the
first Black President, appointing Justice Thomas to the Supreme
Court, the election of North Carolina's first Black Lieutenant
Governor, Mark Robinson, and Virginia's first Black female
Lieutenant Governor Winsome Sears, just to name a few. This did
not happen within a vacuum with just the Black vote. The voting
in of these officials is an example of forming a more perfect
union.
As a matter of fact, the Preamble of the Constitution is an
introduction to the reason for forming a new nation and it
begins with ``We the People.'' Before that, we had the
Declaration of Independence in which the second sentence shows
what American exceptionalism looks like, ``We hold these truths
to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they
are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights,
that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness.'' It ends with the reason for forming our
government, ``that to secure these rights, governments are
instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the
consent of the governed.''
For those of you have been elected, let us lean toward
practical and essential approaches for addressing issues that
are facing the country as a whole.
According to the Pew Research Center as of April 15, 2021,
America's top ten views facing the nation indicated as a very
big problem are:

(1)  The affordability of healthcare with 56 percent;
(2)  the Federal budget deficit of 49 percent;
(3)  violent crime, 48 percent;
(4)  illegal immigration, same at 48 percent;
(5)  gun violence at 48 percent;
(6)  the corona virus outbreak, 47 percent;
(7)  racism, 45 percent;
(8)  economic inequality, 43 percent;
(9)  unemployment, 41 percent; and
(10)  climate change, 39 percent.

As we see, 45 percent of Americans view racism as the very
important issue that needs to be addressed. However, as I
stated earlier, my concern is that we do not use ``Lift Every
Voice and Sing'' as a symbolic gesture to further divide.
It is my hope that we understand the progress of the
American experience is never complete but continues to grow
with concentrated efforts to become a unified country.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Henderson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Henderson, and thank you for your
bravery for participating in the Woolworth sit-in that set the
movement in strong action.
I think we should take our break. There are six minutes
remaining in the vote. Lots of people have voted and I would
ask all Members of the Committee to vote immediately and return
immediately. I am going to move and by the time I get back I
hope everybody will be back with me.
So, at this point we are going to recess for approximately
eight minutes and return for Dr. Redmond. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Mr. Chair, real quick.
Mr. Cohen. Yes, sir.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. I got a note saying we had a
four-vote series. Are you seeing something different? Yes. So,
we may be stuck there for a while. We want to come back at
four.
Mr. Cohen. Well, I guess not. I didn't realize we had four
votes. You did a better job than I. Let's go ahead and see if
we can't conclude the three and maybe we can get there. And let
me--
Mr. Clyburn. Mr. Chair?
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. I think--
Mr. Clyburn. Mr. Chair, I think it goes to the other two
because we are going to have a lot of proxy voting. The other
two Witnesses will have time to finish.
Mr. Cohen. All right, well, let's go ahead with Professor
Redmond. If you can exclude any matter of historical that
others have already mentioned.
Professor Redmond received her Ph.D. from Yale, an M.A.
from Macalester College. She is a Professor of English and
Comparative Literature at Columbia, author, teacher, has won
the American Book Award from Before Columbus Foundation,
writing about Paul Robeson. It was the best book in 2020. Co-
editor of the University of California Press series Phono:
Black Music and the Global Imagination.
Dr. Redmond, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF SHANA L. REDMOND

Dr. Redmond. Thank you very much. Thank you to the
leadership, Membership, and the staff who invited me here today
and made this conversation possible.
Hello, and thank you to my colleagues who are also
Witnesses in this event today.
It is not an exaggeration to say that the influence and
impact of ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' is immeasurable. My
comments today will only scratch the surface of its importance
but will, I hope nonetheless, assist in deliberations.
As we know, it was written at the turn of the century by
the Brothers Johnson and was carried from its original
Jacksonville community out into the rest of the U.S. segregated
South via Black school teachers, faith workers, and families
for decades before it was adopted as the hymn of the NAACP.
It was and remains a standard performance within that
organization, one that comes with its own official and
unofficial rules, including standing during its performance.
The song served as an introduction to the NAACP for many
who knew the song but had little or no knowledge of the
organization in the 1920s and 1930s when it began major
organizing campaigns in the South.
The song was a greeting, a familiar piece of Southern Black
history and a welcome into the future of that interracial
organization.
The Johnsons received requests to reprint and perform
``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' from all over the country and the
world in the early decades of the 20th century--religious
organizations and camps, hymnal projects, missions in Africa,
intercultural propaganda in Japan.
People wanted this song. They cared for it, and they wrote
to its authors to inquire about how exactly it should be sung--
crescendo here, diminuendo here--to honor all that it signaled.
``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' called to historical and
present experiences of racism and other forms of dispossession,
while also highlighting the greatest principles of democratic
possibility, which the elder Johnson believed in
wholeheartedly.
As a party of Lincoln, Republican and appointed consul
abroad, James Weldon understood that the Black experience of
violence in the U.S. was vile but not insurmountable, distinct
but unexcep-tional globally.
His investment in the promises of democracy meant that
``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' was not an end but a beginning,
an opening into the community from which our best futures are
made.
When people gather to sing, things begin to change, from
the pressure in the air to the ways in which people live. As I
wrote in my first book, ``Anthem,'' music is a method that
allows us to do and imagine things that may otherwise be
unimaginable or seem impossible.
``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' is a perfect example of this
process. It is a song with vision that was readily accessible
to and adopted by a wide variety of communities.
Unlike the ``Star-Spangled Banner,'' ``Lift Every Voice and
Sing'' is not coerced. It was and is chosen for performance by
people invested in and inspired by its message.
Although institutionalized by the NAACP, the song retained
its value to people beyond the organization, who took it up in
protest and in praise, then as well as now.
Historically Black colleges and universities who are facing
increasing assault, jazz musicians in protest against police
violence in New York City, a joint recital in 2021 by gospel
choirs at Arizona State University and York University in
Ontario, Canada, as well as the song's appearance on stages for
the NFL and popular music festival Coachella documents that the
song is not a relic, but a resource that is tapped regularly
because it means something that is reinvented with every
performance.
``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' is significant not because of
its exceptional author or even its dynamic history with the
NAACP but because it is useful to people. Regularly adopted for
the concert stage as well as enactments of dissent, it is an
actively sought-after song with recognizable ambitions and
consequences.
The investment in the song is so high that while Johnson
consistently described the song as a hymn, it has been known
for generations as the Black national anthem. This designation
is a testament to its power and vision, and a strong suggestion
that its time of usefulness is far from over.
Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Redmond follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Garcia. Mr. Chair, we can't hear you, sir.
Mr. Cohen. Yeah, thank you. Our next Witness is Lloyd
Washington. Mr. Washington is President of the Durkeeville
Historical Society Museum in Jacksonville, Florida.
He's held that position since 2011, active member of the
historical society there, and he's championing the creation of
``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' on the birth site of James Weldon
Johnson and John Rosamond Johnson, the brothers who wrote
``Lift Every Voice and Sing.''
Mr. Washington, you're recognized for five minutes, sir.

STATEMENT OF LLOYD WASHINGTON

Mr. Washington. Good morning to the Chair and Members of
the Committee.
The song ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' has been performed
by many popular singers such as Marian Anderson, the most
celebrated singer of her era. It is still being performed today
by singers such as Beyonce and Alicia Keys.
Here in Jacksonville, Reverend James Henry and the
Summerville Baptist Church sing it every second Sunday. During
the month of February, the song will be performed by the
children's choir, and the Lavilla School of the Art performed
the song during its European tour.
It continues to be performed in schools, faith communities,
and civic gatherings in Jacksonville. The hymn has brought
hope, solidarity in Jacksonville as the importance of this song
cross different races, creed, and cultures, whether at a
citywide celebration of Dr. King or a prayer vigil in the town
square.
The very Act of singing ``Lift Every Voice and Sing''
embodies the hope, justice, and freedom that is the core of our
democratic system. I support making this hymn our national
anthem--I'm sorry, national hymn. Let me correct that.
[The statement of Mr. Washington follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Washington. I appreciate your
testimony and I appreciate your clarifying national hymn.
Our last Witness before we break is Ms. Melanie Edwards.
Ms. Edwards has worked for the Office of Government--works in
the Office of Government and Community Affairs at Columbia,
granddaughter of the distinguished Johnson--J. Rosamond
Johnson, and grandniece of James Weldon Johnson, and is their
last known surviving family member.
She's currently working to have an autobiography written by
her grandfather published. In addition, she's worked in
education for 40 years for the Modern School, Fordham,
Schomburg Library, and the East Harlem Council for Community
Improvement.
Ms. Edwards, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MELANIE EDWARDS

Ms. Edwards. Thank you.
Good morning, Committee Members. My name is Melanie
Edwards. The song that you are considering today for national
hymn status was composed by my grandfather, J. Rosamond
Johnson. Not John, not John Johnson, not John Rosamond. Simply,
J. Rosamond Johnson. Thank you.
The lyrics were written by his brother, James Weldon
Johnson. When people have asked before this occasion, how do I
feel about the song, I've answered honestly, much to their
disappointment and dismay.
This melody is one of many, some 200, according to ASCAP--
American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers--that my
grandfather created while the lyrics began ``Life is a Poem''
was just one of many others that my granduncle wrote.
This song is a small part of both men's artistic output, so
I have no sense of it being an unusually remarkable
achievement. I am, however, always humbled and impressed by the
staying power it has had. Few things over 100 years old are
referenced for their relevance or timeliness.
This quality is what I hope you, making your decision
today, keep in mind. ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' still speaks
to many people in this time and this place, while it speaks
also to people of many races, faiths, and conditions around the
world.
Like the Black man who created it, ``Lift Every Voice and
Sing'' comments eloquently and accurately about history, hope,
vision, and perseverance.
In 1913, my grandfather was working in London when he met
my grandmother, Nora, and they conceived my mother, Mildred.
Although Rosamond experienced the wrenching social changes of
the post-Reconstruction and burgeoning Jim Crow era, he chose
to return to his home, his country, so that his daughter would
be born in America in Jacksonville.
His brother also had opportunities to see other countries,
but he, too, chose to stand by his native land, even when it
didn't always stand by him.
So, I ask for your support of bill H.R. 301, not for me--I
get no benefit personally or financially. The song is in public
domain. I do appeal, however, to your sense of history and
legacy.
I have pride in the legacy that is ``Lift Every Voice and
Sing.'' By your designating it the national hymn, which is what
James Weldon himself called it, you add another piece to
America's already great cultural legacy and heft.
Greatness is not just defined by strength or use of force.
Great nations, like great people, are additionally magnanimous,
self-aware, and self-correcting.
By approving this bill, your legacy will be acknowledging
the dark and gloomy past of American history yet, assuring
others that grace and continued effort are rewarded by change--
social, economic, and spiritual.
This song penned by my forbearers to America, for America,
I invite you to claim it as your legacy and your gift from
America to the world.
Thank you for your time.
[The statement of Ms. Edwards follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Ms. Edwards. I appreciate your
testimony and everybody else's testimony.
I think--Mr. Clyburn, if you could help me with this--I'm
guessing 20 minutes for the second vote, 20 minutes between the
second and 20 between the second and third, 20 between the
third and fourth.
People can get their votes done before--First, I guess we
should adjourn for safety. Thirty minutes should get us back.
Everybody gets up there and votes immediately on the last one.
We could probably get back in 30 minutes.
So, with that, we're going to take a recess unless Mr.
Clyburn thinks we should make it a little longer. You okay with
30 minutes?
Mr. Clyburn. Yes. There'll still be votes left if we did
that. I don't know how many questions you might ask. I think
you've got time for about 12 minutes of questions if you'd like
to take it now, and I'll make sure you get to vote.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you. We'll go ahead with questions.
Mr. Clyburn. I would like--
Mr. Cohen. I think it's--
Mr. Clyburn. Yeah.
Mr. Cohen. It might be tight, but we'll go ahead and start.
Mr. Clyburn. Yeah, because I don't want to keep the
Witnesses here too long.
Mr. Cohen. All right. Normally, I'd recognize myself, but
I'm going to yield to other Members because of the time, and
I'll recognize Mr. Nadler first.
Chair Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Dr. Andre, can you discuss how the feelings of community
and connectivity that this song engenders applies for all
people that listen to it, not just African Americans?
Dr. Andre. Absolutely. Thank you very much for your
question.
I think that the issue of community is born in a history of
where the hymn--what it means, and it seems to just match so
nicely on here, and it's wonderful to have it clarified that
this was called a hymn from the beginning, although--and to get
this history correct, because so many times people want to call
it an anthem.
Yet, I really appreciate what this bill--excuse me, what
this House resolution is doing to say that it's a hymn. I think
the hymn has enough sort of a history that makes it do many
things but, basically, a song of praise that goes back to
antiquity that includes areas around the world that has a very
strong part in Christian and Byzantine liturgies.
So, that sort of roots it in a religious setting. It's
something that everybody is meant to sing, especially after the
Protestant Reformation when communal singing became a thing.
It then also becomes an issue for the civil rights era and
what we're seeing right now as it keeps being used in political
situations as well as just for fun.
In my written statement, I included a link to a video of
the U.S. Navy in Jacksonville, Florida, with a multiracial
group of people dressed in uniform performing, ``Lift Every
Voice and Sing.''
So, please let me know if I can clarify that more. This
idea of belonging for lots of people, there's--calling it a
hymn really just hits it right on the nose and, I feel, gets it
right.
Chair Nadler. Thank you. Dr. Reece, can you please describe
the significance of ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' as it relates
to the history of this country?
Dr. Reece. Yes. Thank you for the question.
I think that the significance rests in, really, how it
captures the story of this nation, the struggles that we have
endured as a nation, and the struggles that African Americans
have endured.
Part of that history is a way of remembering--for the
country, a way of remembering where we have been and a
continual reminder that history is a part of us, but also the
sense of possibility and be able to move beyond that history--
when the enslaved were free, when they moved into the 20th
century and pursued elements in pursuit of self-determination,
equality for all.
So, it is a message to African Americans but is a message
to all of us, and I think that's why it's embraced across the
world. It is poetic, it is musical, and it is something that we
can all embody and remember.
Chair Nadler. Thank you.
Mr. Washington, how does the city of Jacksonville continue
to honor the legacy of ``Lift Every Voice and Sing?''
Mr. Washington. What we're currently doing we're actually
building a park--the ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' Park. It's
scheduled to be started in the end of this month, and it shows
that--fortunately for us, we found the exact first site. It's
going to build on the birth site and the place where the song
``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' was written. So, we bring
Jacksonville, we bring everybody to the place, and to get
Jacksonville involved we had some--a non-traditional hall--what
am I looking--a non-traditional meeting. We had 350 people
onsite with a marching band of the Ed Wallace University, a
150-member choir, and we all sung ``Lift Every Voice and
Sing.''
So, does that answer your question?
Chair Nadler. Yeah, I think it does.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson, you're recognized for as much time as you can
get through with.
You need your mic. You need to turn your mute off.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Sorry. Sorry. I'll be very brief.
I had a number of questions, but I'll just ask one that I'm
just curious about.
I used to be a religious liberty defense litigator, and I'm
anticipating some resistance that because this is a hymn, which
is what we all love about it, clearly, includes religious
language.
Do any of you anticipate that some activist groups might
oppose its use and rendition in public schools or venues? They
will falsely claim, of course, that it's some sort of
establishment of religion or it's offensive to someone. Is
that--have you all thought that through?
Maybe Mr. Clyburn, or maybe I'd direct it to my senior
colleague.
Mr. Clyburn. Well, thank you very much. I'll respond to
that this way. I was born and raised in a parsonage, and my
church was Fundamentalist Christian Church--Protestant. We were
right across the street from St. Jude Catholic Church.
I learned how to box from a Catholic priest. I'll never
forget Father Hagerty because what he taught me saved me a lot
of pain growing up.
So, there's always going to be differences of religious
opinion when it comes to things like this. So, I did not say
that you will not get that kind of a reaction from some people.
I do say, however, that the universality of this song cuts
across race, gender, religious grounds, and though the song
will not be imposed on anybody, it's just that when you want to
recognize the unity that flows from the song that you may put
it on your programs to be sung.
What we would love to establish and all the people with
whom I've had this discussion, including my long-time friend,
Leon Russell, this is all about having a national hymn as
opposed to what could very well be divisive as a Black national
anthem.
We have one national anthem, and we are saying let's have
one national hymn as a gesture of bringing us together.
You don't impose the singing of the national anthem on
anybody at a school or any church. This is not an imposition.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. That's well said. Anybody can opt
out. I think you're exactly right.
Chair Nadler. Mr. Chair, could I just add that the fourth
verse of the ``Star-Spangled Banner,'' our national anthem, is
chock full of references to God, to in God we trusts.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. That's exactly right, Mr. Chair.
Chair Nadler. So, I believe, actually, on those grounds
it's already done.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. They don't let anybody sing the
fourth passage. That's right. That's why. Look, I'll just say,
I could defend it in court if it was ever challenged and I
would suggest to those who will that you would reference the
Supreme Court in 1952, Zorach v. Clauson. It said we are a
religious people whose institutions presuppose a Supreme Being,
and you would suggest that this is something that recognizes
our deep heritage and tradition in this country, and it's not
an imposition of religion on anybody.
So, I offer that for the good of the order. I yield back
for the interests of time.
Mr. Clyburn. Thank you.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Johnson, and we'll recognize--
Mr. Clyburn. Would the gentleman--
Mr. Cohen. Yes?
Mr. Clyburn. My best advice is now to one more question,
then we should go to the floor, and I think we'll have time for
one more answer.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you.
Mr. Raskin, you're recognized and then we put on our track
shoes. Mr. Raskin, are you with us?
[No response.]
Mr. Cohen. He's already got his track shoes on, I guess.
Mr. Clyburn. Yeah. It looks like he's already gone to the
floor.
Mr. Cohen. Ms. Ross, you're going to take over for Mr.
Raskin.
[No response.]
Mr. Cohen. Ms. Ross has taken off as well, I think.
Mr. Clyburn. Yeah. Well, let's just move to the floor.
Mr. Cohen. All right. Thank you. We're going to--an hour--
we'll be in recess for an hour until 11:13 Eastern Time. Thank
you, everybody.
[Whereupon, a recess was taken.]
Mr. Cohen. I'm going to declare us back in order, back in
session and recess over. No more milk and cookies.
Next, I guess, in our hearing--I guess the last Witness was
going to be Mr. Raskin. Are you back with us yet, Jamie?
Jamie's not with us. Ms. Ross, are you with us?
All right, team, this is not good. Hank Johnson, you're not
there. Ms. Garcia, you're there, aren't you? Sylvia? Well, she
was. Her chair's there, it's empty.
Ms. Bush? Ms. Jackson Lee? Well, we'll continue the
colloquy between me and Mr. Russell on ancient Tennessee
political history. There's Congressman Johnson making his way
back.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Mr. Chair, I think Burgess Owens,
Mr. Owens would have some questions if that's in order. I don't
know how you want to go with the timing.
Mr. Cohen. You're doing a great job, Mr. Johnson. You were
right about the four votes, and you're right about Mr. Owens.
The Chair will now recognize Mr. Burgess Owens for five
minutes.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Great.
Mr. Cohen. Mr. Owens? You're recognized for five minutes,
Mr. Owens. Unmute your--somebody unmute Mr. Owens. Mr. Johnson,
can you unmute Mr. Owens?
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. I wish. I'm at the airport.
Mr. Cohen. Oh. Mr. Owens, are you with us? Mr. Johnson, I
think he's still muted.
Mr. Owens. One second--okay, how's that?
Mr. Cohen. That's good.
Mr. Owens. I apologize.
Mr. Cohen. You're recognized for five minutes, Mr. Owens.
Blow, hurricane, blow.
Mr. Owens. Am I okay now to speak really quick?
Mr. Cohen. You're on five minutes to question our Witnesses
or speak--it's your five minutes.
Mr. Owens. Okay, thank you so much. Thank you so much,
Congressman Cohen. I won't take but a few minutes. I just want
to say first, thank you to all the Witnesses for your comments.
I've enjoyed it.
I grew up in the Deep South, and I can say to Mr.
Henderson, you're so correct, this country is all about
becoming a more perfect union. I'm just excited about the fact
about--I kind of reflect real quickly. I grew up in Tallahassee
in the shadow of the Florida A&M campus.
At 12 years old I was demonstrating in front of the Florida
State Theater with a group of college people that really
believed in our nation, they believed in our nonviolent
demonstration. The effort's really showing up to be a really,
really good [inaudible] for us.
With that being said, I remember also in high school, those
days where this song was actually the marching for graduating
seniors, the marching song, the hymn for that.
I just want to say, to fast forward, to go from there to
where we are today, when we have this remarkable panel of
success, of diversity, all races, creeds, and colors. We do
need to have something that's going to bring us together.
I tell you, and I won't take too long on this, but that
last stanza of the song says it all to me. ``Lest, our hearts
drunk with the wine of the world, we forget thee shadowed
beneath thy hand, may we forever stand, true to our God, true
to our native land, true to our native land.''
That speaks it all, to not only what's happening today, but
what happened to that great generation that came before us,
that believed in our nation, that succeeded. Just think what
the author of this song, he was--he was faithful, he's writing
about the family, free market, and about education.
That was that great generation that gave us this stanza of
this song that we can come together with and bring our country
back together. This has to be something--again, it's a hymn.
It's not to take the place of our national anthem.
I love that part of it, too, we can agree on it, that this
represents all Americans. The strength, the fight, the
overcoming, the coming together is what this hymn really stands
for.
So, I want to thank you guys for the opportunity to speak a
little real quickly. I'm thankful to have seen the growth we've
had and where we've come from and where we are today.
So, with that being said, I don't have very many--don't
have any questions, just want to thank you for presence.
Congressman Cohen, thank you for leading this, and of course
Congressman Johnson, thanks for leading this process for sure.
I yield back.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Owens, appreciate your remarks
and your brevity. Ms. Ross, you're recognized for five minutes,
or as much time if you need to take less than five minutes.
Ms. Ross. Well, thank you very much, Chair Cohen. I don't
see Whip Clyburn, but thanks to him for his initiative here.
I am from North Carolina and long participating in
religious services, NAACP events, and all sorts of events where
we sing ``Lift Every Voice and Sing.'' I will just say that the
way that it sets the tone for whatever occasion we're
participating in, it brings people together.
It's an honor to be here and learn even more about the
history of this hymn, and to recognize and say out loud that
Black Americans have experienced trauma, abuse, and inequity
because of slavery, segregation, and racism. We have always
have found a way to rise up. We need to celebrate that, and we
need to do that across party lines, across race, and across
areas of the country.
I want to just ask a few questions of some of our
distinguished panel Members. Dr. Andre, to you first. I really
love how you talked about what a hymn is and what it has meant
in every culture.
So, why is it important for our country in particular, the
United States, to have a hymn, and even more than one hymn,
that are representative of our diversity and our people?
Dr. Andre. Thank you for your question. I'm glad that the
background of what a hymn is, it just felt like it would be a
really relevant conversation here. Because the hymn has all, it
goes back far and it has religious and nonreligious, and even
in the Oxford English Dictionary talking about sort of praise
for one's country, it feels like this is an important way to
come together.
When you designate--we have a wide repertory of songs that
a lot of Americans know and songs that people that vary with
different times. This one has shown a staying power. To elevate
it to the space of a national hymn allows us to feel that we
can come together.
It's something where you don't need an instrument, you sing
your song. It helps people have more access to the words to get
to know the song if it has the standing.
Just bringing every voice together, and the words seem to
connect to experiences of being here in the U.S., of having its
association with African Americans. With being human and having
good times as well as having a tough history.
Having a hymn is something that everybody can do. You don't
need elaborate things. If it's brought to that position, it
says that we have a lot of songs that are important to many
people, but here is a song that has a particular importance.
Our singing it, it's a song that is--the national anthem is
a terrific work, but it's in the 18th century. Here's a song
right on the dawn of the 19th, 20th century, and it feels a
little more connected. We have relatives, with Melanie Edwards,
who is here, who spoke so beautifully about her connection to
these really august folks.
It's nice to be able to have that connection when so many
African Americans don't know sort of what their background is.
So, it brings in a beautiful way the non-too-distant past right
up to the present, and we can sing it together.
So, I think there's a collectivity you have. You can stand
in silence, but there's even more when voices come together.
Ms. Ross. Great. Dr. Reece, how important would it be to
have ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' be our national hymn to your
work at the National Museum of African American History and
Culture? What would that mean?
Dr. Reece. Well, I can't--it's hard to predict the meaning.
I would frame a response about what the hymn represents in the
terms of the power of music. It crossed my mind that music,
American music, is one of the most visible examples that we
have of America's pluralistic society.
``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' encapsulates that. I would
find few people to argue about the power that music has as
something that's universal to all human beings to bind people
together in the spirit of creating music, singing songs, and
just representing and binding people together and serving as a
beacon, as guidance and moving forward.
So, when you think about the historical and cultural
significance of--just think about that alone, the meaning, I
believe, speaks for itself.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much, and I yield back.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, thank you, Representative Ross. Next,
I'll recognize Representative Fischbach, are you still with us?
Representative Fischbach is not with us.
Is Representative Jackson Lee with us? There she is.
Representative Jackson Lee from Houston, Texas. As I always
say, where they not only sing, but they dance.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. There's a great history in
Houston, Texas. Obviously, we're in right now studying an
Emancipation Trail that starts from the announcement of the
freed slaves by General Granger. So, thank you, Mr. Chair, for
this hearing. Let me cite you.
All should know that Chair Cohen has been at the forefront
of the voting rights trial and tribulation and advocacy, and
out of his Committee and its fine work came H.R. 40, the
Commission to Study and Develop--Study Slavery and Develop
Reparations.
Now, this couldn't be more appropriate, the leadership,
under the leadership of James Clyburn, his legislation, for it
to come under Chair Cohen's Committee. I'm glad to be a member
of it, as he knows. I just want to thank him very much.
Let me quickly submit to the record, it may have already
been, the ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' lyrics, I'd like to
submit it the record. Ask unanimous consent.
Mr. Cohen. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

MS. JACKSON LEE FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. I'd like to read these four
lines; I think it's four lines. ``Lift every voice and sing,
till earth and heaven ring, ring with the harmonies of liberty;
let our rejoicing rise high as the listening skies.''
What a patriotic group of words. ``Ring with the harmonies
of liberty. Let our rejoicing rise high as the listening
skies.''
I only have a short time, and so Witnesses, I'm going to go
very quickly on this question. All you need to do is say yes or
no.
Is this an attempt to replace the Star-Spangled Banner, the
national anthem? Chair Russell, yes or no?
Mr. Russell. No.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Professor Reece, Director Reece? Professor
Reece?
Dr. Reece. I don't see it in that way, no.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Shana Redmond. Naomi Andre.
Dr. Andre. No.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Lloyd Washington.
Mr. Washington. No.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Melanie Edwards.
Ms. Edwards. No.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Henderson.
Mr. Henderson. No.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. I think that's an important
affirmation of what and how important this message would be.
We have a Star-Spangled Banner, we honor it. Now, we have
the opportunity to ensure that we have a hymn. Hymn by its very
nature, I'm not a musician but I've had them in my family, is a
healing and gathering piece.
So, Chair Russell, my time is short. I am a witness to the
scenes of the wonderful ``Lift Every Voice'' and the NAACP for
all the decades I've gone as a life member. Can you just say
again how powerful the beginning of your conference and what
you see happening in the people's faces when you sing ``Lift
Every Voice''?
Mr. Russell. I think, Congressman Jackson Lee, that
whenever we perform, wherever we are, it sets the tone for the
kind of meeting that we are going to hold. As you well know, we
never have a meeting that we don't begin or end with ``Lift
Every Voice and Sing.''
I wanted to bring up just one thought across the board
here, and that is this song has a majesty. It has a majesty
that lifts it above many other songs. I've heard it song by the
Cookman College Choir and so many others. I've heard it sung
for the first time by the Tabernacle Choir at Temple Square in
Salt Lake City.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Russell. Thousands of voices.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Let me ask Associate Director
Reece and Professor Andre, if I could get an answer from all
the Witnesses. Hymns I view as healing, and I think the
question that we need to present to America is that fact that
no matter who you are, you would find a comfort of standing,
sitting, or hearing this song.
Because a hymn--we've voting on not the Black hymn, we're
voting on the national hymn. I think we have to make it very
clear what--no matter who we are, feel a healing sense or
unifying sense in this time.
So, if you all would go to answering that so that I get
that on the record, what makes it more potent that this would
be an appropriate national anthem.
I'll start with Reece, please. Chair's indulgence. I'd
appreciate it if you all would go quickly in your answers.
Dr. Reece. Sure, Congresswoman Lee. I believe that is the
sole purpose of the hymn. ``Lift Every Voice and Sing''
functions in that way in religious settings and outside
religious settings.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Redmond. I'm sorry I'm calling
you by your last name if you're there.
Dr. Redmond. That's fine, thank you. My apologies, I lost
sound and had to log back on.
There are already precedents for this song being taken up
in communities, various communities in the United States,
various faith traditions from Jewish to various Christian,
Protestant as well as Catholic denominations.
Also, being translated internationally, right. Having been
used in Angola and being translated into Mbundu. Having been
requested for use in Japan and being published in Japan in
1936. So, there's already precedents for this song being used
across cultures, across national boundaries even.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Professor Andre, then
Washington--
Dr. Andre. ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' is a national hymn
for all American peoples, absolutely. It's being used this way,
and it's wonderful to give it this recognition.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Professor--President Washington.
Mr. Washington. I agree with that. As a song it speaks to
all people, not just [inaudible].
Ms. Jackson Lee. Melanie Edwards.
Ms. Edwards. The song reflects the men who wrote it. They
were African Americans in America, but they saw themselves as
citizens of the country, and so the lyrics invite others to
face reality, but move forward and be hopeful.
Ms. Jackson Lee. We thank you for your family's legacy, by
the way. We thank you for being here, and we believe this is a
tribute for the rainbow of Americans. Isn't wonderful we've
sung it, and not divisively, but in a unifying manner.
I want to thank all the Witnesses that are here. Mr.
Henderson, thank you so very much for your service to this
nation and your civil rights legacy.
Thanks to all those who now made an excellent record that
no matter who you are in America, you could stand and sing this
song and feel comforted and feel approved and affirmed and not
divided.
Mr. Chair, I thank you for allowing the extra for these
Witnesses to place that on the record, and I yield back. Thank
you so very much.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Ms. Jackson Lee. Now, I'd like to
recognize Mr. Jamie Raskin for five minutes.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chair, thank you very much. I'm sorry it's
been such a choppy day with all the voting, and it was
especially tough for me because I was carrying proxies for, I
think eight or nine colleagues. So, forgive me for being late,
everybody.
I was able to check out some of the earlier testimony, I
want to thank the Witnesses for their excellent testimony.
I wonder if anyone would be prepared to address the
question of where ``Lift Every Voice and Sing'' fits into
American music generally. How it would serve to enrich our
musical lexicon if we were to formally embrace it and adopt it
in this way. I don't know, perhaps Ms. Andre or--could you
address that?
Dr. Andre. Sure, I'll jump--thank for that, and I'll jump
in very quickly and others can add their voices.
In American music history we have hymns, we have protest
songs, we have songs of praise, and they overlap with different
categories. The fact that we have this song, which started very
connected with the Black community, and then within its first
50 years it became very associated with other different
American, and as Professor Redmond has shown us, even outside
of America.
This is a song that has already risen in music
historiography as having a particularly important place. Our
recognition of it as a national hymn I really feel is almost
giving it a title that it has already fulfilled.
Mr. Raskin. Very next then, Professor Redmond, can I come
to you?
Dr. Redmond. Yes, I would agree with especially that last
sentiment. I think sonically the song actually fits very, very
comfortably inside of many of the singing traditions that we
already have established through our kind of civic duties as
citizens.
Is one that has a kind of melodic line that is in some
respects more accessible than something like the Star-Spangled
Banner, right. That there are levels of difficulty to all these
songs, but that ``Lift Every Voice and Sing,'' especially
because it was written for children, right, is already keeping
in mind the kinds of capacities of its singers.
So, it is accessible to people in that, even if the
language is sometimes a little bit different, right. We're
inheriting the kinds of linguistic traditions of the late 19th
century in all these songs.
So, there is some learning curve, but it fits sonically
very beautifully inside of what our national songs are already
accomplishing.
Mr. Raskin. Yeah, I know a song about the late Chilean
singer Victor Jara which goes, ``You can kill a singer, but you
can't kill a song.'' I wonder what this song represents to you,
Professor Redmond, let me just stick with you for a second.
I know everybody projects different meanings and different
interpretations onto all forms of art and all forms of music,
so it doesn't have one single meaning. You've studied it so
deeply and understand it in a very rich way.
What would you say the thematic resonance is of the song
for you?
Dr. Redmond. I think that one of the most significant
through-lines in the song are two-fold. One is a ``we-ness,''
that there is something about collectivity that is urgent and
necessary for our best successes moving forward. That there's
always a ``we'' in mind.
That stems both from its four-part composition from J.
Rosamond Johnson, all the way through the lyrics of the song
that it is always meant to be sung together.
Then secondly, I think the messaging of the song really is
about perseverance and transcendence, right. That there's a
struggle that is in front of us, but it is worthy of taking up.
That will be fruitful, it will be successful in the final
result.
Mr. Raskin. Well, I love that. The point of the ``we-ness''
of it, the universality of it of course comes through in the
very first line, ``Lift Every Voice and Sing.'' I remember as a
kid the first time I sang it, and a lot of kids didn't want to
sing it.
I remember very clearly the teacher saying this song tells
you we need every person's voice; we need everybody singing.
It's not just for the kids who love to sing, it's for everybody
even if you're a little shy about singing. That's beautiful.
Of course, the theme of perseverance, which has been so
much the hallmark of the African American struggle in America
is something that speaks also universally to everybody. Because
everybody has been experiencing struggle.
So, I'm thrilled about this legislation, Mr. Clyburn. I
thank you so much for bringing this forward. It's beautiful
legislation that I hope will be unifying across every line in
America. I thank all these Witnesses for this great testimony.
I yield back to you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Representative Raskin. I think
Representative Johnson had a question or two. Since he's at the
airport with a plane about to leave, I'm going to recognize him
ahead of Ms. Fischbach.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. I thank you for that, Mr. Chair,
your indulgence.
Just, I'll be brief, but is Mr. Henderson still available?
I'm on my phone so I can't see all streams.
Mr. Cohen. Yes, he is.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Let me just ask Mr. Henderson,
it's sort of an open-ended question, but we've all--everyone
has been very articulate this morning about what I would view
the greatness of America. We are an exceptional nation.
We all acknowledge, of course, that we're still in this--in
this sometimes difficult, long process of becoming a more
perfect union.
So, I give you an open mic, an open platform to just share
with us your view, I would love to hear on what are some of the
most important things that we can and should be doing right now
in that regard, making it a more perfect union?
Mr. Henderson. Well, for me, it ties into the words of Dr.
King that we should continue to live together as brothers lest
we perish together as fools. We need as much unification as
possible at this particular point in time in the history of
America because of all the various things that are happening.
First, a communication system that is ongoing, continual, 24/7.
So, as long as we understand this song actually stands for what
it says, its place in history cannot be taken. We need to use
it as a message for unifying and not to be divisive.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. That's a good answer. I think
everyone in the hearing today has acknowledged the importance
of keeping the national anthem and making it a national hymn
and not confusing the two. I just wonder if, and maybe this is
a rhetorical question, but is there some risk that this effort
will create confusion?
In other words, that you know, the average constituent
average, everyday American will see Congress pass something
like this and they'll confuse it? Because there has been a lot
of--maybe it's misleading headlines over the last year or so
about things like this.
So, is there going to--is there a risk that we stir up
controversy with everyone's good faith effort here to do
something noble, that somehow we create more confusion or
division by this misunderstanding of this as a competing
national anthem? Does that make sense? What would you say about
that, Mr. Henderson?
Mr. Henderson. In all things, we freedom of speech, we have
risk, and we have reward. We need to be able to explain to
whomsoever that might be adverse ``Lift Every Voice and Sing,''
what it really means.
That's one of the challenges we have in this country right
now, is that far too many people in this country do not know
the history of this country. Therefore, they speak on opinion
rather than fact.
So, I'm so grateful that we've had a number of people on
here giving the history of it so that we understand that it is
a unifying hymn and not a divisive hymn. Even if you do hear
someone that thinks it should not be, then to be able to
explain to them what it really means.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. I think that's well said. Look,
one thing I'm sure we all agree on is that there's a--we have a
problem in this country with cultural illiteracy, civic
illiteracy, right. It transcends every socioeconomic line and
every State and every place.
So, maybe something like this can help in that regard to
help educate all of us, all America again. So, with that
regard, it could be a noble pursuit. So, I appreciate all the
Witnesses again for the time.
Sorry for the confusion. As Mr. Raskin said, it's been a
crazy day on the Hill. I'm sorry for the background noise at
the airport, and I yield back.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Johnson. I now recognize Ms.
Garcia. Five minutes.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to thank the
sponsor of this proposal. I think it's very important that we
move forward.
Coming from Houston and coming from Texas, I've grown with
this hymn, and I've grown with Juneteenth celebrations. I've
grown with a lot of rich cultural history that adds to the
diversity of our great city. I think this is a fitting way to
kick-start, if you will, National Black History Month.
Today's hearing reaffirms the unwavering commitment of this
Committee and this congress to advance in equity, racial
justice, and opportunity. Recognizing our African American
history of struggles and resilience is a step in the right
direction towards a path of healing, reconciliation, and
reunion.
Music does bring people together. I don't know how the
church that doesn't at some point try to bring their
congregation together with good music. So, I think that it's
important that we recognize this hymn.
So, my questions are for the historians in the group, and I
wanted to begin with Ms. Reece. Ms. Reece, apparently, and I've
learned today from reading all this, that a song is not a song,
and is a song. They are hymns, they are anthems.
Could you tell us the difference between a hymn and an
anthem?
Dr. Reece. Thank you for that question. In fact, the term
hymn and anthem, they are frequently if not often used
interchangeably. A hymn is particularly designed in a religious
setting, in a worship setting. Anthems, people rally around for
a particular cause.
I think what's also interesting to note that in society, we
can adopt anything, any piece of music, and declare that it
serves a purpose that may not be its original intent.
So, any piece could become an anthem, maybe not necessarily
any piece can be a hymn. It is coalescing around the idea of
what piece of music is supposed to symbolize.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you for that. Ms. Andre, you've studied
this area also. Has there ever been any other hymns that have
been made national hymns, there's ever been a thought before to
make a hymn a national hymn?
Dr. Andre. I actually don't know that history in terms of
the United States or other countries with--recognizing national
hymns. I would like to support what my colleague Dwandalyn
Reece has mentioned about hymns and anthems are the meaning we
give them.
My history before where we're going back to antiquity and
up through the liturgy is that hymns particularly have a very
malleable and flexible meaning. So, they can symbolize devotion
and God, and country is one. So, I just, I'm sorry, I don't
know the other national hymns.
I think you don't really hear about them. Going back to an
earlier question, would this be confusing for the American
public. I think we all have our national anthem, and we love
the national anthem, even if it is a little hard to sing.
We have the complexity and the sophistication to realize
that you can have more than one important national music,
national song. This not being the anthem but being elevated as
a hymn adds the sense of belonging and so many, I can think of
any other song besides the national anthem, that people know so
well.
So, in terms of making--we're setting a really wonderful
precedent to have music speak in this way.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you. I'll then defer to Ms. Reece, do you
happen to know the answer to my question?
Dr. Reece. Actually, I have learned, and I can't speak to
the specifics, but there have been several instances where
hymns have been put forward in this country as designated
national hymns. I don't believe they have passed, but within
the last day or two I was informed of that very fact. I
wouldn't like--
Ms. Garcia. Since many of you have already testified, this
is not meant to supplant or replace. It's a hymn, not an
anthem. As Mr. Henderson said, we would not let this symbolic
gesture, device--it's about division.
Because as Mr. Clyburn has said from the beginning, if you
hear the song, and I've heard it so many times and sung it on
many occasions in Houston, at a swearing-in a mayor and
funerals. I graduated from TSU, a historically Black college,
from their law school, at the graduation.
It is part of the culture, it's part--and not just really,
frankly, that African American culture, but it's part of
Houston's culture. Because it reflects the diversity of our
city.
So, I'm really excited about this, and I wanted to just say
thank you to Ms. Edwards for being here and sharing your story.
Because obviously what you have inherited and the legacy that
you carry is so important to not only your community, but to
the entire country. So, thank you for being here, and thank you
to all the Witnesses.
Mr. Chairman, I see my time has expired, so I'll have to
yield back.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Ms. Garcia, I appreciate it. Ms.
Fischbach, are you present and waiting, and I think you're
still with us, I hope? No, Ms. Fischbach. I guess she must have
needed to go catch an airplane or something.
Well, with that I want to thank all of Witnesses for their
testimony and their time. It was educational. Thank Mr.
Clyburn, he's back. He was subbing for Mr. Hoyer and doing
the--
Mr. Clyburn. Colloquy.
Mr. Cohen. With Mr. Scalise. In your absence, Ms. Ross
questioned and testified how she appreciated your bringing this
bill for us, and so did Ms. Garcia and Mr. Raskin. We
appreciate it, it's being a very enlightening and inspiring
committee. I'm proud to chair it. Thank you for bringing it.
With that, this will conclude today's hearing, unless Mr.
Clyburn has anything to close with.
Mr. Clyburn. I just want to thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
all our Witnesses here today for the very enlightened
discussion here. I assure all you, as I said in my opening
remarks. I get a bit uncomfortable. I grew up in a little town
in South Carolina. Mary McLeod Bethune was from Mayesville.
I remember on one occasion her expressing a little bit of
discomfort with the reference to ``Lift Every Voice and Sing''
being the ``Negro National Anthem.'' We are one nation under
God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all. We should
have one national anthem for all.
I think it would elevate the human spirit, it will help
bring us together, and God knows we need to come together, by
naming, making ``Lift Every Voice and Sing,'' such an iconic
song, our national hymn. That will bring us together in a very
significant way.
I am hopeful that the Committee, Subcommittee and Full
Committee, will see their way clear to report this out. I think
the votes are in the House to pass it.
Ms. Edwards. Could I leave you this?
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Clyburn. Yes, ma'am, Ms. Edwards?
Ms. Edwards. Could I leave this comment quickly? I think
you have a wonderful opportunity to remind people that the
composers saw it as a hymn, not as an anthem.
Mr. Clyburn. Absolutely.
Ms. Edwards. To beat that little drum in public, that we
never separate ourselves from the country.
Mr. Clyburn. Absolutely. Thank you so much--absolutely.
Ms. Edwards. Use that as a teaching point. I'm an old
teacher. Use that as a teaching point, a learning moment.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Ms. Edwards, and thank you, Mr. Whip,
and thank you all the Witnesses and the Members of the
Committee who participated today.
So, that will conclude our hearing. Without objection--our
Witnesses, you might have somebody submit questions in writing
which people could do up to five--I think we have five days to
submit questions. There may be questions that are sent to you
for a request that you answer them. Five legislative days just
for Members to submit written questions.
With that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon the Subcommittee was adjourned at 12:06 p.m.]
